                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE BEHAVIORALIST GOES DOOR-TO-DOOR:
        UNDERSTANDING HOUSEHOLD TECHNOLOGICAL DIFFUSION USING
               A THEORY-DRIVEN NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                     Matilde Giaccherini
                                     David H. Herberich
                                    David Jimenez-Gomez
                                        John A. List
                                       Giovanni Ponti
                                      Michael K. Price

                                     Working Paper 26173
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26173


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




We would like to thank the Sloan Foundation for providing funding. David Jimenez-Gomez and
Giovanni Ponti acknowledge additional financial support from the Spanish Ministry of
Economics and Competitiveness (ECO2015-65820-P) and Generalitat Valenciana (Research
Projects Gruposo3/086). We would also like to thank Noah Goldstein for his insightful
discussions, Hendrik Wolff for his helpful comments and the research assistants at the Becker
Center for their diligent assistance. This paper was previously circulated under the title: "How
Many Economists Does it Take to Change a Light Bulb." The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research
or those of Maqueta, Inc.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Matilde Giaccherini, David H. Herberich, David Jimenez-Gomez, John A. List,
Giovanni Ponti, and Michael K. Price. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Behavioralist Goes Door-To-Door: Understanding Household Technological Diffusion
Using a Theory-Driven Natural Field Experiment
Matilde Giaccherini, David H. Herberich, David Jimenez-Gomez, John A. List, Giovanni
Ponti, and Michael K. Price
NBER Working Paper No. 26173
August 2019
JEL No. D9,D91

                                          ABSTRACT
This paper uses a field experiment to estimate behavioral parameters from a structural model of
residential adoption of technology. As our model includes both economic and psychological
factors, we are able to identify the role of prices, social norms, social pressure, and curiosity on
the adoption decision. We find that prices and social norms influence the adoption decision along
different margins, opening up the opportunity for economics and psychology to be strong
complements in the diffusion process. In addition, welfare estimates from our structural model
point to important household heterogeneities: whereas some consumers welcome the opportunity
to purchase and learn about the new technology, for others the inconvenience and social pressure
of the ask results in negative welfare. As a whole, our findings highlight that the design of
optimal technological diffusion policies will require multiple instruments and a recognition of
individual household heterogeneities.

Matilde Giaccherini                                   John A. List
Centre for Economic and International Studies         Department of Economics
Università degli Studi di Roma Tor Vergata            University of Chicago
Via Columbia 2                                        1126 East 59th
00133 Roma                                            Chicago, IL 60637
Italy                                                 and NBER
matilde.giaccherini@uniroma2.it                       jlist@uchicago.edu

David H. Herberich                                    Giovanni Ponti
Marqeta, Inc.                                         Departamento de Fundamentos del
180 Grand Ave                                         Análisis Económico
Oakland, CA 94612                                     Universidad de Alicante
dherberich@gmail.com                                  03071 Alicante
                                                      Spain
David Jimenez-Gomez                                   giuba@ua.es
Department of Economics
University of Alicante                                Michael K. Price
Spain                                                 Department of Economics, Finance,
davidjimenezgomez@ua.es                                and Legal Studies
                                                      The University of Alabama
                                                      250 Alston Hall
                                                      Box 870224
                                                      Tuscaloosa, AL 35487
                                                      and NBER
                                                      mkprice2@cba.ua.edu



A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at H09367
    "Innovation is the market introduction of a technical or organisational novelty, not just its invention"
Joseph Schumpeter



1     Introduction
Economists have long argued that an essential driver of economic growth is innovation (see, e.g. Romer, 1990;
Aghion and Howitt, 1992). Indeed, in his seminal work, Young (2005) argues that dierences in production
technologies represent an important source of contrasting economic growth across countries historically.
Indeed, some estimates suggest that roughly 50 percent of U.S. annual GDP growth can be attributed to
innovation (U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation, 2012)1 As a result, policymakers have focused their
eorts on designing policies that stimulate innovation, ranging from early childhood education programs to
favorable tax treatment to subsidized investments in RD. The prevailing wisdom is that such public policies
will increase development and application of ideas and technologies that improve goods and services, leading
to economic growth.
    Yet, what is often left on the sidelines in these discussions is the diusion of new technologies. As
Schumpeter's quote in the epigraph suggests, innovation is not only creation, but also market diusion.
For their part, economists, social scientists, and marketers have explored technological diusion to varying
degrees. Griliches (1957), for example, provides an early demonstration of the economic approach when he
explored the adoption of hybrid corn technologies. In his analysis, Griliches focuses on two fundamental
drivers of behavior: the pecuniary cost and benefits of the technology.2 Although economists highlight
profit as the main motivation for technology adoption, other disciplines focus on non-pecuniary influences
such as the influence of social networks and agents of change as underlying drivers of the adoption decision
(e.g. Rogers, 2010). The diering viewpoints fostered a lively academic debate between sociologists and
economists that remains a common reference today (see Skinner and Staiger (2007) for a recent addition to
the discussion).
    Since this early debate, economists have broadened their focus to explore non-pecuniary aspects of tech-
nology adoption (see, e.g. the excellent survey by Hall, 2004). An example of this exploration is the number
of recent studies considering how social pathways influence adoption. The aim of this body of work is to
explore how information is passed through societies or social networks and to identify how it aects sub-
sequent adoption decisions (e.g. Bandiera and Rasul, 2006; Oster and Thornton, 2012; Chen et al., 2010;
  1 Similar figures on the importance of research intensity on annual GDP growth are reported in Fernald and Jones (2014)

and Jones (2002).
  2 Foster and Rosenzweig (2010) and Jae et al. (2002) contain broader overviews of research on technology adoption.




                                                           2
Conley and Udry, 2010).
    In this paper, we take an alternate approach to the problem and design a theory-driven field experiment
to explore the underlying economic and psychological factors that motivate technological adoption at the
household level. As a case study, we use the purchase of an energy e cient technology - compact flourescent
lightbulbs (CFLs).3 While CFLs oer substantial energy savings, residential consumers have been loathe
to adopt them as an alternative to traditional incandescent bulbs. For example, even though 86 percent of
households in the United States report using at least one energy-e cient light bulb, incandescent bulbs are
contained in approximately 60 percent of all light sockets in homes in the United States (EPA, 2017).4
    Our experimental design and subsequent empirical analysis is guided by a theoretical model much in the
spirit of DellaVigna et al. (2012, DLM hereafter). Specifically, we model decisions as a multi-stage game
with incomplete information in which consumers interact with their future selves. We extend the basic DLM
framework to include three distinct motivations underlying the adoption of green technologies: 1) utility
directly derived from CFLs (which is a combination of private returns and altruism), 2) social pressure or a
desire to conform with the actions of others, and 3) curiosity, or the desire to seek information about energy
e cient technologies. To recover the key parameters of our model, we employ an alternative structural
estimation technique, namely, a Random Preference Probit (RPP) model (Hausman and Wise, 1976; Train,
1998). In doing so, our approach allows for correlation among the "random" components of utility (i.e., social
pressure and curiosity) and, as a by-product, the explicit allowance for variation in tastes across individuals
for the attributes of alternatives. Allowing for correlation across the structural components of our subjects'
utilities seems an important step in the direction of realism as reduced form results suggest correlations
across actions taken by the same individuals at dierent stages of the decision-making process.
    In our field experiment, we approached nearly 9,000 households in the suburbs of Chicago, IL. Households
were oered the opportunity to purchase either one or two packages that contained four CFLs. As in DLM,
a crucial aspect of our experimental design is the ability of households to sort in or out of the face-to-face
interaction with the salesperson. To operationalize this idea, we use warning flyers placed on door knobs
of households to identify whether purchases are driven by the valuation for CFLs or social pressures. The
flyers also allow us to identify heterogeneity and simulate how sorting impacts the eectiveness of our policy
instruments. Additional randomization varies both the price at which households could purchase CFLs and
the framing of a descriptive norm detailing the proportion of households in an area that report having at
    3 We focus on CFLs as lighting accounted for approximately 9 percent of total electricity consumption in the residential

sector in the United States in 2017 and an even larger share of total electricity consumption in the residential sector worldwide.
    4 For perspective on the potential savings foregone, if every household in the United States were to install CFLs in the

five most frequently used light fixtures it would; (i) save enough energy to light 23 million homes for a year, (ii) save nearly
$3.5billion in energy costs, and (iii) prevent greenhouse gas emissions equivalent to 4.1 million cars (EPA, 2017).



                                                                3
least one CFL in their home. Our framing treatments test the importance of social pressure on purchase
decisions and allow us to calculate an associated social norm elasticity of demand.5
    We use data from the experiment to estimate reduced form and structural models that identify both the
motives underlying the adoption decision and the distribution of reservation values. In addition, we use the
structural model to simulate the eectiveness of two popular policy instruments - (i) a subsidy that serves
to lower the price of purchasing the technology, and (ii) the use of a descriptive social norm detailing the
proportion of households in a given area that report having at least one CFL in their home.
    Data from our field experiment provide insights in three distinct areas. First, we find that both prices
and descriptive social norms impact the adoption decision. Conditional on answering the door, households
are approximately 8.7 percentage points (or 40 percent) less likely to purchase a package of CFLs at our high
($5) price level. Social norms have also a significant impact -although less pronounced- impact on purchase
decisions. Conditioned on answering the door, households in our social norm treatments are approximately
3.5 percentage points (or 43 percent) more likely than counterparts in our neutral frame treatment to purchase
at least one packet of CFLs. We find no discernible dierence in the eect of our normative statements based
on the proximity between the consumer and reference group.
    Interestingly, we find that prices and descriptive norms influence behavior along dierent margins. Social
norm statements aect behavior largely along the extensive margin. In fact, there is no discernible dierence
in the likelihood that a household in a social norm treatment purchases a second package of light bulbs
relative to counterparts in a Neutral frame treatment. Prices, in contrast, aect behavior along both the
intensive and the extensive margin. Indeed, households oered CFLs at $5 per package are 52.5 percent
less likely to purchase a second package than counterparts who can purchase CFLs at $1 per package. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to show that norms and prices are complements in the adoption
decision.6 If this is a general insight, then the possibilities are limitless for the policymaker to enhance
adoption decisions of households by combining economic and non-economic instruments.
    A second major area of results involves sorting. Our warning treatments highlight the dual role of sorting
in the adoption dynamics. On the one hand, flyers lower the frequency with which households answer the
door. Whereas 36.7 percent of households approached in our No Warning treatment open the door, the
fraction of households opening the door is approximately 6.4 percentage points (or 17.4 percent) lower in
   5 As noted in prior work, the descriptive social norm statements could influence the decision to purchase through at least two

dierent channels. As in a Becker household production model, the information could be used to update prior beliefs concerning
the benefits of the technology. Alternately, descriptive social norms could operate through conformity motivations or increased
social pressures (e.g Lapinski and Rimal, 2005; Cialdini, 2007; Schultz et al., 2007; Ferraro and Price, 2013).
   6 The closest analog to this finding is Holladay et al. (2019) who show that while social comparisons and rebates impact

the likelihood a households completes and in-home energy audit, neither policy has a significant impact on the likelihood of
installing energy e cient technologies following the audit.



                                                               4
our warning (i.e., Warning plus Opt-Out) treatments, respectively. This evidence is consistent with the
idea that warned households lower the frequency of door opening in the attempt to avoid interacting with
our salespeople and the resulting pressure to purchase a CFL. Alternatively, conditional on answering the
door, households in our warning treatments are significantly more likely to purchase at least one package of
CFLs. Households are approximately 2.2 percentage points (or 25 percent) more likely than counterparts
in No Warning to purchase at least one pack of CFLs. This evidence confirms the idea that the warning
treatments alter the distribution of types who answer the door towards those with a greater preference for
(valuation of) CFLs.
    Finally, the third area of results derives from the structural model. Our structural estimations refine
the descriptive analysis by providing quantitative assessments of the motivating forces behind consumption
decisions, and allow us to conduct policy counterfactuals exploring various ways to promote the adoption of
CFLs. We find that both our estimated "curiosity" and "social pressure" are negative, although only the
former is significant. A negative value of curiosity means that households prefer to avoid the interaction with
the solicitors irrespectively of their purchase decisions, i.e., households dislike the interaction with solicitors
per se, indicating strong a priori feelings of suspicion or a disinterest in learning about energy e ciency.
    Our "random preference" approach model also reveals interesting household heterogeneities. For example,
we discover that curiosity and social pressure are highly negatively correlated, indicating that those who are
the more willing to interact with solicitors are also the ones less concerned about not purchasing.7 In addition,
estimates from our structural model allow us to recover the distribution of CFL valuations, whose mean is
just above $2 per pack. Yet, our estimates for the distribution of willingness to pay suggest that a substantial
fraction of individuals value CFLs less than the prevailing market price at the time of the experiment. In
fact, more than three-quarters of all individuals appear to dislike CFLs and would require compensation in
order to accept a package of CFLs. This implies that CFLs are viewed as an inferior technology and should
not be considered as a close substitute for less e cient lightbulbs such as incandescents - an assumption
implicitly embedded in much of the prior work on the "energy paradox". While the ability to sort and our
normative appeals shift demand and increase willingness to pay, such eects are small and do little to reduce
the amount of compensation that would be required to ensure adoption rates in excess of 25 percent.
    We view our study as speaking to several branches of research. At the most applied level, it contributes
to the literature on the adoption of energy e cient technologies and the "energy paradox". There is a
long-standing belief amongst policymakers that investments in energy e cient technology oers a mutually
beneficial prospect. For the investor, energy e cient technologies provide a way to save money on energy
   7 One possibility for the negative correlation is that indivdiuals alleviate feelings of guilt or the desire to purchase a CFL

after opening the door and listening to our salesperson talk about energy e ciency.


                                                               5
bills. For society, energy e cient technologies provide a way to reduce energy consumption and the negative
externalities associated with such. Yet, many consumers seemingly leave money on the table by eschewing
the purchase of such technologies; a phenomena called the energy paradox or energy e ciency gap Jae
and Stavins (1995). Concerns for such investment ine ciencies has spurned a large empirical literature
exploring potential causes of the energy e ciency gap and/or evaluating the eectiveness of policies to
promote investment in energy saving technologies (for an overview of this work see, e.g., Gillingham et al.,
2009; Allcott and Greenstone, 2012; Gillingham and Palmer, 2014; Gillingham et al., 2018; Gerarden et al.,
2017). Our data not only show the low level of investment at baseline, but provide tools to enhance adoption.
   In addition, we provide tools to measure impact of behaviorally motivated policies (such as the descriptive
statements in which the decision to buy is triggered by way of peer eects). Our main contribution is to
use structural methods to uncover the underlying distribution of households' willingness to pay and run
policy counterfactual to estimate the degree of complementarity between social norms and prices in the
identification of such distribution. In this respect, we find that social norms and prices are complements,
rather than substitutes: while prices aect both the extensive and the intensive margin, social norms mostly
aect the extensive margin only.
   The paper also contributes to the growing literature that develops empirical methods to measure the
impact of behaviorally motivated policies. In this manner, by using structural methods to uncover the
underlying distribution of households' willingness to pay, and conducting policy counterfactuals to estimate
the degree of complementarity between social norms and prices, we link closely to the literature that imposes
structure on model and field experiment (see, e.g., DellaVigna et al., 2012, 2016b,a; Zhe Jin et al., 2010).
Our study also serves as a complement to the literature on structural behavioral economics (Laibson et al.,
2007; Conlin et al., 2007). We view this area as a ripe one for future studies to combine field experiments,
behavioral economics, and formal models to address important economic and social issues.
   The remainder of the paper is arranged as follows. Section 2 briefly summarizes some facts around
household diusion of technologies. Section 3 details our experimental methods and strategy for estimating
the structural model. Section 4 presents descriptive statistics from the experiment and our reduced form
results. Section 5 summarizes results from the structural model and policy simulations. Finally, Section 6
concludes, followed by the Appendices containing additional statistical evidence and a detailed account of
our structural identification strategy.




                                                      6
2     Diusion of Household Technologies
Examining the technological adoption patterns across consumables amongst households represents an inter-
esting glimpse of the nature and extent of diusion. Figure 1 provides an ocular depiction of various adoption
rates of new technologies over more than a century in the US. The figure reveals several interesting insights.
First, while it is well known that technological progress has been fast paced in the last century, the figure
shows that the rate at which newly commercialized technologies get adopted by consumers is also rapidly
improving. For instance, the telephone was invented in 1876, but did not reach saturation until a century
later, when landlines to households were adequate. Second, other modern era inventions such as microwaves,
cell phones, smartphones, social media, and tablets each show fast adoption rates. Interestingly, the tablet
computer went from 0 to 50 percent in roughly five years.

                                   Figure 1: Technology adoption in U.S. households




           N ote: Technology adoption rates, measured as the percentage of households in the U.S. using a par-
           ticular technology. Adapted from Comin and Hobijn (2004) and from Alternative Fuels and Advanced
           Vehicles Data Center (US DoE).



    One might ask, Why do newer technologies get adopted so quickly? It seems partly because modern tech
needs less infrastructure in contrast with the inventions of years ago. Experts have also argued that the



                                                           7
market has undergone a structural change, as consumers are "connected, fast-acting, and not afraid to adopt
the new technologies that can quickly impact their lives for the better" (see Desjardins, 2018) Indeed, today
new products can spread at speeds never seen before merely because of more rapid information diusion.
   A rich literature has developed in both the social sciences and the business and policy communities to
help explain observed diusion patterns. For example, the "Diusion of Innovation Theory" is a social
scientific construct developed by Roger (1962), and still serves to explain how an idea or product diuses.
The theory has been used to explain the tremendous amount variation that we observe in figure 1, as well
as provide marketers a strategy to enhance product adoption.
   Yet, while innovative goods are adopted at increasingly fast rates by households, there are some technolo-
gies that consumers are loathe to adopt and whose patterns of diusion are markedly dierent than most
other technologies. One such example is energy conserving technologies, even though consumers are seem-
ingly becoming more environmentally conscious and demanding "green products". For example, as noted
in Figure 1, while the diusion of automobiles as a whole has followed a path similar to that for landline
telephones and electric power, the diusion of hybrid vehicles is markedly dierent (and lower) than that of
other modern technologies such as cellular phones and tablets.
   The marketing literature that has evolved in response to this emergence of green preferences is now deep
and introduces new concepts such as green marketing and green consumerism (see Nath et al., 2013). Over
the years various studies have explored factors that influence consumer adoption of sustainable products.
In an eort to extend this line of work and more fully understand how to enhance the adoption patterns in
figure 1, our paper combines pecuniary and non-pecuniary motives for technology adoption by households.
In this way, we explore the eect of strategies suggested in the fields of economics and social psychology.
We extend the literature on social norms and energy conservation by comparing social norms to prices in as
close to an apples-to-apples comparison as possible utilizing a carefully designed field experiment.
   Our focus on social norms is motivated by recent research suggesting that such messages are eective
in encouraging energy conservation (see, e.g., Allcott, 2011; Ferraro and Price, 2013; Schultz et al., 2007).
In each of these studies, households are provided information that compares how their energy (or water)
use relates to that for other, similar households.    Empirical results suggest that providing this type of
information generates, on average, an approximate 2 to 3 percent decline in monthly usage. Amongst high
consuming households, the observed declines are even more pronounced, ranging from 5.3 to 8.3 percent.
   Research into motivating energy conservation has typically focused on curtailment rather than e ciency
(Abrahamse et al., 2005). Yet, there is a recent literature that discusses eorts to promote energy e cient
behavior and the adoption of CFLs more specifically. These eorts have not been designed as treatments to



                                                      8
uncover the impact of various methods of encouragement but instead have typically considered CFL adoption
policies and programs that had already occurred (Martinot and Borg, 1998; Lef`
                                                                             evre et al., 2006). The lack
of experimental implementation in these studies resulted primarily in discussions of barriers to adoption for
CFLs through survey results rather than providing information on methods to encourage adoption. The
previous research has found that various barriers to CFL adoption exist, such as cost and quality as well
as a lack of information and desire to change behavior, but has left many interesting questions unanswered
(e.g. Lef`
         evre et al., 2006; Reynolds et al., 2007). Our paper diers from previous work on CFL adoption in
that we utilize a carefully designed natural field experiment on technology adoption to estimate a structural
model (see Harrison and List, 2004, for a general discussion of field experiments).
   In this manner, our paper is methodologically connected to recent work exploring the welfare eects
of nudges. When implementing interventions like ours, the fundamental question is whether they increase
welfare : this includes both individual welfare (i.e. whether the individual is made better o by the inter-
vention), but also societal welfare more broadly, which also includes the externalities imposed by excessive
energy use. There is a recent literature on behavioral welfare economics that attempts to measure how dif-
ferent interventions aect welfare, taking seriously the insights from behavioral economics. In particular, the
literature has focused mostly on internalities, which are consequences for an individual of her own actions,
that she does not take into account (Herrnstein et al., 1993). Internalities are important because, if ignored
when present, they can substantially change the results of empirical analysis (Baicker et al., 2015).
   In the context of environmental economics, Allcott and Taubinsky (2015) study the welfare eects of two
interventions that provided dierent types of information and/or prices about CFLs, using the "su cient
statistic" approach (introduced in the behavioral economics literature by Chetty, 2008), which identifies
the marginal individual after taking internalities into account.8 Our approach is dierent from most of the
literature in behavioral welfare economics in two aspects. First, we follow the door-to-door methodology of
DellaVigna et al. (2012), by measuring welfare through the ability of individuals in our experiment to sort
in or out of our treatments, what provides a complementary approach to the su cient statistic approach.9
Second, we do not focus on internalities, but instead on the disutility from social pressure on taking actions
that are environmentally conscious (Yoeli et al., 2013).
   There is a related literature on behavior change that uses incentives as well as nudges (i.e., interventions
that change the environment but do not restrict choice), in order to change behavior in a variety of contexts.
These include, but are not limited to, exercise (Charness and Gneezy, 2009; Acland and Levy, 2016), smoking
  8 Seealso Chetty (2015) for a discussion of the su cient statistic approach and its place in behavioral welfare economics.
  9 Other papers that apply the behavioral economics framework in the context of environmental/energy decisions are Allcott
and Rogers (2014) and Allcott et al. (2014).



                                                             9
cessation (Volpp et al., 2006, 2009; Gin´
                                        e et al., 2010) and water conservation (Ferraro et al., 2011; Ferraro
and Price, 2013). Our focus on technology adoption instead of permanent behavioral change complements
this work in that results of the actions we find are likely to be persistent provided reversing the adoption is
di cult (Brandon et al., 2016).10



3     Methods

3.1     Theoretical Underpinnings

We streamline the stylized theoretical model that guided the design and implementation of our field exper-
iment (details in Appendix B). We consider a 4-stage game between a potential customer (Anna ) and a
solicitor (Beppe ).

    1. In Stage 1, Anna may receive a flyer of Beppe's upcoming visit. She notices the flyer with probability
      r 2 (0, 1] and, if the flyer has an Opt-Out box (Opt-Out treatment, see Section 3.2 below), she may
      decide to opt in (by not checking the box) with probability             1   2 (0, 1).

    2. In Stage 2, Beppe visits the home. Anna answers the door with probability h. If she did not notice
      the flyer (or did not receive one), h is equal to a baseline probability h0 2 (0, 1). If she noticed the
      flyer, she can adjust this probability to        2   2 (0, 1). In any case, if she does not answer, her payo is
      normalized to zero.

    3. In Stage 3, if Anna answers the door, she can buy at least one pack of CFLs (extensive margin) with
      probability     3   2 (0, 1).

    4. In Stage 4, conditional on having purchased one pack already, she may also decide to buy an additional
      one (intensive margin) with probability          4   2 (0, 1).

    In other words, Anna's timeline is broken down into four binary decisions, or stages, as shown in Figure
2. Figure 2 displays the sequential decision problem Anna is facing and identifies the three behavioral
parameters governing her (binary) decisions. Specifically:
  10 The literature in behavioral welfare economics has recently emphasized the importance of focusing on general equilibrium

eects (Handel, 2013; Spiegler, 2014; Jimenez-Gomez, 2019). We believe that general equilibrium are indeed of great importance,
but we only focus on the partial equilibrium eect of our intervention, due to logistical constraints. The general equilibrium
eects of our interventions are a priori ambiguous, partly because social norms (and therefore social pressure) depend on
aggregate behavior, and it is di cult to make ex-ante predictions.




                                                               10
                                     Figure 2: Timeline of the structural model




   · Anna's value for a CFL pack, , accounts for financial considerations (i.e., a reduction in energy costs)
      as well as for pure and impure altruism (warm glow). Since the experiment is not designed to identify
      these components, we use a specification that is general enough to encompass all.

   · Anna's sensitivity to social pressure, & , is positive when Anna feels bad about not buying anything facing
      Beppe in a face-to-face interaction (i.e., after answering the door). In this respect, this parameter is
      very similar to that being used by DLM.

   · Anna's curiosity, , is positive when Anna is interested to learn more about energy saving solutions
      independently on her willingness to buy (see the extensive discussion in Section 3.2).

   In Appendix B we solve the model "backwards", starting from Stage 4, under the assumption Anna is
aware of her own parameter preferences at the time the latter are relevant for choice (i.e.,  in Stage 4, &
in Stage 3 and  in Stage 2) and rationally anticipates her response conditional on her information state at
each stage. Figure 3 summarizes the main features of the solution of our model as far as the extensive (Stage
3) and intensive (Stage 4) margins are concerned.
   Denote by  = p the threshold for  which identifies the (intensive) marginal buyer in Stage 4. Given
our linearity assumption, Anna will buy an additional pack whenever  >  = p. Therefore, the belief
associated to this intensive margin, at all prior stages h < 4 will then be       h
                                                                                  4   =1   ( ), where   (·) denotes
the cumulative (normal, in the structural estimations of Section 5) density that defines our heterogenous
population. By the same token, in Stage 3, Anna decides whether to buy some pack or nothing (extensive
margin) if & is su ciently high. In Appendix B we identify the extensive marginal buyer as a function of the
parameters  and & . Figure 3 illustrates the case of the (i.i.d.) normal distributions of  and & as in Model 1
in our structural estimations (see Section 5). As Figure 3 shows,  corresponds to the ruling price, p, while
&  () is decreasing in . This is because a higher value of  (i.e., higher evaluation for the CFL) lowers


                                                        11
                                                Figure 3: Testable hypotheses




Note: Figure 3 indicates the dierent regions for buying, no buying [q = 0], extensive margin [0 < q < 2] and intensive margin
[q = 2]. The regions are a function of the value parameter, , and the social pressure parameter, &.



the impact of social pressure on the marginal adopter. Also notice that a positive social norm facilitates
adoption by shifting down the extensive margin threshold.
       While Figure 3 is calibrated according with the structural estimation of Section 5, in Appendix B
we prove that the qualitative features of our model are preserved under very mild distributional restrictions.


3.2     Field Experimental Design and Implementation

Our field experiment was implemented by oering households up to 2 packages of CFLs to purchase in a door-
to-door design (each package contained 4 CFLs). Approaching consumers at their doors may not appear to be
the most applicable method for technology adoption. However, energy conservation programs often employ
door-to-door approaches to encourage adoption of technologies such as CFLs. Examples of recent programs are
the Clean Development Mechanism projects in the South Urban Lahore district of Pakistan and
Visakhaptanam India, and a door-to-door energy conservation campaign distributing environmental
technologies in Boulder, Colorado in the summer of 2010. Although there is a natural interest in working within
stores, that setting would provide a select sample of consumers. While such a select sample is of interest, the
benefits gained by installing CFLs is immediate and thus an ideal sample to approach is all consumers who use
traditional incandescent light bulbs. Further, approaching households directly allows for greater ease of
allowing sorting of households, which is necessary to identify pieces of our structural model.
      In total, there are 18 treatment cells in the experimental design. Table 1 provides the sample size by



                                                              12
                                           Table 1: Treatment Sample Size


                    Price per Pack     Social Norm       No Warning      Warning      Opt-Out
                                            No              480           474           473
                           $1              Low               447          508           535
                                          High              454           469           481
                                            No              435           546           501
                           $5              Low               493          544           491
                                          High              431           511           542
                         Total                              2740          3052         3023
                    Each cell gives the number of households approached for each treatment group.



treatment cell. Households were approached during the day on weekends by University of Chicago students
employed through the Becker Center at the University of Chicago. Students were hired upon responding
to job advertisements placed around the campus of the University of Chicago and on the University's main
electronic help wanted web site (marketplace.uchicago.edu). After responding to the advertisement, students
were briefly interviewed. Every student who completed the interview was hired and given a time to come
back for a training session. Each training session lasted approximately 30 minutes and were conducted with
multiple students so that they could practice scripts with each other.
   Students were driven to the suburbs on Saturdays and Sundays to approach households over 4 one-hour
blocks of time: 10 a.m. to 11 a.m., 11 a.m. to noon, 1 p.m. to 2 p.m. and 2 p.m. to 3 p.m. Households
were grouped into blocks containing roughly 25 houses. Each block of houses was randomly assigned to a
treatment so that a given student typically had a dierent treatment each hour. The CFL sales took place
on weekends between June 2009 and June 2010 with a break in the winter months and on weekend days
when it was either too cold or raining.
   Households in the following locations around Chicago were approached: Arlington Heights, Elmwood
Park, Evanston, Lemont, Libertyville, Oak Park, River Forest, Roselle, Skokie, and Wheaton. These suburbs
range in median household income from $47,315 to $89,284 as reported in the 2000 U.S. Census (1999 dollars).
This is in comparison to the United States national and Illinois median household incomes for the same period
- $41,994 and $46,590 respectively. The sample approached in our study had higher median incomes then
is typical in the U.S. This suggests an important caveat to our results and may limit the generalizability of
our findings.
   Our theoretical model suggests two treatments to parse the impacts of the valuation for CFLs (private and
altruistic) vs. social pressure, allowing consumers to select into or out of interacting with a salesperson. In
order to provide households this opportunity, a team of researchers and interns placed flyers on households in



                                                         13
the Warning and Opt-Out treatments the day prior to the students visiting households. These flyers, shown
in 4, informed the household that it would be visited the following day by someone with an "oer for purchase
and discuss energy saving light bulb options". While placing the flyers on doors, the researchers and interns
only interacted with members of the households if they were approached directly (i.e. household members
were outside in the yard and witnessed the placement of the flyer). Although the student salespersons were
aware of the dierent scripts and prices for each treatment, they were not aware that only some houses had
been warned of the visit the day prior via the flyers. This ensures that the proportion of households that we
warn that see the warning have an ability to adjust the likelihood of being home and answering the door,
compared with the No Warning treatment, in which no flyer is delivered.11
    To provide a setting consistent with our environment, we introduce a novel parameter that we call
curiosity. This parameter measures the individual's expectation about her utility gain from the interaction
with the solicitor, independent of any price, social norm and purchasing decision. In other words, it measures
the expectation of the gain from the interaction itself, which is precisely what we understand by curiosity.
Note that this parameter is not present in DLM since in that case the flyers contained information relevant
to the treatments (price, social pressure). In our design the flyers contain minimal information. While this
approach is customary in real-world interventions that target energy e ciency, it is by design impossible to
have a measure of households sorting behavior based on the information that is absent from the flyer (prices
and social norms), although they are still able to sort due to their curiosity.
    Scientifically, the motivation to include a curiosity parameter in estimation arises from a growing series of
psychological studies where curiosity has been defined as the desire to know . (i.e. Litman et al., 2005).12 In
particular, Loewenstein (1994) highlights that curiosity can be characterized as a loss-aversion phenomenon,
that is a situation in which the opportunity to loss information is considered to be worse than a situation
in which one merely does not acquire the same information (i.e. Al´
                                                                  os-Ferrer et al., 2018). This phenomenon
is related to the interest in learning something new (Charness et al., 2003). Hence, the curiosity eect may
be generalized to all goods that have an element of uncertainty associated with them, since curiosity arises
from a perception gap in knowledge. Indeed, curiosity might motive consumers to purchase a desirable new
product (see among others, Bernard et al., 2005; Loewenstein, 2000); alternatively, curiosity may play a role
in setting expectations in prices, causing the endowment eect (Van De Ven et al., 2005).
  11 Social norm and price treatments provide variation to identify the impact of social pressure and price on the decision to

purchase. However, the decision to purchase could be due to underlying social pressure present in all treatments vs. the private
and public attributes of the purchase. Moreover, we are unable to identify the public vs. private valuation for CFLs, so we will
consider the individual valuation for CFLs that combines the two.
  12 These studies analyze two categories of epistemic curiosity: the interest-type curiosity and the deprivation-type curiosity.

The first involves the anticipated pleasure of new discoveries and the second reduces uncertainty of knowledge gaps.




                                                               14
                                         Figure 4: Door-hanger examples




                                N ote: Warning on left (W), Opt-Out on right (OO).



   The main treatments were delivered through scripts given to student salespersons for each one-hour
treatment block of households. The scripts varied in two ways: stated social norm and sale price of CFL
package. The CFLs sold door-to-door were priced between $3.85 and $7.15 for a package of 4 CFLs in stores
throughout the Chicago area. The price tended to be around $5.00 when tax was included so we set our
baseline price for a package of 4 CFLs at $5.00. We included one other price point, a low price of $1.00. The
low price of $1.00 was chosen for a number of reasons. The main reason is that, depending on quality and
type, a package of 4 incandescent light bulbs can range from $0.33 to $5.00 but is typically around $1.00.
Thus, pricing the package of 4 CFLs at $1.00 made it reasonably equivalent to purchasing a new package of
incandescent light bulbs. A secondary reason was that logistically, selling goods for $5.00 and $1.00 simplifies
providing change for purchases.
   Social pressure can be applied in a number of ways to varying degrees of e cacy. For example, psychol-



                                                       15
ogists have written extensively on approaches specific to door-to-door sales such as the "Foot-in-the-Door"
approach and the "Door-in-the-Face" approach. As discussed in the literature review (see Section 2), recent
research has found social norms to be an eective social psychological pathway to impact a person's deci-
sions. This led us to incorporate social norms into our experimental design as a test for the impact that
social-psychology can have on adoption. In order to incorporate social norms, a script without a statement
of social norms, referred to as the "Neutral Frame" treatment, and two treatments involving a statement
of social norms, "Social Norm Low" and "Social Norm High" were run (hereafter N, L, H, respectively).
Both social norm treatments augment the general Neutral Frame script by one statement prior to stating
the price. Social Norm Low uses the phrase: "For instance, did you know that 70% of U.S. households
own at least one CFL?" while the Social Norm High treatment uses the phrase: "For instance, did you know
that 70% of the households that we surveyed in this area own at least one CFL? " The change in the
proximity with which the social norm is stated follows in line with Goldstein et al. (2008).
    In addition, including variation in social pressure and price allows for a pricing of social pressure as will
be discussed in the results. Further, analyzing not only the decision to purchase but considering also how
many packages of CFLs were purchased permits some indication of whether consumers appear to be "buying
out" of social pressure or "buying in" to a new technology due to information contained in the social norm.



4     Descriptive statistics and reduced-form results
Given the multi-stage structure of our field experiment, our reduced form analysis is built around a multivari-
ate linear probability model, where we estimate the joint probability of our three binary actions (opening the
door and choosing along the extensive/intensive margin) using dierent covariates depending on the informa-
tion sets of each stage. This model is built on the classical linear probability model with normally distributed
errors, and combines naturally into a system of equations (Roodman, 2011). Parameters are consistently
estimated in two steps: i) a set of equation-by-equation linear estimations and ii) a set of simultaneous
estimations that treats them as related to each other.13 In other words, the results of the simultaneous
estimation maximizes a likelihood function that includes all three equations in order to take into account
the full covariance structure of three decisions and the interdependence across choices (the equations are not
independent since they are computed on a gradually reducing subject pool).
    The general specification for our three-equations model is:
 13 The   equation-by-equation estimation fit individual models as starting point for full model fit.




                                                                16
                                              
                                             yijm =    n Xijm   + j +    k   + "jm                                          (1)

where                                                           8
                                                                >
                                                                <0          
                                                     
                                                                        if yijm 0
                                          yijm = f (yijm )=                                                                 (2)
                                                                >
                                                                :1          
                                                                        if yijm >0
       
where yij,m capture the choice at stage m = 1, 2, 3 for household i located in suburb j , where               n   is a vector of
coe cients, Xijm is a vector of observed variables that influence the choice of individuals, that are dierent
across equations:

    · M1 : Choice to open the door depends on the warning level (W , OO);

    · M2 : Choice to purchase at least 1 pack of CFLs depends on the warning treatments, the social norms
          (L, H ), and the high price ($5);14

    · M3 : Choice to purchase at least 2 pack of CFLs depends on the social norms (L, H ) and the high
          price ($5);

    We include the vectors  and            that represent respectively, salesperson and suburbs specific dummies
and we clustered robust standard errors at date-solicitor time blocks level in order to control for possible
randomization fixed eects. Finally, " is the error term specific to the equation of the m-th behavior.
We estimate the model using maximum likelihood (ML) estimation, assuming that the errors are normally
distributed.
    The number of observations varies by task given the sequential structure of the experiment (see Figure
2). As such, each equation is conditioned on a reduced data sample: 8815 (2848) [290] observations in stages
1 (2) [3], respectively.15 But, importantly, the three equations take into account i) the impact of the dierent
warning level, ii) the rate of purchase of at least one pack of CFLs and iii) the rate of purchase of second
pack of CFLs.
    Table 2 reports summary statistics of the distributions of the various outcomes of interest. The first
column in table 2 shows the descriptive statistics for the Opt-Out treatment, which is the fourth stage in our
structural model. This result concerns the possibility of sorting out by checking the appropriate box in the
flyer (conditional on seeing the flyer). Columns 2-4 contain summary statistics on probability of answering
the door and probability of purchasing one or two packages.
  14 Inthe second equation we use the warning variable to collect information for warning as well as opt-out treatments.
  15 We use the cmp Stata command for practical implementation (Roodman (2009)) that is built on a maximum - likelihood
estimator. We believe that this technique is the most appropriate to address simultaneously the three equations related to three
stages structure of the model.


                                                              17
                                                 Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                        Opted Out      Open Door         Buy      Buy|Open   Q=2|Buy
                    No Warning                           0.367          0.0321      0.087      0.443
                                                        (0.482)         (0.176)    (0.283)    (0.500)
                       Obs.                              2740            2740       1006         88
                      Warning                            0.332           0.038      0.115      0.564
                                                        (0.471)         (0.192)    (0.320)    (0.498)
                       Obs.                              3052            3052       1014        117
                      Opt-Out             0.116          0.274           0.028      0.103      0.529
                                         (0.321)        (0.446)         (0.165)    (0.307)    (0.502)
                        Obs.              3023           3023            3023        828         85
                        Total             0.116          0.323           0.033      0.102      0.517
                                         (0.321)        (0.468)         (0.178)    (0.302)    (0.500)
                        Obs.              3023           8815            8815       2848        290

                   Note: Figures in table are means and standard deviations (in parentheses). For
                   example, "Opted Out" is calculated as 0.116=352 households checking the box
                   divided by 3023 total households. In the remaining figures for this treatment the
                   352 households of the 3023 are included as doors knocked on but not answered.


   Table 3 complements table 2 by showing the first set of conditional results related to the equation-by-
equation estimations. Table 4 provides a second complement to the raw data by summarizing empirical
estimates from the second set of simultaneous estimation.
                                    Table 3: Equation-by-equation linear estimations

                                                       Open Door        Buy | Open    Q=2 | Buy
                                                        -0.026**
                           Warning
                                                         (0.013)
                                                       -0.077***
                           Opt-Out
                                                         (0.013)
                                                                         0.033***
                           Warning treatments
                                                                          (0.012)
                                                                           0.003        -0.053
                           Social Norm Low
                                                                          (0.017)      (0.094)
                                                                         0.035***       -0.060
                           Social Norm High
                                                                          (0.014)      (0.081)
                                                                         -0.084***    -0.319***
                           Price $5
                                                                          (0.011)      (0.066)

                           Solicitors FE                     YES           YES          YES
                           Suburbs FE                        YES           YES          YES
                                                           0.351***      0.090***     0.510***
                           Constant
                                                            (0.024)       (0.030)      (0.168)
                           Obs.                              8815          2248          290
                           p    < .1;    p   < .05;    p   < .01

                         Note: All regressions include solicitors and suburbs fixed eects.
                         Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at date-solicitor
                         blocks level.




                                                                   18
                                            Table 4: Simultaneous estimations

                                                    Open Door     Buy | Open    Q=2 | Buy
                                                     -0.026*
                              Warning
                                                     (0.015)
                                                    -0.077***
                              Opt-Out
                                                     (0.015)
                                                                    0.062**
                              Warning treatments
                                                                     (0.026)
                                                                      0.005       -0.063
                              Social Norm Low
                                                                     (0.018)     (0.084)
                                                                    0.038***      -0.094
                              Social Norm High
                                                                     (0.014)     (0.093)
                                                                   -0.085***     -0.300*
                              Price $5
                                                                     (0.012)     (0.158)

                              Solicitor eects          YES           YES           YES
                              City eects               YES           YES           YES
                                                     0.351***       0.463*        -0.632
                              Constant
                                                      (0.031)       (0.242)      (1.693)
                              Obs.                     8815          8815          8815
                              p < .1;   p < .05;   p < .01

                          Note: All regressions include solicitors and suburbs fixed eects.
                          Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at date-solicitor
                          blocks level.


   Together, these three tables lead to several results highlighting the households' decisions stage by stage:


Result I: Our treatments induce dierential sorting.
Concerning the Opt-out treatment, in table 2 we find that approximately 11.6 percent of all households
check the Opt-Out box, and 27.4 percent of subjects in that treatment answer the door. Table 2 also shows
that people in the Warning and Opt-Out treatments are much less likely to answer the door: 9.5 and 25.3
percent less likely than their counterparts in the NW group. These raw statistics highlight that households
warned in advance of a visit by a salesperson attempt to avoid the interaction, using the Opt-Out option
when available, suggesting that there might be scope for interesting welfare implications and heterogeneities,
as we discuss in Section 5.
   The conditional analyses further support Result I. For example, column 1 of Table 4 reports the estimated
coe cients of households who choose to answer the door in our warning treatments (W and OO). Households
in Warning and Opt-out treatments are 2.6 and 7.7 percentage points less likely to answer the door than
their counterparts approached without warning. Interestingly, an identical result is found in table 3. Taken
together, results in the three tables reveal the dierential sorting that our treatments induced, and are
suggestive of social pressure being an important driver of observed behavior. Furthermore they are consistent
with the assumption that checking the Opt-Out box lowers the costs of avoiding the salesperson. In this way,



                                                           19
the Opt-out increases sorting. As we lower the cost of avoiding such interactions (such as in the Opt-Out
treatment), we observe further reductions in the rate of door answering.
   A second and third result follows from exploring the purchase decision more deeply.

   Result II: Social norms aect consumers on the extensive margin.
   Result III: Prices aect both the intensive and extensive margins.


   Tables 3-5 provide empirical support for Results II and III. Table 5 reports a data summary about
purchase decisions across the three psychological frames: i) Neutral frame, ii) Low social norm, and iii)
High social norm and for the two price levels: $1 and $5, respectively. Whereas 2.7 percent of all households
approached in our Neutral treatment ultimately purchase at least one package of CFLs, purchase rates in our
Low norm treatment are approximately 18.5 percent higher. Increasing the proximity between the household
and comparison group, as in the High norm treatment, leads to even further increases in purchase rates:
people in this treatment are 44.4 percent more likely than counterparts in the Neutral group to purchase
CFLs. We observe similar dierences if we focus on purchase rates conditioned on answering the door.
For example, the results in table 5 show that households that answer the door in our High (Low) social
norm treatment are approximately 45.6 percent (41.7 percent) more likely to purchase CFLs than their
counterparts in the neutral treatment. These dierences suggest the importance of proximity when using
social norms, and are consonant with previous research (Goldstein et al., 2008).

                                   Table 5: Treatment Eects on the Purchase Decision


                                            Buy                               Buy | Open                       Q = 2 | Buy

   Social norm          Price    p=1       p=5       Total           p=1         p=5        Total    p=1          p=5        Total

  Neutral Frame                   0.040     0.015     0.027          0.110       0.046      0.079     0.631       0.182       0.506
                                 (0.196)   (0.121)   (0.163)        (0.313)     (0.210)     0.270    (0.487)     (0.395)     (0.503)
  Obs.                            1427      1482      2909            520         475        995        57          22          79
  Social Norm Low                 0.048     0.016     0.032          0.174       0.055      0.112     0.667       0.320       0.577
                                 (0.215)   (0.127)   (0.176)        (0.379)     (0.230)    (0.316)   (0.475)     (0.476)     (0.496)
  Obs.                            1490      1528      3018            414         451        865        72          25          97
  Social Norm High                0.055     0.024     0.039          0.158       0.073      0.115     0.538       0.333       0.474
                                 (0.230)   (0.154)   (0.195)        (0.366)     (0.260)    (0.320)   (0.502)     (0.478)     (0.501)
  Obs.                            1404      1484      2888            492         496        988        78          36         114
  Total                          0.0480     0.018     0.033          0.145       0.058      0.102     0.609       0.289       0.517
                                 (0.214)   (0.135)   (0.178)        (0.352)     (0.234)    (0.302)   (0.489)     (0.456)     (0.501)
  Obs.                            4321      4494      8815           1426        1422       2848       207         83          290

 Note: Figures in table are means and standard deviations (in parentheses). For example, column 1 "Buy" is calculated as
 0.04=57 households buying at least a pack of CFLs divided by 1427 total households approached in Neutral treatment with
 price=1$. Column 2 "Buy | Open" is calculated as 0.11 = 57 households buying at least a pack of CFLs divided by 520 total
 households who open the door when approached in Neutral treatment with price=1$. Column 3 "Q=2 | Buy" represents
 households that choose to buy two packs of CFLs.




                                                               20
    There are several further bits of empirical support for Results II and III. First, summary results in table
5 indicate that an increase in price from $1 to $5 generates a significant decrease in the fraction of people
purchasing at least one package: in many cases by large percentages. These results highlight that the demand
curve for CFLs is indeed downward sloping in general. When we restrict the analysis to the households that
purchased 2 packs of CFLs (rightmost panel in table 5), we find a significant role for prices.
    Second, turning to tables 3 and 4 we find complementary evidence. For example, in column 2 of table
3 we find that both prices and social norms aect the probability of purchase. Yet, in column 3 of table
3 we find that while price aects the probability of purchasing a second package, social norms play no
statistically significant role. Likewise, in column 2 of table 4, we find that when we conduct a simultaneous
equation estimation we find that both price and social norms matter for the purchases decision. Yet, in
column 3 of table 4, when modeling purchasing two packages only price is significant. As a whole, in terms
of economic significance, tables 3-5 paint a consonant picture: the high norm increases the probability of
purchase by roughly 40 percent compared to the control and decreasing the price from five dollars to one
dollar increases the probability of purchase by roughly three-fold. Viewed in their totality, these reduced
form results suggest an important complementarity between pecuniary and non-pecuniary factors on the
diusion of new technologies.
Result IV: the correlation across choices.
Finally, table 6 reports the  terms associated to the cross-equation correlation matrix between the choices.16

                                            Table 6: Correlation matrix ( terms)

                                                 Open Door      Buy | Open     Q=2 | Buy
                                                     1            -0.832*       1.600***
                                   Open Door
                                                                  (0.442)        (0.512)
                                                                     1            -0.856
                                   Buy | Open
                                                                                 (0.603)
                                   Q=2 | Buy                                         1
                                   p < .1;   p < .05;   p < .01



    Addressing simultaneously empirical estimations we find evidence of opening the door and choosing along
the extensive/intensive margin. Indeed, the two equations related to the decisions to open the door and the
decisions to purchase at least 1 or 2 packages of CFLs are strongly correlated (12 =                0.832 and 13 = 1.600,
respectively). Looking to the not statistically significant correlation between the error terms of the second
and third equation (23 =          0.856) we could assume that households which register a higher likelihood of
purchase at least 1 pack of CFLs are also less likely to purchase the second package this suggests that the
  16                               and 
      12 = 0.832 , 13 = 1.600               23 = 0.856.  is the standard error for the correlation coe cient between the three
error terms. Basically,  is just the correlation between the residuals of the three equations.



                                                             21
choices are almost independent - perhaps reflecting that our treatments attract dierent types for whom the
underlying motivation for purchasing the first package of CFLs dier.
    In Appendix A we report as robustness check the traditional approach that shows the estimated co-
e cients of ten linear probability models analogous to the regression in Equation 1, that do not consider
the intrinsic correlation between choices.17 Table A1 shows results for the sample of 8815 households un-
conditional on whether or not they answer the door, table A2, shows findings for the subsample of 2848
households who answered the door, and table A3 shows results for the subsample of 290 households who
purchased at least 1 pack of CFLs. Results from these models provide insights consistent with those from
our main specifications - norms and prices impact behavior along dierent margins. Norms only impact the
extensive margin decision whereas prices impact choice along both the extensive and intensive margins.



5     Structural estimation
We view the reduced form results as providing interesting insights on their own, yet we can complement those
by imposing further structure on the estimation. Identification of theoretical parameters through structural
estimation permits a discussion of the policy and welfare impacts of a door-to-door campaign to encourage
energy conservation technologies, and the impact of using social-psychology statements. Because our natural
field experimental design was informed by the theory, a thorough discussion concerning the welfare impacts
of the various policy instruments employed (i.e., subsidy incentives, social pressure, and warning levels)
from purchasing CFLs is possible. The parameters of the structural model are estimated using Maximum
Likelihood (ML), and we summarize the structural estimates in three sub-sections.


I: Estimated Parameters

Empirical results from the structural estimations are reported in Table 7, which reports the estimated
parameters of three alternative specifications. Informed by the reduced form results of Section 4, Model (1)
does not condition the estimate of µ on social norms. In other words, Model (1) restricts social norms
to have an impact on the extensive margin only while allowing prices to impact decisions along both the
extensive and intensive margins. Model (2) relaxes this restriction by allowing social norms to influence the
  17 We report the estimated coe cients of ten linear probabilities models of the form: y
                                                                                          ijk = Zijk + j + k + "ij , where yijk
equals 1 if household i located in suburb j opened the door to salesperson k, and 0 otherwise. The vector Z includes indicators
for: i) W and OO treatments (columns 1 and 2), ii) L and H treatments (columns 3 and 4), iii) high price (columns 5 and
6), iv ) all treatments (columns 7 and 8) and v ) all treatments and interaction terms between high price and L and H pressure
level (columns 9 and 10), while the vector  includes salesperson specific dummy variables and the vector suburbs-specific
dummies. Moreover, clustered robust standard errors are included at date-solicitor time blocks level in order to control for
possible randomization fixed eects.



                                                              22
                                                       Table 7: Structural estimations

                                                       (1)                  (2)                  (3)
                                                       2.327***          2.067***              1.381**
                                        µ
                                                       (.416)             (0.588)              (0.690)
                                                                           0.779
                                            L
                                                                          (0.477)
                                                                           0.008
                                            H
                                                                          (0.791)
                                                                                              1.362
                                            W
                                                                                            (0.882)
                                                       -2.542***             -2.23**         -1.058
                                        µ
                                                       (0.867)               (0.957)        (1.063)
                                                       0.222**                -0.901        0.218**
                                            L
                                                       (0.103)               (0.694)        (0.103)
                                                       0.222**                0.218          0.212*
                                            H
                                                       (0.113)               (1.111)        (0.121)
                                                                                              -2.04
                                            W
                                                                                            (1.262)
                                                       -3.01***          -3.063***          -3.549*
                                        µ
                                                       (0.857)             (0.854)          (1.075)
                                                       0.351***           0.349***         0.351***
                                        h0
                                                       (0.011)             (0.012)          (0.011)
                                                       0.207***           0.207***         0.207***
                                        r
                                                       (0.019)             (0.019)          (0.019)
                                                       4.810***           4.827***         4.774***
                                            
                                                       (1.101)             (1.109)          (1.107)
                                                       0.925***           0.963***         0.863***
                                            
                                                       (0.228)             (0.223)          (0.264)
                                                       -0.9                  -0.9              -0.9
                                        
                                                       (-)                    (-)               (-)
                                        Obs.           8815                 8815              8815
                                        Log lik.       7585.7101         -7583.935         -7583.372
                                            = p < .1;      = p < .05;         = p < .01



intensive margin, positing direct eects on µ . Specifically, in Model 2 we restrict our normative statements
-which are captured by        L   and          H-   to have impacts via shifts in the parameter mean. Finally, Model (3)
maintains the same structure as Model (1), but allows for the existence of both µ and µ& , or selection
eects. That is, shifts in the corresponding parameter means associated with warning (both W and OO
conditions together). These parameters are labelled as                        W   and     W,   respectively.
    The parameter estimate for µ in Model (1) suggests that the marginal utility (willingness to pay) for a
packet of CFLs is approximately $2.33 for the average household in our sample. Importantly, this estimate
provides a potential rationale for why many consumers do not purchase CFLs -ceteris paribus they value
them less than the prevailing market price. The negative and highly significant estimate of µ& -that is,
negative social pressure - accounts for the large proportion of subjects not buying anything despite opening
the door and having a valuation for a packet of CFLs that exceeds the $1 of our low price condition.18 As
  18 Unfortunately, we are unable to determine what drives this estimate. One possibility is that households dislike being

solicited and asked to purchase a packet of light bulbs. A second possibility is that the estimate captures a fixed cost of either
having to store the bulbs for future use or replacing existing lighting in the home. Future work should explore the possibilities


                                                                        23
the estimated parameter for social pressure in Model (1) is even higher than µ , the average household in
our experiment would only purchase a packet of CFLs if the price was negative (i.e, we paid them to do
so). By contrast, both social norms - L and H - have a positive (and significant) impact on the extensive
margin suggesting that the normative statements mitigate spite towards our solicitors and/or increases the
valuation households place on the first packet of CFLs purchased. Interestingly, our structural model does
not detect any significant dierence between the two. This result challenges the claim of the relevance of
"proximity ", that has been documented in prior work in social psychology which we discussed in Section 4.
   The estimate of µ is negative and highly significant in Model (1) suggesting that individuals do not
desire and in fact dislike information on energy e ciency and energy saving strategies. Such dislike accounts
for the large proportion of subjects who do not open the door in our warning treatments. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to document that individuals may actually dislike information on energy
e ciency and are willing to take a costly action to avoid receiving such. This result might provide insights
into why informational treatments have had little impact on energy savings in the previous literature (see,
e.g., Allcott and Sweeney (2016) or Holladay et al. (2019)) and highlight that even though information is
supplied, for it to be valuable the market must have demand for the information. In this way, our result has
a distant antecedent in considering demand for information in the area of health. For example, people avoid
information about their own health (Thornton, 2008; Zanella and Banerjee, 2016), which has been attributed
to the fact that people who are ignorant of their health can be more optimistic about it - i.e., it provides
a sort of anticipatory utility (or, alternatively, avoiding information may allow them to avoiding anxiety
associated with knowledge of bad outcomes, Oster et al., 2013). Viewed in its totality, Model (1) provides
two potential explanations for why households eschew the purchase of CFLs despite the documented energy
savings: (i) individuals do not seem to care about energy e ciency and actually dislike receiving energy
savings information, and (ii) most individuals value CFLs substantially less than the market price- a result
we will return to when conducting our policy simulations. In this regard, our structural model provides
unique underpinnings for the "energy paradox."
   Concerning Model (2), while most of the estimated parameters remain practically unchanged -with specific
reference to µ and µ - the dependency of µ& on social norm disappears. Moreover, we are unable to establish
an eect of the social norms on the intensive margin in that we fail to reject both null hypotheses H0 :   H   =0
and H0 :     L   = 0. Combined with results from Model (1), our structural estimates provide evidence that
normative statements operate entirely along the extensive margin. From a positive perspective, this suggests
that normative appeals should be modeled as something akin to fixed costs, or "warm glow" that impacts
to better understand what drives the low rates of purchase in our experiment.




                                                            24
choice along the extensive margin but has no impact on the valuation for inframarginal units. Whether and
to what extent this insight extends to other domains is an important research agenda.
    As for Model (3), we find an interesting result of sorting: it influences both margins, raising the utility of
consumption and lowering social pressure (although neither eect turns out to be significant at conventional
levels). Directionally, these insights open up an interesting possibility since this is exactly how sorting
should impact the treatment eects. For example, in the warning treatment those individuals who are most
susceptible to social pressures should sort out so we should find a reduction in the eect of social pressure.
Likewise, those with greater valuations should sort in, causing a higher estimated valuation for those that
open the door in the warning treatment. In this manner, the structural estimates from Model (3) reveal a
potential benefit of a policy approach that is voluntary in nature, allowing people to sort according to their
preferences because such an allowance permits a shifting of the distribution eects.19


II: Heterogeneity

Figure 5 sketches a) the estimated normal distribution of  and b) the joint (normal) distribution of & and
 according to Model (1). As for Panel a), the estimated relative frequency of households willing to buy 2
packs at the price p = 1 (p = 5) against 1 are set equal to 61 % (29 %), respectively. These figures match
exactly the observed frequencies of Table 5.
  19 In terms of model fit, the three functionals are not nested, so one cannot use nested test statistics to test between them.

However, one can use the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) or the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) to provide a ranking
of the various functionals (Amemiya, 1980). Both criteria In deal with the trade-o between the goodness of fit of the model
and the simplicity of the model (i.e., the number of parameters to be estimated). In this respect under both criteria, Model (1)
(Model (3)) [Model (2)] ranks first (second) [third], respectively. This is some confirmation that the most parsimonious model
tailored upon the reduced-form regressions is also the one which fits best our experimental evidence.




                                                              25
                                  Figure 5: Estimated distributions of , & and  (Model II)




             N ote: Panel a) shows the estimated normal distribution of . Panel b) the joint (normal) distribution
             of & and  according to Model (1).



     As we know from Table 7, & and  display a very high negative correlation, which reflects the shape of
the joint distribution.20 The estimated probability of opening the door in the No Warning condition, h0 , is
estimated around 35 % and follows closely the observed frequency (37%, see Table 2). By the same token,
the probability of noticing the flyer, r, is lower than the corresponding estimate in DLM (20% vs. 32%).
Then, the ex-ante probability of not opening the door conditional on warning derived from Model (1) is then
(1    r)(1    h0 ) + r(1     2 (µ , µ& , µ ))   = 32% (compare with Table 2).


III: Willingness to Pay and Policy Simulations

We now take deeper advantage of our structural model to estimate expected changes in demand at prices
outside the narrow range of parameters implemented in our field experiment. Table 8 reports the "simulated
demand" derived by Models (1) to (3) for a wider range of prices, from -1 to 5, than those tested in the field
experiment. In doing so, we are able to simulate the eect of policies whereby CFLs are given to households
at no cost, or are actually subsidized. Furthermore, we are able to examine the complete interaction of prices
and social norms. For example, whether normative statements on the usage of others aects observed price
elasticities, and the role of sorting as induced by our warning treatments. We can derive such eects across
our three model specifications. As such, we are able to examine the existence of a "social norm eect" and
  20 We estimated the models by fixing the value of the correlation coe cient, , from a finite grid. This is why the associated

standard errors have not been reported.




                                                              26
simulate it at dierent price levels. We are also able to examine how the eectiveness of any policy option
is impacted by sorting and subsequent changes in the distribution of types that are exposed to the policy.
    As we allow the eect of prices and social norms to vary along the extensive and intensive margins, we
simulate and report the eects along the two margins separately - i.e., we allow dierent elasticities along the
extensive and intensive margins. Moreover, all figures in Table 8 represent relative frequency of purchases
conditional on opening the door, and should thus be interpreted as the eect of a treatment on the treated.
In this regard, we are unable to directly simulate the eect of a policy that allows sorting. Rather, we are
able to examine whether the eect of price changes and normative appeals is impacted by changes in the set
of people exposed to the policy across the warning and no-warning conditions.21
    Figures in Table 8 can be read as follows. The table is divided into four distinct blocks that capture
whether households were warned about the solicitation and whether the household was provided a normative
statement on the adoption decisions of others. For example, the first block corresponds to our baseline
treatment whereby households are not warned in advance of the solicitation request and are not provided
any information about the adoption decisions of others whereas the final block corresponds to the predicted
frequencies for households that were warned in advance of the solicitation and were provided information on
the adoption decisions of others upon opening the door.
    Within each block, we calculate predicted frequencies for five dierent price levels - the prevailing market
price for a package of CFLs at the time of our experiment ($5), two prices that reflect partial subsidies on the
purchase ($3 and $1), a full subsidy on purchase that would correspond to giving away the package ($0), and
a negative price that would correspond to a policy of fully subsidizing the purchase of CFLs and providing
households a tax credit or similar rebate (of $1) should they accept the package. The first column of the
table presents results that simulate demand using parameter estimates from Model (1) in Table 7 whereas
the second and third columns present simulations that rely upon parameter estimates from Models (2) and
(3) of Table 7, respectively. Within each column, we present two distinct frequencies - the likelihood that a
household who opens the door elects to purchase at least one package of CFLs (the extensive margin) and
the conditional likelihood of purchasing a second package (the intensive margin).
  21 Of course, one could use estimates on the likelihood of opening the door to recover the eect of sorting and the total eect

of policy options in the presence of sorting. By the same token, we condition intensive margin eects on the set of individuals
that purchased at least one package of CFLs but can easily recover the total eect of any policy change from the information
reported in Table 8.




                                                              27
                                           Table 8: Counterfactuals (1)

                                        Model (1)                  Model (2)                Model (3)
      W    Social Norms   Price   Ext. Marg.  Int. marg.    Ext. Marg.   Int. marg.   Ext. Marg.  Int. marg.
                            5       0.042        0.289        0 .042        0.274       0.036        0.224
                           3        0.069        0.444        0.069         0.425       0.059        0.367
      No        No          1       0.114        0.608        0.113         0.588       0.096        0.531
                           0        0.145        0.685        0.145         0.666       0.123        0.613
                           -1       0.183        0.755        0.182         0.737       0.156        0.691
                            5       0.066        0.289        0 .066        0.301       0.063        0.224
                           3        0.104        0.444        0.104         0.457       0.098        0.367
      No       Yes          1       0.162        0.608        0.163         0.619       0.152        0.531
                           0        0.201        0.685        0.203         0.695       0.188        0.613
                           -1       0.248        0.755        0.249         0.763       0.232        0.691
                            5       0.042        0.289        0 .042        0.274       0.046        0.318
                           3        0.069        0.444        0.069         0.425       0.075        0.479
     Yes        No          1       0.114        0.608        0.113         0.588       0.124        0.643
                           0        0.145        0.685        0.145         0.666       0.158        0.717
                           -1       0.183        0.755        0.182         0.737       0.199        0.784
                            5       0.066        0.289        0.066         0.301       0.071        0.318
                           3        0.104        0.444        0.104         0.457       0.112        0.479
     Yes       Yes          1       0.162        0.608        0.163         0.619       0.175        0.643
                           0        0.201        0.685        0.203         0.695       0.217        0.717
                           -1       0.248        0.755        0.249         0.763       0.266        0.784



   We begin by exploring the eect of policy changes as simulated using estimates from Model (1). Recall
that, under this specification, prices are allowed to influence choice along both the extensive and intensive
margins whereas social norms are restricted to impact behavior along only the extensive margin. Hence,
estimates for the proportion of households that purchase at least one pack of CFLs at any given price dier
across the first and second blocks of the table but there are no dierences in intensive margin eects across
these two blocks. Similarly, as Model (1) does not condition behavior on our warning treatments, there
are no dierences in predicted probabilities across blocks one and three (two and four) which dier only in
whether or not the estimates are conditioned on warning the household in advance of the solicitation request.
   We first examine the eects of a policy that subsidizes the purchase of CFLs and thus lower the per unit
price. As noted in the first block of Table 8, it is hard to stimulate the purchase of CFLs through price
changes. For example, we estimate that approximately 4.2 percent of households would purchase at least one
package of CFLs at the prevailing market price ($5). If, instead, we were to oer a 40 percent (or $2) subsidy
on the purchase of a package, the probability of a household purchasing at least one package would only
increase by 2.7 percentage points. Increasing the subsidy by an additional $2 would lead to an approximate
4.5 percentage point increase in the likelihood a household purchases at least one package. In fact, even if
we were to fully subsidize the purchase of CFLs and oer to give away packages for free, only 14.5 percent of
households would take up the oer. That such a significant fraction of households would turn down a "free"
package of CFLs suggests that such households view them as inferior to (or imperfect subsititute for) the


                                                       28
existing stock of lightbulbs in their home.22
    Comparing the eect of price changes along the intensive margin reveals a more elastic pattern of behavior.
For example, we estimate that approximately 28.9 percent of the households who purchase CFLs at the
prevailing market price ($5) would buy multiple packages. If, instead, we were to oer a $2 subsidy on
the price per pack, the conditional probability of a household purchasing a second package of CFLs would
increase by approximately 15.5 percentage points. Combined with the estimated extensive margin eects,
we would thus expect a $2 per pack subsidy to generate a 35 unit increase in the overall number of packages
purchased per one thousand people.23 Yet, even in this case if we were to give away packages for free, only
68.5 percent of those who take up the oer would demand a second package which, when combined with
the eects along the extensive margin, would generate a 179 unit increase in the overall number of packages
purchased per one thousand people.24
    We next examine the eect of an alternate policy, grounded in behavioral economics, that would provide
households information on the fraction of others in their area that report owning and using at least one CFL.
As the eects of such policies in Model (1) are restricted to the extensive margin, we focus our discussion on
the extensive margin eects and subsequent changes in the likelihood that a household will elect to purchase
at least one package of CFLs at dierent price levels. As noted in the second block of Table 8, the inclusion
of normative information leads to an approximate 35.5 to 57.1 percent increase in the likelihood a household
elects to purchase at least one package of CFLs with the eect more pronounced at higher price levels. For
example, at a price of $5 per package, provision of our normative information is estimated to generate an
approximate 57.1 percent (2.4 percentage point) increase in the likelihood a household purchase a package
of CFLs. At a price of $1 per package, in contrast, providing households normative information is estimated
to generate an approximate 42.1 percent (4.8 percentage point) increase in the likelihood of purchase.
    Results using estimates from our other two specifications are qualitatively similar. However, it is worth
noting that allowing households to sort - as in our warning treatments - does alter the eectiveness of our
various policy instruments. For example, comparing estimates for Model (3) across the first and third blocks,
the eect of a $2 subsidy on the per package price of CFLs would nearly double if households were allowed
to sort. Without the ability to sort, such a subsidy would generate an approximate 26 unit increase in the
overall number of packages purchased per one thousand people. If, instead, households were allowed to sort,
such a subsidy would generate an approximate 70 unit increase in the overall number of packages purchased
  22 While we are unable to identify why the households in our study dislike CFLs, our findings are consistent with concerns

that fluorescent lights do not work well in colder temperatures and take longer to achieve full brightness.
  23 At the prevailing price, our estimates suggest that we would sell approximately 65 packages per 1000 households. At $3

per package, we would expect to sell approximately 100 packages per 1000 households.
  24 Our estimates thus suggest that we would have to spend somewhere in the range of $5.71 to $6.82 to stimulate the purchase

of one additional package of CFLs.


                                                             29
per one thousand people.25 From a policy perspective, allowing households to sort, reduces the necessary
budget to stimulate the purchase of an additional package of CFLs by almost a dollar - $4.40 per additional
package in the warning condition versus $5.38 per additional package in the no warning condition.
    In contrast, allowing households the ability to sort, reduces the eectiveness of social norms. For example,
in our no warning condition, our normative statement increases the likelihood a household purchases a
package of CFLs by approximately 75 percent (2.7 percentage points) when the price is $5 per package. In
our warning condition, however, including a normative statement only increases the likelihood a household
purchases a package of CFLs by 54 percent (2.5 percentage points). Interestingly, such dierences are even
more pronounced at lower prices. These results hold import for the recent discussion regarding scaling
and generalizability of experimental results. As Al-Ubaydli et al. (2017, 2019) show, the properties of the
population and situation importantly influence whether and to what extent empirical results from original
small-scale studies transfer to a larger setting. In this case, our results show that sorting in and of itself
leads to dramatically dierent policy interpretations. For policymakers interested in understanding benefit
cost ratios at scale, this result reveals the importance of a rarely discussed activity, sorting.
    In this spirit, we can also use our structural model to determine the maximum prices that could be
charged to ensure a target frequency of adoption. Results from these simulations are presented in Table 9,
and can be read as follows. As with our prior discussion, the table is divided into four distinct blocks that
capture whether households were warned about the solicitation and whether they were provided a normative
statement about the adoption decisions of others. Within each block, we calculate the maximum price that
could be charged given a target that X = 1, 5, 10, 25, 50 percent of households would purchase at least one
package of CFLs (extensive margin) or an additional one (intensive margin). The first column of Table 9
presents results that simulate demand using parameter estimates from Model (1) in Table 7 whereas the
second and third columns present simulations that rely upon estimates from Models (2) and (3) of Table 7.
  25 In the no warning condition, the estimated number of packages purchased at $5 ($3) is 44 units (70 units) respectively. If,

instead, we allow people to sort and condition the estimates on whether or not households were warned, the expected number
of packages purchased at $5 ($3) is 60 units (110 units) respectively.




                                                              30
                                            Table 9: Counterfactuals (2)

                                           Model (1)                  Model (2)                  Model (3)
     W     Social Norms   Target   Ext. Marg.    Int. marg.   Ext. Marg.    Int. marg.   Ext. Marg.    Int. marg.
                            1%      $ 10.90        $ 13.51     $ 10.97        $ 13.39     $ 10.30        $ 12.48
                            5%       $ 4.32        $ 10.24      $ 4.35        $ 10.08      $ 3.66         $ 9.23
     No        No          10 %      $ 1.53         $ 8.49      $ 1.53         $ 8.31      $ 0.84         $ 7.49
                           25 %      $ -2.41        $ 5.57      $ -2.44        $ 5.36      $ -3.13        $ 4.59
                           50 %      $ -6.34        $ 2.32      $ -6.37        $ 2.08      $ -7.05        $ 1.37
                            1%      $ 13.33        $ 13.51     $ 13.19        $ 13.78     $ 12.71        $ 12.48
                            5%       $ 6.28        $ 10.24      $ 6.22        $ 10.47      $ 5.63         $ 9.23
     No        Yes         10 %      $ 3.19         $ 8.49      $ 3.18         $ 8.70      $ 2.51         $ 7.49
                           25 %      $ -1.04        $ 5.57      $ -1.01        $ 5.75      $ -1.75        $ 4.59
                           50 %      $ -5.07        $ 2.32      $ -5.02        $ 2.47      $ -5.79        $ 1.37
                            1%      $ 10.90        $ 13.51     $ 10.97        $ 13.39     $ 11.17        $ 13.85
                            5%       $ 4.32        $ 10.24      $ 4.35        $ 10.08      $ 4.64        $ 10.59
     Yes       No          10 %      $ 1.53         $ 8.49      $ 1.53         $ 8.31      $ 1.88         $ 8.86
                           25 %      $ -2.41        $ 5.57      $ -2.44        $ 5.36      $ -2.04        $ 5.97
                           50 %      $ -6.34        $ 2.32      $ -6.37        $ 2.08      $ -5.95        $ 2.75
                            1%      $ 13.33        $ 13.51     $ 13.19        $ 13.78     $ 13.57        $ 13.85
                            5%       $ 6.28        $ 10.24      $ 6.22        $ 10.47      $ 6.57        $ 10.59
     Yes       Yes         10 %      $ 3.19         $ 8.49      $ 3.18         $ 8.70      $ 3.51         $ 8.86
                           25 %      $ -1.04        $ 5.57      $ -1.01        $ 5.25      $ -0.68        $ 5.97
                           50 %      $ -5.07        $ 2.23      $ -5.02        $ 2.47      $ -4.69        $ 2.75



   Consistent with our previous analysis, we consider two distinct policy instruments - price changes (subsi-
dies) and the use of a nudge that provides information on the fraction of households in one's area that report
having installed at least one CFL in their home -and examine whether the eectiveness of such instruments
are eected when we warn households and thus allow sorting.
   Considering the extensive margin, we begin by exploring the eect of policy changes as simulated using
estimates from Model (1). As noted in the first column of Table 9, any policy that targets adoption rates in
excess of 25 percent would require that policy makers oer households compensation for accepting a package
of CFLs. For example, estimates from the first block suggest that we would have to oer compensation of
approximately $2.41 if we wanted adoption rates of 25 percent. If instead, our target was for the median
household to purchase a package of CFLs, compensation of approximately $6.34 would be required. Provision
of social information, however, reduces the amount of compensation required to meet adoption targets in
excess of 25 percent. As noted in the second block of Table 9, the amount of compensation required to
ensure a 25 (50) percent adoption threshold amongst households that are provided social information falls
to $1.04 ($5.07) respectively.
   Introducing the ability to sort, as in Model (3), also serves to reduce the level of compensation required
to achieve target adoption rates in excess of 25 percent. For example, in the absence of social information,
the compensation required to induce 25 percent of households to adopt falls from $3.13 in our no warning




                                                         31
condition to $2.04 when households can sort.26 We observe a similar eect of sorting on the level of com-
pensation required in the presence of social information. For example, the level of compensation required
to achieve a 25 percent adoption rate in the presence of social information falls from $2.04 to $0.68 when
households are allowed to sort.
    We now turn our attention to intensive margins where, by construction, the median household in the
baseline condition evaluates the purchase of an additional package exactly as what the estimates of µ in
Table 8 indicate, for all models. Also notice that the impact of social norms (Model 2) and sorting (Model 3)
are in line with those we discussed for the extensive margins, but lower in magnitude. As for social norms,
the presence of a social norm statement can act as a substitute for a price reduction that ranges from 3 to
16 % (depending on the target of adoption). By comparison, sorting (Model 3) has an even greater impact:
it substitutes for a price reduction that ranges from 10 to 50 % (again, depending on the target: the lower
the target, the lower the reduction).
    As a whole, our policy simulations questions the cost eectiveness of policies to promote the adoption of
CFLs. Demand for CFLs is low and a substantial fraction of households appear to dislike such technologies
and would require compensation in order to accept a package of CFLs. This opens up the debate of whether
one should consider CFLs as a perfect substitute for incandescent lights­our estimates suggest that a majority
of households view them as an inferior technology.27 Moreover, while social information and the ability to
sort do serve to stimulate demand, such eects do little to reduce the costs required to achieve adoption
rates in excess of 25 percent.



6     Conclusions
The eects of innovation on economic growth are importantly moderated by the diusion rates of new
technologies. Viewed broadly, our contribution is to highlight the import of both economic and non-economic
factors to the diusion process. Methodologically, we show the power of designing a field experiment that
is tightly connected to a structural model. Narrowly, our study is motivated by the potential (and need)
for reducing energy consumption by residential households. Residential users account for approximately
21 percent of all greenhouse gas emissions in the United States (U.S. Energy Information Administration).
Changing patterns of electricity consumption in the residential sector is necessary if the United States is to
  26 We observe a similar reduction in the level of compensation required to induce the median household to accept a package

of CFLs. In the absence of social information, the median household in our no warning condition requires $7.05 to accept a
package of CFL's whereas counterparts who are allowed to sort require only $5.95 to accept a package.
  27 Although outside the scope of our current analysis, this result has implications for work on the energy paradox. If households

view CFLs as an inferior technology, it could be a rational decision to eschew their purchase even though doing so would save
the household money on monthly energy bills.


                                                                32
achieve former President Obama's goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 28% by 2020. Although social
comparisons have proven an eective means to manage residential electricity demand (see e.g. Allcott, 2009;
Ayres and Ayres, 2009), the eects of such programs are far less than what is needed to achieve Obama's
emissions targets. In this regard, we view policies designed to promote technology adoption as an important
complement to such programs.
    We focus our analysis on CFLs as the rate of CFL adoption and diusion throughout the United States
satisfied two primary conditions necessary to be classified a technology suering from the energy paradox
- CFLs have had slow rates of diusion while being economically rational to purchase.28 Yet, the results
from the field experiment could be used to inform adoption programs for other environmental technologies,
such as low flow shower heads, hybrid and electric cars, or technology involved with energy smart grids
such as smart meters and in-home displays. Importantly, our research provides the first direct comparison
of prices and social norms, since our approach aords an apples-to-apples comparison in the context of a
single, large-scale field experiment. In doing so, our approach provides greater understanding of the motives
surrounding consumer adoption and should help inform policy makers interested in promoting the adoption
of green technologies as a means to achieve Obama's emissions target.
    Although market-based environmental policies have been on the minds of economists since Pigou's seminal
work on welfare in 1912, subsidizing new environmental technologies to encourage adoption stands as a
somewhat controversial approach under the standard economic assumption of informed rational agents.
This paper does not explore market imperfections or whether subsidizing new technology could be seen as
economically rational. Rather, we operate under an assumption that su cient externalities exist to justify
public policy, or, as stated previously in Jae and Stavins (1994): "If there are significant externalities
associated with burning fossil fuels, however, then the paradox becomes much more important. Indeed, the
existence of such externalities could justify public policies to reduce energy use." We feel comfortable in this
assumption given that pollution continues to not be fully priced in to the market, presenting society a cost
that markets have not internalized. Moreover there is a growing literature on behavioral welfare economics
(e.g. Allcott and Taubinsky, 2015, see Section 2 for a discussion of the relevant literature) that considers
that individuals are subject to internalities (so that they do not consider all the consequences for themselves
of their own decisions), what would further justify the interventions.
  28 The Department of Energy's "CFL Market Profile" released in March, 2009, found that only 11% of the light sockets

feasible for CFLs in U.S. households were being used by CFLs, although 70% of U.S. households did have at least one CFL.
Under varying assumptions, the upfront costs of CFLs will be recouped in two to four months due to energy cost savings. For
example, assuming energy prices of $0.12 per kilowatt hour and a typical assumption of 1,142 hours per year of usage per light
bulb results in a per month charge of $0.69 for a 60 watt incandescent light bulb versus $0.34 for a 60 watt "equivalent" CFL at
14 watts, netting a per month savings of $0.35. Although the savings is small, the dierence in upfront costs are now typically
small, ranging between $0.25 and $2.00.



                                                              33
   Non-pecuniary techniques to motivate residential energy conservation used in research by social psy-
chologists and behavioral economists have generally focused on changing energy usage behavior rather than
focusing on encouraging adoption of energy e cient products. This is evident in broad reviews of the existing
literature such as Abrahamse et al. (2005), as well as more recent research such as Schultz et al. (2007),
Allcott (2009), List and Price (2016), or Price (2014). However, we chose to focus on motivating technol-
ogy adoption as a specific behavioral change in order to avoid the issues that cause the beneficial energy
conservation results to lessen over time, such as the "boomerang" eect and mean reversion. It is possible
that adjustments in lighting usage caused our study to not result in the full energy reduction potential. We
attempt to address this by conducting follow-up interviews but this should be considered more fully in future
research provided that energy usage data can be obtained.
   In particular, we believe the importance of heterogeneity should be explicitly addressed in interventions
such as ours. Our structural estimation results in Section 5 show that there is substantial heterogeneity in
individual characteristics and, even more, that there is a substantial negative correlation between curiosity
and social pressure. This suggest that interventions that ignore heterogeneity will often under-perform those
that take it into account, for example by assigning treatments to individuals according to observed and/or
elicited characteristics. This would allow individuals who would benefit from treatment to receive it, while
those who would be hurt can be assigned to a control group. We view this approach as an exciting area of
future research.
   Our results suggest that both prices and social norms impact the decision to adopt new technologies. Yet,
only prices impact the consumer's quantity decision. Hence, price and social norms aect behavior along
dierent margins: whereas social norms aect behavior along the extensive margin, prices aect behavior
along both margins. Price and social norms working on dierent margins has important implications when
considering how to motivate consumers to utilize new environmental technologies. As we have discussed
in Section 3, our design did not allow us to disentangle the eects of the private valuation for the CFLs
from those of altruism. However, in future research we will attempt to analyze these two channels, by using
treatments that prime private economic concerns vs. public environmental concerns.
   The results suggest that the use of price reductions through subsidies should be considered when there
is a desire to encourage further diusion of the technology, while social-psychology motivations should be
considered when attempting to encourage adoption. This intriguing result is intuitive and could be easily
explored further in future research.




                                                     34
References
Abrahamse, W., Steg, L., Vlek, C. and Rothengatter, T. (2005) A review of intervention studies aimed at
 household energy conservation, Journal of environmental psychology, 25, 273­291.
Acland, D. and Levy, M. (2016) Habit formation and Naivete in gym attendance: evidence from a field
  experiment, Working paper.
Aghion, P. and Howitt, P. (1992) The schumpeterian approach to technical change and growth, in Economic
  Growth in the World Economy: Symposium, vol. 1993.
Al-Ubaydli, O., List, J. A. and Suskind, D. (2019) The science of using science: Towards an understanding
  of the threats to scaling experiments, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Al-Ubaydli, O., List, J. A. and Suskind, D. L. (2017) What can we learn from experiments? understanding
  the threats to the scalability of experimental results, American Economic Review, 107, 282­86.
Allcott, H. (2009) Social norms and energy conservation working paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
  (MIT), Cambridge, MA https://files. nyu. edu/ha32/public/research. html.
Allcott, H. (2011) Social norms and energy conservation, Journal of Public Economics, 95, 1082­1095.

Allcott, H. and Greenstone, M. (2012) Is there an energy e ciency gap?, The Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives, 26, 3­28.
Allcott, H., Mullainathan, S. and Taubinsky, D. (2014) Energy policy with externalities and internalities,
  Journal of Public Economics, 112, 72­88.
Allcott, H. and Rogers, T. (2014) The Short-Run and Long-Run Eects of Behavioral Interventions : Ex-
  perimental Evidence from Energy Conservation , American Economic Review, 104, 3003­3037.
Allcott, H. and Sweeney, R. L. (2016) The role of sales agents in information disclosure: evidence from a
  field experiment, Management Science, 63, 21­39.
Allcott, H. and Taubinsky, D. (2015) Evaluating behaviorally-motivated policy: Experimental evidence from
  the lightbulb market, American Economic Review, 105, 2501­2538.
Al´
  os-Ferrer, C., Garc´
                     ia-Segarra, J. and Ritschel, A. (2018) Performance curiosity, Journal of Economic
  Psychology, 64, 1­17.
Amemiya, T. (1980) Selection of regressors, International economic review, pp. 331­354.

Ayres, R. U. and Ayres, E. H. (2009) Crossing the energy divide: moving from fossil fuel dependence to a
 clean-energy future, Pearson Prentice Hall.
Baicker, K., Mullainathan, S. and Schwartzstein, J. (2015) Behavioral hazard in health insurance, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics.
Bandiera, O. and Rasul, I. (2006) Social Networks and Technology Adoption in Northern Mozambique, The
  Economic Journal, 116, 869­902.
Bernard, J. C., Schulze, W. et al. (2005) The next new thing: curiosity and the motivation to purchase novel
  products, Economics Bulletin, 3, 1­8.



                                                    35
Brandon, A., Ferraro, P. J., List, J. A., Metcalfe, R. D., Price, M. K. and Rundhammer, F. (2016) Do
  The Eects of Social Nudges Persist? Theory and Evidence from 38 Natural Field Experiments, Working
  Paper.
Charness, G. and Gneezy, U. (2009) Incentives to exercise, Econometrica, 77, 909­931.

Charness, G., Levin, D. et al. (2003) Bayesian updating vs. reinforcement and aect: A laboratory study,
  Levines Bibliography 666156000000000180, UCLA Department of Economics.
Chen, J., Humphreys, M. and Modi, V. (2010) Technology diusion and social networks: Evidence from a
  field experiment in Uganda, Manuscript, Columbia University.
Chetty, R. (2008) Su cient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and Reduced-Form
  Methods, Annual Review of Economics, 1, 451­488.
Chetty, R. (2015) Behavioral Economics and Public Policy: A Pragmatic Perspective, American Economic
  Review, 105, 1­33.
Cialdini, R. B. (2007) Descriptive social norms as underappreciated sources of social control, Psychometrika,
  72, 263.
Comin, D. and Hobijn, B. (2004) Cross-country technology adoption: making the theories face the facts,
  Journal of monetary Economics, 51, 39­83.
Conley, T. G. and Udry, C. R. (2010) Learning about a new technology: Pineapple in Ghana, The American
  Economic Review, 100, 35­69.

Conlin, M., O'Donoghue, T. and Vogelsang, T. J. (2007) Projection bias in catalog orders, american economic
  Review, 97, 1217­1249.
DellaVigna, S., List, J. A. and Malmendier, U. (2012) Testing for Altruism and Social Pressure in Charitable
  Giving, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1­56.

DellaVigna, S., List, J. A., Malmendier, U. and Rao, G. (2016a) Estimating social preferences and gift
  exchange at work, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
DellaVigna, S., List, J. A., Malmendier, U. and Rao, G. (2016b) Voting to tell others, The Review of
  Economic Studies, 84, 143­181.

Desjardins,   J.   (2018)   A    brief  history    of   technology,     World     Economic            Forum
  https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/02/the-rising-speed-of-technological-adoption.
EPA, U. (2017) Light bulb revolution: Epa predicts widespread consumer adoption of led lighting by 2020
  if utility programs persist., Tech. rep., EPA O ce of Air and Radiation, Climate Protection Partnerships
  Division.

Fernald, J. G. and Jones, C. I. (2014) The future of us economic growth, American economic review, 104,
  44­49.
Ferraro, P. J., Miranda, J. J. and Price, M. K. (2011) The persistence of treatment eects with norm-
  based policy instruments: evidence from a randomized environmental policy experiment, The American
  Economic Review, 101, 318­322.




                                                     36
Ferraro, P. J. and Price, M. K. (2013) Using Nonpecuniary Strategies to Influence Behavior: Evidence from
  a Large-Scale Field Experiment, Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 64­73.
Foster, A. D. and Rosenzweig, M. R. (2010) Microeconomics of technology adoption, Annu. Rev. Econ., 2,
  395­424.
Gerarden, T. D., Newell, R. G. and Stavins, R. N. (2017) Assessing the energy-e ciency gap, Journal of
 Economic Literature, 55, 1486­1525.
Gillingham, K., Keyes, A. and Palmer, K. (2018) Advances in evaluating energy e ciency policies and
  programs, Annual Review of Resource Economics.
Gillingham, K., Newell, R. G. and Palmer, K. (2009) Energy e ciency economics and policy, Annu. Rev.
  Resour. Econ., 1, 597­620.
Gillingham, K. and Palmer, K. (2014) Bridging the energy e ciency gap: Policy insights from economic
  theory and empirical evidence, Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 8, 18­38.
Gin´
   e, X., Karlan, D. and Zinman, J. (2010) Put your money where your butt is: a commitment contract for
  smoking cessation, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, pp. 213­235.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B. and Griskevicius, V. (2008) A room with a viewpoint: Using social norms
 to motivate environmental conservation in hotels, Journal of consumer Research, 35, 472­482.
Griliches, Z. (1957) Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technological change, Econometrica,
  Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 501­522.
Hall, B. H. (2004) Innovation and diusion, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Handel, B. R. (2013) Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudging Hurts,
  American Economic Review, 103, 2643­2682.
Harrison, G. W. and List, J. A. (2004) Field Experiments, Journal of Economic Literature, 42, 1009­1055.
Hausman, J. A. and Wise, D. A. (1976) A conditional probit model for qualitative choice: discrete decisions
  recognizing interdependence and heterogenous preferences.
Herrnstein, R. J., Loewenstein, G. F., Prelec, D. and Vaughan, W. (1993) Utility maximization and melio-
  ration: Internalities in individual choice, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 6, 149­185.
Holladay, S., LaRiviere, J., Novgorodsky, D. and Price, M. (2019) Prices versus nudges: What matters for
  search versus purchase of energy investments?, Journal of Public Economics, 172, 151­173.
Jae, A. B., Newell, R. G. and Stavins, R. N. (2002) Environmental policy and technological change, Envi-
  ronmental and resource economics, 22, 41­70.
Jae, A. B. and Stavins, R. N. (1994) The energy paradox and the diusion of conservation technology,
  Resource and Energy Economics, 16, 91­122.
Jae, A. B. and Stavins, R. N. (1995) Dynamic incentives of environmental regulations: The eects of alter-
  native policy instruments on technology diusion, Journal of environmental economics and management,
  29, S43---S63.
Jimenez-Gomez, D. (2019) Nudging and Phishing: A Theory of Behavioral Welfare Economics, Working
  Paper.


                                                    37
Jones, C. I. (2002) Sources of us economic growth in a world of ideas, American Economic Review, 92,
  220­239.
Laibson, D., Repetto, A. and Tobacman, J. (2007) Estimating discount functions with consumption choices
  over the lifecycle, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lapinski, M. K. and Rimal, R. N. (2005) An explication of social norms, Communication Theory, 15, 127­
  147.
Lef`evre, N., de T'Serclaes, P. and Waide, P. (2006) Barriers to technology diusion: the case of compact
  fluorescent lamps, Joint OECD and IEA Paper, Paris, pp. 1­35.
List, J. A. and Price, M. K. (2016) The use of field experiments in environmental and resource economics,
  Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 10, 206­225.
Litman, J., Hutchins, T. and Russon, R. (2005) Epistemic curiosity, feeling-of-knowing, and exploratory
  behaviour, Cognition & Emotion, 19, 559­582.
Loewenstein, G. (1994) The psychology of curiosity: A review and reinterpretation., Psychological bulletin,
  116, 75.
Loewenstein, G. (2000) Emotions in economic theory and economic behavior, American economic review,
  90, 426­432.
Martinot, E. and Borg, N. (1998) Energy-e cient lighting programs: experience and lessons from eight
 countries, Energy policy, 26, 1071­1081.

Nath, V., Kumar, R., Agrawal, R., Gautam, A. and Sharma, V. (2013) Consumer adoption of green products:
  Modeling the enablers, Global business review, 14, 453­470.
Oster, E., Shoulson, I. and Dorsey, E. R. (2013) Optimal Expectations and Limited Medical Testing: Evi-
  dence from Huntington Disease, American Economic Review, 103, 804­830.

Oster, E. and Thornton, R. (2012) Determinants Of Technology Adoption: Peer Eects In Menstrual Cup
  Take-Up, Journal of the European Economic Association, 10, 1263­1293.
Price, M. K. (2014) Using field experiments to address environmental externalities and resource scarcity:
  major lessons learned and new directions for future research, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 30,
  621­638.

Reynolds, T. W., DeSisto, T. P., Murray, B. and Kolodinsky, J. (2007) Promoting energy e ciency in
  small island states: overcoming barriers to the adoption of compact fluorescent lighting in saint lucia,
  International Journal of Consumer Studies, 31, 460­467.
Roger, E. M. (1962) Diusion of innovations., Diusion of innovations.

Rogers, E. M. (2010) Diusion of innovations, Simon and Schuster.
Romer, P. M. (1990) Endogenous technological change, Journal of political Economy, 98, S71­S102.
Roodman, D. (2009) Estimating fully observed recursive mixed-process models with cmp.
Roodman, D. (2011) Fitting fully observed recursive mixed-process models with cmp, Stata Journal, 11,
 159­206(48).


                                                    38
Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J. and Griskevicius, V. (2007) The Constructive,
  Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms, Psychological Science, 18, 429­434.
Skinner, J. and Staiger, D. (2007) Technological diusion from hybrid corn to beta blockers, Hard-to-Measure
  Goods and Services: Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches. University of Chicago Press and NBER.

Spiegler, R. (2014) On the Equilibrium Eects of Nudging, Journal of Legal Studies.
Thornton, R. L. (2008) The demand for, and impact of, learning HIV status, The American economic review,
  98, 1829­1863.
Train, K. E. (1998) Recreation demand models with taste dierences over people, Land economics, pp.
  230­239.

U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation (2012) Enterprising states:               Policies that produce.,
  https://www.uschamber.com/sites/default/files/documents/files/Enterprising-States-2012-web.pdf.
Van De Ven, N., Zeelenberg, M. and Van Dijk, E. (2005) Buying and selling exchange goods: Outcome
  information, curiosity and the endowment eect, Journal of Economic Psychology, 26, 459­468.

Volpp, K., Troxel, A. B., Pauly, M. V., Glick, H. A., Puig, A., Asch, D. A., Galvin, R., Zhu, J., Wan, F.,
  DeGuzman, J., Corbett, E., Weiner, J. and Audrain-McGovern, J. (2009) A Randomized, Controlled Trial
  of Financial Incentives for Smoking Cessation, The New England Journal of Medicine, 360, 699­709.
Volpp, K. G., Levy, A. G., Asch, D. A., Berlin, J. A., Murphy, J. J., Gomez, A., Sox, H., Zhu, J. and Lerman,
  C. (2006) A randomized controlled trial of financial incentives for smoking cessation, Cancer Epidemiology
  and Prevention Biomarkers, 15, 12­18.
Yoeli, E., Homan, M., Rand, D. G. and Nowak, M. a. (2013) Powering up with indirect reciprocity in
  a large-scale field experiment., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
  America, 110 Suppl, 10424­9.

Young, A. (2005) Increasing returns and economic progress, in Readings In The Economics Of The Division
  Of Labor: The Classical Tradition, World Scientific, pp. 234­248.
Zanella, G. and Banerjee, R. (2016) Experiencing breast cancer at the workplace, Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 134, 53­66.
Zhe Jin, G., Kato, A. and List, J. A. (2010) Thats news to me! information revelation in professional
  certification markets, Economic Inquiry, 48, 104­122.




                                                     39
Appendices
:



Appendix A              Additional Statistical evidence

Tables A1, A2 and A3 show the estimated coe cients of ten linear probability models on the purchase

decision analogous to the regression in Equation 1 of the form:

                                          yijk = Zijk + j +     k   + "ij

where yijk equals 1 if household i located in suburb j opened the door to salesperson k , and 0 otherwise.

The vector Z includes indicators for: i) W and OO treatments (columns 1 and 2), ii) L and H treatments

(columns 3 and 4), iii) high price (columns 5 and 6), iv ) all treatments (columns 7 and 8) and v ) all

treatments and interaction terms between high price and L and H pressure level (columns 9 and 10), while

the vector  includes salesperson specific dummy variables and the vector      town-specific dummies. Moreover,

clustered robust standard errors are included at date-solicitor time blocks level in order to control for possible

randomization fixed eects. Table A1 shows results for the sample of 8815 households unconditional to answer

the door, table A2, shows findings for the samples of 2848 households conditional to answer the door and

finally the last table shows results for the sample of 290 households who purchased at least 1 pack of CFLs.




                                                       40
                               Table A1: The Decision to Purchase Unconditional on Answering Door: Linear Probability Model


                                (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)          (9)       (10)
     Warning                   0.006     0.013**                                                            0.007        0.013**        0.007    0.013**
                             (0.007)     (0.006)                                                           (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)
     Opt Out                  -0.004      -0.001                                                            -0.004        -0.002       -0.004     -0.001
                             (0.006)     (0.005)                                                           (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.006)    (0.005)
     Social Norm Low                                   0.005       0.002                                    0.005         0.003         0.008      0.007
                                                      (0.005)     (0.006)                                  (0.005)       (0.006)      (0.009)    (0.010)
     Social Norm High                                 0.012**     0.012**                                  0.013**      0.013***      0.016*     0.020**
                                                      (0.005)     (0.005)                                  (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.008)    (0.009)
     Price $5                                                                 -0.029***     -0.030***     -0.030***     -0.030***   -0.025***   -0.024***
                                                                               (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.006)    (0.006)




41
     Price*SNL                                                                                                                         -0.007     -0.006
                                                                                                                                      (0.010)    (0.010)
     Price*SNH                                                                                                                         -0.006     -0.013
                                                                                                                                      (0.009)    (0.010)
     Constant               0.032***     0.025**     0.027***     0.025**      0.048***      0.044***      0.041***      0.032***    0.039***    0.029**
                             (0.005)     (0.010)      (0.003)     (0.012)       (0.004)       (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.011)     (0.007)    (0.011)
     Solicitor FE              No          Yes          No          Yes           No            Yes           No            Yes          No         Yes
     Suburbs FE                No          Yes          No          Yes           No            Yes           No            Yes          No         Yes
     N                        8815        8815         8815         8815         8815          8815          8815          8815         8815       8815
     p  < .1;   p < .05;   p < .01.
     The figures refer to the sample of 8,815 households who purchased at least 1 pack of CLFs unconditional to open the door.
     Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at date-solicitor blocks level.
                                Table A2: The Decision to Purchase Conditional on Answering Door: Linear Probability Model


                               (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)          (9)       (10)
     Warning                  0.028       0.046**                                                             0.031*       0.047***     0.030*    0.047***
                             (0.019)      (0.018)                                                            (0.018)        (0.017)     (0.018)    (0.017)
     Opt Out                  0.015        0.021                                                               0.013         0.017        0.012     0.017
                             (0.018)      (0.016)                                                            (0.018)        (0.016)     (0.018)    (0.016)
     Social Norm Low                                  0.033*        -0.003                                   0.036**         0.005     0.063**       0.024
                                                      (0.018)      (0.021)                                   (0.017)        (0.018)     (0.028)    (0.028)
     Social Norm High                                 0.036**      0.030**                                   0.039**      0.038***      0.050**    0.053**
                                                      (0.016)      (0.015)                                   (0.016)        (0.014)     (0.025)    (0.024)
     Price $5                                                                   -0.087***     -0.083***     -0.089***     -0.085***   -0.065***   -0.064***
                                                                                 (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.013)        (0.012)     (0.018)    (0.018)




42
     Price*SNL                                                                                                                          -0.053*     -0.034
                                                                                                                                        (0.031)    (0.030)
     Price*SNH                                                                                                                           -0.022     -0.030
                                                                                                                                        (0.029)    (0.029)
     Constant               0.087***      0.064**    0.079***      0.084***     0.145***      0.126***      0.107***      0.084***     0.096***    0.072**
                             (0.014)      (0.027)     (0.010)       (0.031)      (0.013)       (0.024)       (0.016)       (0.029)      (0.018)    (0.031)
     Solicitor FE              No           Yes         No            Yes          No            Yes           No            Yes           No         Yes
     Suburbs FE                No           Yes         No            Yes          No            Yes           No            Yes           No         Yes
     N                        2848         2848        2848          2848         2848          2848          2848          2848          2848       2848
     p  < .1;   p < .05;   p < .01.
     The figures refer to the sample of 2,848 households who purchased at least 1 pack of CFLs conditional to open the door.
     Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at date-solicitor blocks level.
                           Table A3: Decision to Purchase 2 Packages of CFLs Conditional on Purchasing: Linear Probability Model


                               (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)             (9)       (10)
     Warning                  0.121       0.092                                                           0.121        0.072           0.125     0.079
                             (0.075)     (0.085)                                                        (0.075)      (0.081)         (0.078)    (0.083)
     Opt Out                  0.086       0.137                                                           0.112      0.173**           0.107    0.175**
                             (0.079)     (0.084)                                                        (0.074)      (0.074)         (0.073)    (0.072)
     Social Norm Low                                   0.071      -0.052                                  0.074       -0.061           0.051     -0.068
                                                     (0.085)     (0.107)                                (0.075)      (0.093)         (0.088)    (0.103)
     Social Norm High                                 -0.033      -0.081                                 -0.025       -0.081          -0.096     -0.155
                                                     (0.078)     (0.089)                                (0.072)      (0.078)         (0.093)    (0.099)
     Price $5                                                                -0.320***     -0.322***   -0.314***    -0.328***      -0.437***   -0.420***
                                                                              (0.072)       (0.065)     (0.072)      (0.066)         (0.111)    (0.105)




43
     Price*SNL                                                                                                                         0.075     0.027
                                                                                                                                     (0.161)    (0.168)
     Price*SNH                                                                                                                         0.239     0.211
                                                                                                                                     (0.147)    (0.141)
     Constant               0.443***      0.286     0.506***     0.417**     0.609***      0.453**     0.511***      0.465**        0.545***    0.485**
                             (0.057)     (0.178)     (0.066)     (0.190)      (0.043)      (0.174)      (0.080)      (0.197)         (0.088)    (0.206)
     Solicitors FE             No          Yes         No          Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes              No        Yes
     Suburbs FE                No          Yes         No          Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes              No        Yes
     N                         290         290         290         290          290          290          290          290              290       290
     p  < .1;   p < .05;   p < .01.
      The figures refer to the sample of 290 households who purchased two packs of CFLs.
     Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at date-solicitor blocks level.
Appendix B                    Solution of the structural model

In our structural model, households' decisions are framed by way of a multi-stage game with incomplete

information, where the individual -call her "Anna"- interacts at each stage with her "future selves" of which,

at the time she has to make prior decisions along the sequence, she has limited knowledge. Information sets

consist of what Anna knows about the 3 treatment interventions: i) the warning level ! 2 {N W, W, OO};

ii) the social pressure s 2 {N, L, H }; and iii) the price p 2 {1, 5}. Similarly, Anna has partial information

about her own realization of the three behavioral parameters of our structural model: i)  (which measures

the combination of private benefits from CFLs and altruism), ii) & ("sensitivity to social norms") and iii)

 ("curiosity"). In this respect, we assume that Anna comes to know the realization of her own behavioral

parameter only when the latter directly aects her choice, while prior decisions are made conditional on the

expectation of the behavioral parameter(s) in object.

    To summarize, these are the information sets characterizing our Bayesian game. Let hk 2 H denote

Anna's information set at stage k = 1, ..., 4, where


   1. h1 = {w, µ ,        , µ& ,   & ,  , },


   2. h2 = h1 ,

                S
   3. h3 = h2       {p, s, & },

                S
   4. h4 = h3       {}.


    We solve the model "backwards", starting from Stage 4, using the standard notation of dynamic Bayesian
                                                                                                             0
games by conditioning payos upon the information available at each stage. Let uh (a) and uh
                                                                                          h (a), denote the

"true" utility of action ah 2 {0, 1}, i.e. the one directly aecting the likelihood function, and its expectation
                                                                                                                         h0
conditional on the information available at stage h0 < h, respectively. By the same token,                       h   (   h )   are

Anna's "true" behavioral strategy (its expectation formulated at stage h0 < h, modeling Anna's beliefs over

her own future behavior), respectively.29
  29 Since, at each information set, Anna has only two available actions, we indicate with   the probability of choosing ah = 1
in the corresponding Stage respectively.




                                                              44
Stage 4: intensive margin: a4 2 {0, 1}

In Stage 4 Anna's quantity decision q = a4 + 1 is only aected by her altruism parameter, :


                                                               u 4 ( q ) = (        p)q.                                                          (3)


Let ? = { : u4 (1) = u4 (2)} be the value of  that makes Anna indierent with respect to her quantity

decision, i.e., ? = p. This, in turn, implies that, in Stage 4, Anna is indierent over her quantity choice

when  = ? = p and that             4 ( )   =1(         4 ( )   = 0) when  > ? ( < ? ), respectively.


Stage 3: extensive margin: a3 2 {0, 1}

Let u3 (a3 ) be Anna's "direct" utility evaluated at Stage 3. If Anna decides not to buy anything (i.e., a3 = 0),

her utility will be u3 (0) =       &       , where         =0( =           L)   [ =            H]   for s = N (s = L) [s = H ], respectively.

The parameter & captures the impact of social pressure that Anna experiences by being approached in person

by Beppe. The level of social pressure, , is a function of the "proximity ", referenced in the social norm,

either H or L. In this respect, we assume that the social pressure s yields shift in the value of & , so that

social pressure under treatment s is           (& +        s ),   where    s   =0(         s   =    L)   [   s   =   H ],   depending on the assigned

social norm s = N (s = L) [s = H ], respectively.

    If Anna decides to buy something (i.e., a3 = 1) her utility will be her expectation of her payo at Stage

4, i.e.,


                                                                               3                             3
                                           u3 (1) = (L             p)(1        4)   + 2(H            p)      4,                                   (4)

             Rp                                R       1
where L =         1
                      x    (x)dx   and H =         p
                                                           x    (x)dx     are the conditional means of the values for the intensive

marginal purchase in Stage 4 evaluated at Stage 3 and                           (·)   is any smooth density function (not necessarily

the normal distribution used in the structural estimations of Section 5).

    Clearly, u3 (1) is increasing in µ . By analogy with Stage 4, let &  = {& 2 < : u3 (1) = u3 (0)} =                                         u3 (1)

be the value of & for the (extensive) marginal buyer. Therefore, & ? is decreasing in µ and a positive social

norm yields a downward shift of &  , for all smooth densities                           (·).




                                                                          45
Stage 2: choosing whether opening the door a2 2 {0, 1} (! 6= N W )

Before answering the door, Anna does not know her treatment assignment in Stage 2 over the price p 2 {1, 5}

and the social norm s 2 {N, L, H } randomization. In this respect, consistently with our assumption regarding

the behavioral parameters, we shall assume that Anna knows that her treatment assignment is the result of

two uniform i.i.d. draws from the corresponding supports. This, actually, corresponds to the implementation

of the randomization over our treatment conditions. Then, her expected utility u2
                                                                                3 (a2 ) can be derived as

follows:
                                            1 X            1X
                                 u2
                                  3 (0) =        uhs (0) =     E [u3 (0)|s]                                       (5)
                                            3  s
                                                   3
                                                           3 s

                                            1 X             1X
                                 u2
                                  3 (1) =        uh p (1) =     E [u3 (1)|p]                                      (6)
                                            2  p
                                                    3
                                                            2 p

   Note that, if  and & are correlated, Anna could use her information about  to infer information about

& . However, we assume that Anna behaves as if she believes as if  and & were uncorrelated. Because of

that, Anna's beliefs over her decisions in Stage 3 are evaluated using the same methodology we used to

evaluate her beliefs over her decision in Stage 4. We define this assumption - which is needed to avoid the

implicit fixed point problem for which beliefs over Stage 3 are needed to evaluate optimal behavior in Stage

2 - although behavior in Stage 2 and 3 is estimated simultaneously- as the independence bias assumption

(IB). Once we allow for IB, the analysis of Stage 2 is straightforward, namely:



                                                   u2 (0) = 0;                                                    (7)



                                                    2 2             2 2
                                   u2 (1) = (1      3 )u3 (0)   +   3 u3 (1)   + .                                (8)


   Therefore, by analogy of Stages 3 and 4 we can identify a threshold  =            (1   2 2
                                                                                          3 )u3 (0)
                                                                                                      2 2
                                                                                                      3 u3 (1),   for

each warning level ! 2 {W, OO}, such that Anna answers the door if and only if             .


Stage 1: choosing whether to check the flyer a1 2 {0, 1} (! = OO)

In our experimental design, we include a treatment (OO) which allows for Anna to "opt out" without any

cost by simply marking a box on the flyer. This decision is only relevant for those in the OO treatment. In


                                                       46
this case, Anna decides not to check the box if     .




                                                   47
