                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               DANCING WITH ACTIVISTS

                                      Lucian A. Bebchuk
                                          Alon Brav
                                          Wei Jiang
                                       Thomas Keusch

                                     Working Paper 26171
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26171


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019


This discussion paper was prepared for publication in the Journal of Financial Economics. We
have benefitted from the comments of Manuel Adelino, Amil Dasgupta, Veljko Fotak, Oliver
Hart, Scott Hirst and participants in the 2015 FMA International Consortium on Activist
Investors, Corporate Governance and Hedge Funds in London, the 2015 FMA International
meeting in Helsinki, and workshops at Harvard, INSEAD, NYU, and Maastricht University. We
are especially indebted to an anonymous referee for many valuable suggestions. We also wish to
thank Brady Baldwin, Seung Hwan Bang, Vlad Bouchouev, Hannah Clark, Ahmet Degerli,
Timothy Goh, Robert Holowka, Wenyin Huang, Kirti Kamboj, Kobi Kastiel, Zheng Li, Cong
Liu, Yaron Nili, John Rady, Qingrong Ruan, June Rhee, Ruoxi Tian, Jun Xu, Jiaqi Yang, Zilan
Yang, Kailei Ye, and Lu Zheng for their excellent research assistance. Finally, we are also
grateful to many practitioners affiliated with the Harvard Law School Program on Corporate
Governance, including senior proxy solicitors, investment bankers, and hedge fund officers, for
helpful discussions about activist settlements. Financial support was provided by the INSEAD
Corporate Governance Centre, Columbia Business School, Duke, and Harvard Law School. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lucian A. Bebchuk, Alon Brav, Wei Jiang, and Thomas Keusch. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dancing With Activists
Lucian A. Bebchuk, Alon Brav, Wei Jiang, and Thomas Keusch
NBER Working Paper No. 26171
August 2019
JEL No. G12,G23,G32,G35,G38,K22

                                         ABSTRACT

An important milestone often reached in the life of an activist engagement is entering into a
"settlement" agreement between the activist and the target's board. Using a comprehensive hand-
collected data set, we analyze the drivers, nature, and consequences of such settlement
agreements. Settlements are more likely when the activist has a credible threat to win board seats
in a proxy fight and when incumbents' reputation concerns are stronger. Consistent with
incomplete contracting, face-saving benefits and private information considerations, settlements
commonly do not contract directly on operational or leadership changes sought by the activist but
rather on board composition changes. Settlements are accompanied by positive stock price
reactions, and they are subsequently followed by changes of the type sought by activists,
including CEO turnover, higher shareholder payouts, and improved operating performance. We
find no evidence to support concerns that settlements enable activists to extract rents at the
expense of other investors. Our analysis provides a look into the "black box" of activist
engagements and contributes to understanding how activism brings about changes in target
companies.

Lucian A. Bebchuk Harvard                       Wei Jiang
Law School                                      Graduate School of Business
1545 Massachusetts Avenue                       Columbia University
Cambridge, MA 02138 and                         3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 803
NBER                                            New York, NY 10027
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu                         and NBER
                                                wj2006@columbia.edu
Alon Brav
Fuqua School of Business                        Thomas Keusch
Duke University                                 INSEAD
One Towerview Drive                             Boulevard de Constance
Durham, NC 27708                                Fontainebleau Cedex 77305
and NBER                                        France
brav@duke.edu                                   thomas.keusch@insead.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26171
1. Introduction

        In August 2013, Third Point, the hedge fund led by Daniel Loeb, disclosed a significant
stake in the auction house Sotheby's, criticized the company for its poor governance and its failure
to take advantage of a booming market for luxury goods, and called for the ouster of the company's
CEO. Third Point launched a proxy fight for board representation and both sides were preparing
for a contested election at the company's upcoming annual meeting. However, the day before the
scheduled annual shareholder meeting, the company and the activist fund entered into a settlement
agreement in which Sotheby's agreed to appoint three of the Third Point director candidates and
Third Point agreed to discontinue the proxy fight. The settlement terms did not require the
company to make any of the operational and executive changes that Third Point was seeking.
However, ten months later, Sotheby's announced the hiring of a new CEO, the appointment of a
new board chairman, and a plan to return capital to its investors.

        While such settlements used to be rare, they now occur with significant frequency, and
they have been attracting a great deal of media and practitioner attention. Understanding settlement
agreements is important for obtaining a complete picture of the corporate governance landscape
and the role of activism within it. Using a comprehensive, hand-collected dataset of settlement
agreements, this paper provides the first systematic empirical investigation of settlements between
activists and target companies. We study the drivers of settlements, their growth over time, the
terms of settlements and their impact on board composition, and the stock market reaction
accompanying them. We further study the aftermath of settlements in terms of CEO turnover,
payouts to shareholders, M&A activity, and operating performance.

        With the growing recognition of the importance of hedge fund activism, a large empirical
literature on the subject has emerged [see Brav et al. (2015b) for a recent survey]. This literature
has extensively studied the initiation of activist interventions ­ the time at which activists announce
their presence, usually by filing a Schedule 13(d) with the SEC after passing the 5% ownership
threshold, and the stock market reactions accompanying such announcements.1 This literature has


1
  Studies analyzing such initiations, including the stock market reactions accompanying them, and the stock
accumulations preceding them, include Clifford (2008); Klein and Zur (2009); Boyson, and Mooradian (2011); Brav,
Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008); Bebchuk, Brav, Jackson, and Jiang (2013); Mietzner and Schweizer (2014);
Edmans, Fang, and Zur (2013); Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2015); Becht, Franks, Grant, and Wagner (2017); Norli,

                                                       1
also studied extensively the changes in the value, performance, and behavior of firms in the years
following activist interventions; among other things, researchers have studied the changes in
Tobin's Q, return on assets (ROA), productivity, innovation, payouts to shareholders, likelihood
of an acquisition, divestitures, internal capital markets, and accounting practices that ultimately
follow activist interventions.2 But there has been limited empirical work on the "black box" in
between ­ the channels through which activists' influence is transmitted and is reflected in targets'
economic outcomes.3 In particular, the determinants, nature, and role of settlement agreements ­
and the cooperation between activists and companies that they target ­ have not been subject to a
systematic empirical examination. Our study fills this gap.4

         We begin by quantifying the upward trend in activist settlements. We show that the
unconditional likelihood of an activism campaign leading to a settlement increased sevenfold and
almost linearly from 3% for campaign launched in 2000 to 21% for campaigns launched in 2013.
This increase in the prevalence of settlement agreements is much stronger than the increase in
contested votes during the same period. While contested votes also occurred in 3% of all activism
campaigns started in 2000, this ratio only increases to 6% for campaigns started in 2013.

         We build on the insights generated by the economics of litigation and settlements to put
forward hypotheses concerning the determinants of which cases will produce a settlement, rather
than end up without either a contested vote or a settlement. We hypothesize that settlements are
more likely in cases in which the activist has good chances to win board seats should a contested


Oostergard, and Schindele (2015); Gantchev and Jotikasthira (2017); Back, Collin-Dufresne, Fos, Li, and Ljungqvist
(2018); and Boyson, Ma, and Mooradian (2016).
2
  Studies of the subject include Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008); Clifford (2008); Klein and Zur (2009, 2011);
Greenwood and Schor (2009); Becht, Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2009); Boyson and Mooradian (2011); Cheng,
Huang, Li, and Stanfield (2012); Sunder, Sunder, and Wongsunwai (2014); Gow, Shin, and Srinivasan (2014, 2016);
Cheng, Huang, and Li (2015); Bebchuk, Brav, and Jiang (2015); Brav, Jiang, and Kim (2015a); Boyson and Pichler
(2019); Brav, Jiang, Ma, and Tian (2018); Aslan and Kumar (2016); Boyson, Gantchev, and Shivdasani (2017);
Boyson, Ma, and Mooradian (2016); Corum and Levit (2018); Gantchev, Gredil, and Jotikasthira (2018); Jiang, Li,
and Mei (2018); Krishnan, Partnoy, and Thomas (2016); Johnson and Swem (2017); Swanson and Young (2017);
Bourveau and Schoenfeld (2017); Hege and Zhang (2019); Guo, Utham, and Wang (2019); Kim (2018); and Gantchev,
Sevilir, and Shivdasani (2019).
3
  Some studies have provided insights on the engagement process [see, e.g., Appel, Gormley, and Keim (2018); Becht,
Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2009); Boyson and Pichler (2019); Corum (2018); Gantchev (2013); He and Li (2018);
Levit (2018); and McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2016)]. However, none of the empirical studies has paid significant
attention to investigating settlement agreements and their role.
4
  Recent work by Schoenfeld (2018) studies the determinants (but not the terms or consequences) of contracts between
a wide variety of shareholders (not focusing on activists) and publicly-traded companies. In contrast to the settlement
agreements in our study, the contracts in his study include a variety of provisions that pertain to financing terms,
trading, directorships, payout policy, joint ventures, financial reporting, and selective disclosure.

                                                          2
vote take place, and we find evidence consistent with this hypothesis. We also hypothesize that
settlements are more likely when a contested vote could impose larger reputational costs on
incumbents, and we find evidence that is also consistent with that hypothesis. As to timing, we
hypothesize that settlements are more likely to take place closer to the time of the target's
shareholder meeting, as the arrival of information regarding the outcome of the expected vote
narrows any divergence of expectations between the parties, and we provide evidence that is
consistent with this hypothesis.

       Turning to the terms of settlement, we argue that the terms of settlement agreements can
commonly be expected to focus on board turnover rather than to stipulate directly the kind of
operational and leadership changes that activists ultimately seek and on which they base their
hopes for value appreciation. We put forward three reasons ­ incomplete contracting that make
some direct action commitments infeasible, face-saving benefits, and informational asymmetry ­
that combine to preclude or discourage the incorporation of commitments for direct action. We
provide evidence that is consistent with the hypothesis that settlement terms tend to focus on board
composition and avoid commitments of direct action. We also find evidence that face-saving
benefits, as well as informational asymmetry, at least partly contribute to the documented patterns.

       We then turn to investigate systematically the effects of settlements on board composition.
We demonstrate that settlements are a key channel through which activists bring about board
changes. In particular, we find that settlements are associated with an increase in the number of
activist-affiliated, activist-desired and well-connected directors, and decrease the number of old
and long-tenured directors.

       Next, we document that settlements are accompanied by positive abnormal stock returns.
We find that the positive market reaction is especially large when the settlement is of "high impact"
in terms of creating a high volume of board turnover or providing for an immediate strategic
transaction. We also find that activist engagements that produce settlement agreements are
associated with higher abnormal stock returns at the time of the activist's initial 13(d) filing. These
patterns are overall consistent with the view that the market views favorably the boardroom




                                                  3
composition and other changes that activist settlements produce, and are inconsistent with the view
that such changes can be expected to be disruptive and detrimental to target shareholders.5

         Why do activists settle on changes in board composition if their ultimate goal is to bring
about operational or leadership changes? We argue that introducing individuals into the boardroom
who are aligned with the activist, or at least open to the changes sought by the activist, is an
intermediary step that often facilitates such changes. Consistent with this view, we show that, while
settlements generally do not stipulate a replacement of the CEO, settlements are followed in the
years following the settlement by a considerable increase in CEO turnover and in the performance-
sensitivity of CEO turnover. Thus, the evidence is consistent with settlements planting the seeds
for a subsequent CEO replacement. Similarly, while settlement agreements generally do not
require any specific operational changes, settlements might facilitate such changes: consistent with
the presence of such an effect, we document that settlements are followed by increased payouts to
shareholders and improvements in operating performance.

         Finally, we also investigate concerns raised by practitioners and commentators that
settlements between activists and targets enable activists to extract rents at the expense of other
shareholders who are not "at the bargaining table."6 We examine two suggested channels for such
rent extraction and find little evidence that settlements distribute significant rents to activists at
other shareholders' expense. First, we find no evidence to support concerns that settlements enable
activists to put on the board directors that are not supported by other shareholders.7 In particular,
we show that directors who enter the board through settlements do not subsequently receive less
voting support at the following annual general meetings than other directors. Second, we also find
little evidence that settlements produce a significant incidence of "greenmail" through the target's
purchasing of the activist's shares at a premium to the market price. Buybacks of activist shares
occur in a very small fraction of settlement agreements and, when they do occur, they are typically
executed at the market price.



5
  We investigate the effects of activism settlements on a wide array of dimensions, but we do not cover all possibly
relevant dimensions. For example, in a recent paper, Coffee et al. (2019) focuses on the effect of such settlements with
activists on subsequent "information leakage" prior to the issuance of 8 -K filings and on bid-ask spreads.
6
  For recent media accounts, see Reuters, 07/18/2016, "Big Funds Push Back Against Settlement Agreements" and
State Street Global Advisors, 10/10/2016, "Protecting Long -Term Shareholder Interests in Activist Engagements."
7
  Leading index fund manager State Street Global Advisors expressed such a concern. See State St. Global Advisors,
Protecting Long-Term Shareholder Interests In Activist Engagements (2016).

                                                           4
         Our analysis is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the institutional background.
Section 3 describes the data collection and sample construction. Section 4 examines the
determinants and timing of settlements. Section 5 focuses on the terms of settlements and, in
particular, on the prevalence of director turnover and the infrequent specification of direct actions.
Section 6 examines the director changes on which settlement terms focus and analyzes their effects
on board composition. Section 7 considers the stock market reactions that accompany the
announcements of settlements, as well as the initial stock market reactions to the initiation of
campaigns that ultimately end up in settlements. Section 8 focuses on the economic aftermath of
settlements. In particular, we examine the changes in CEO turnover, shareholder payouts,
likelihood of a strategic transaction, and operating performance that follow settlements. Section 8
also examines concerns about rent extraction by activists, and we find no evidence for such
extraction. Finally, we present our conclusions in Section 9. The attached Appendix A provides a
list of variable definitions, and Appendices B-1 through B-4 included in an online Data Appendix
that is available on the NBER website provide additional relevant information about our dataset
and settlement agreements.8


2. Institutional background

         The first stage of an activist intervention occurs when an activist reveals its presence and
possibly the changes it seeks to instigate at the company, e.g., to the target's board. This often
happens when the activist files an SEC Schedule 13(d) upon crossing a 5% ownership threshold
of company shares outstanding.9 Objectives often proclaimed for the activism campaign include
(i) maximizing shareholder value, which is the most common goal; (ii) changing capital structure,
for example, by distributing excess cash to shareholders; (iii) changing business strategy, for
example, by refocusing the company; (iv) sale of the target company; and/or (v) effecting
governance changes, for example by replacing directors or the CEO. However, activists often do
not disclose at the 13(d) stage what changes they will ultimately demand but rather keep their
options open. Most activists do not initially take an adversarial position, hoping to be able to reach
a cooperative outcome, but 25% of the activists in our sample (similar to the frequency reported


8
  The Data Appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26171.
9
  The Schedule 13(d) filing is a mandatory filing under Section 13(d) of the Securities Exchange Act that requires
investors to disclose within 10 days of acquisition of, or conversion into, more than 5% of any class of securities of a
publicly traded company if they have an interest in influencing the control or the management of the company.

                                                           5
in Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008) for an earlier sample) express an adversarial position
when disclosing their presence.

       How can an activist bring about changes it is seeking given that the power to set the course
of the company is vested in the company's board of directors? One important route that has
received significant attention is to win board seats in a proxy fight [see, Gantchev (2013), Fos and
Tsoutsoura (2014), Fos and Jiang (2016), and Fos (2017)]. To do so, the activist needs to nominate
director candidates, file a proxy statement, campaign for shareholder support, and win one or more
board seats in the contested vote.

       A settlement agreement offers a "cooperative" alternative to a contested vote. The
settlement ends, at least for a specified time, the conflict between the two sides by requiring
concessions on both sides. Because reaching an agreement with an activist is a material event,
companies are required by the securities laws to disclose the existence and terms of a settlement
agreement.

       In such agreements, the most important and almost universal concession made by the
activist is a "standstill" provision. Such a provision specifies a period during which the activist
agrees to refrain from activities designed to influence the control or policies of the company. The
termination of the standstill can be event-driven (i.e., it remains in effect until certain agreed-upon
conditions are in effect) or time-driven (i.e., until a definite expiration date). There are two major
types of standstill agreements: (i) a share ownership standstill which prohibits the activist from
acquiring additional voting securities of the target company and, (ii) a corporate governance
standstill which prohibits further activist activities such as seeking a merger, seeking additional
board representation, or solicitation of the company's proxies.

       In consideration for the activist's concessions, incumbent directors entering a settlement
agreement can agree to take certain steps that would move the operations or strategy of the
company in a direction favored by the activist. The incumbents have the power to agree to specified
buybacks or special dividends, to explore a sale of the company or a recapitalization, or to replace
the CEO. Alternatively, the incumbents can agree to make changes to board composition ­ adding
specified new directors and/or avoiding re-nomination of specified incumbent directors ­ that
could affect subsequent decisions concerning the company's operations and strategy.



                                                  6
3. Data and sample overview


3.1 Data sources

           We obtain stock returns from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) and
accounting data from Compustat. The remaining data used in this study comes from various
sources. First, data on activism events come from a dataset that is an extension of the sample
studied in Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008). The events are identified mainly through
Schedule 13(d) filings submitted to the SEC (accessible via the EDGAR system), which disclose
beneficial ownership of 5% or more of any class of publicly traded securities of a company where
the investors intend to influence corporate policy or control. In putting together this dataset,
Schedule 13(d) filings aiming at bankruptcy reorganization or distress investing, and those
representing risk arbitrage after the announcements of mergers and acquisitions, were manually
excluded because such events are not related to shareholder activism. To supplement Schedule
13(d) filings, news searches were conducted for activists who launch public activism with stock
ownership below 5% at mid- to large-cap companies. We remove target firms whose CRSP
common share codes differ from 10 or 11, the standard codes for common stock.

           Our event sample period begins in 2000, because settlements were rare before 2000, and
ends at the end of 2013. We follow the settlement outcomes to 2018. For each activist fund in our
sample, we collect information on the number of past campaigns, past settlements, past proxy
fights, past successful campaigns, and average market reaction to past campaign announcements,
all measured over the five years prior to the start of the focal campaign.

           Second, information on the existence of settlement agreements between activists and
targets was obtained from FactSet's Shark Watch, Capital IQ Key Developments, and via news
archive searches. We use these sources to determine, for each activism campaign launched
between 2000 and 2013, whether a settlement agreement was reached by May 2018. Third,
information on the contents of each settlement agreement was hand-collected from the public
filings that targets and activists made and supplemented using a news archive search. 10
Specifically, we collected information on the specific dates that settlement agreements were
reached and publicly disclosed; the number of directors added and whether these directors were

10
     Appendix B-4 in the online Data Appendix provides an example of a representative settlement agreement.

                                                          7
affiliated with the activist, unaffiliated but desired by the activist, or neither affiliated nor desired;
the number of director departures stipulated in the agreement; whether the CEO has to leave the
firm; whether the firm sells itself or a division, or whether the firm plans to engage in such actions;
whether the board creates a "Strategic Transactions" committee; and whether the firm initiates or
increases the scale of a buyback program.

        Fourth, for each activism campaign, we also collected data on whether the activist filed
proxy material and whether the proxy fight was settled (in which case we would already have
collected the settlement agreement), withdrawn, or went to a vote. Fifth, information on director
characteristics and turnover is collected from the Directors Database Archive, a product of
Corporate Board Member Magazine, which provides quarterly snapshots of executives and
directors of firms listed on the NYSE, NASDAQ, and AMEX going back to the year 2000 until
year 2013. 11 We supplement this data with information gathered from proxy filings and news
searches to determine whether the new director is affiliated with the activist fund or, in the case of
a director independent of the fund, at least favored by the fund. Sixth, director election voting
outcomes were obtained from ISS Voting Analytics for the time period 2001 to 2018. This
database covers the Russell 3000. We matched the names of the directors of our sample firms to
the director names provided in ISS Voting Analytics by hand.

        Seventh, information on target firm CEOs and their characteristics, and CEO turnover
during activism campaigns is collected from the intersection of ExecuComp and Equilar for years
2000 to 2017. Eighth, for each of the activism campaigns in sample, we searched FactSet's Shark
Watch, Capital IQ, Thomson Reuters' SDC, and news archives for privately negotiated share
repurchase transactions between hedge fund activists and their target companies. Last, we collect
information on target companies' share class structure, insider (board and management)
ownership, and analyst coverage from Equilar, ISS, Thomson, FactSet Shark Watch, and IBES.




11
  This database has recently been used in Brav, Jiang, Ma, and Tian (2018); Larcker, So, and Wang (2013); and Stuart
and Yim (2010). Since Board Magazine was acquired by NYSE, it does not update or sell the Directors Database any
longer, which means that the last year for which we have data on all the directors of companies listed on NYSE,
NASDAQ, and AMEX is 2013.

                                                         8
3.2. Summary statistics

       Panel A of Table 1 reports the annual frequency of activist interventions, settlements,
contested votes, and filings of proxy statements. Over the 14-year period 2000-2013, there were
3,012 hedge fund activism campaigns. Of these campaigns, 13% (399 campaigns) resulted in a
settlement agreement between the activist and the target company, while only 5% (137 campaigns)
resulted in a contested vote. The table indicates that settlements were rare during the beginning
years of the 2000-2013 period, but the incidence of settlements has gone up considerably since
then, increasing from 3% for campaigns starting in 2000 to 21% for campaigns starting in 2013.
By contrast, the incidence of contested votes has been relatively stable during the period we
examine.

       Panel B tabulates the frequency and outcome of proxy contests ­ defined as campaigns in
which the activist filed a proxy statement ­ over time. Activists file proxy statements and thereby
formally start a proxy contest in 12% of activism campaigns. Of the proxy contests initiated, 38%
of them go all the way to a contested vote, 45% are settled, and 17% withdrawn. In untabulated
analyses, we find that 44.4% of settlements are preceded by the activist filing proxy material. Thus,
cases in which a proxy fight is formally initiated have a higher incidence of settlement than cases
without a formal filing of a proxy statement, though activists still obtain the majority of settlements
without having to formally file proxy material. In such cases, however, the background threat of
pursuing a proxy fight might still play a role in inducing incumbent directors to agree to a
settlement.

       Appendices B-1 and B-2 in the online Data Appendix provide information about notable
targets and activists. Appendix B-1 lists settlements related to activism campaigns launched
between 2000 and 2013 regarding firms with market capitalization of $7 billion and above, a total
of 30 cases. The two largest target companies during the sample period were Microsoft, which
settled with ValueAct in 2013, and PepsiCo, which settled with Trian Partners in 2015. Appendix
B-2 lists the 30 activists that were involved in four or more settlements. The three activists that
entered into the largest number of activist settlements were Carl Icahn (20 settlements), Ramius
Capital (14 settlements), and ValueAct (13 settlements).

       In the next section, we compare the characteristics of activist campaigns that result in a
settlement, contested vote, or neither a settlement nor a contested vote. Table 2 reports the mean,

                                                  9
median, and standard deviation for all independent variables in each of these three cases. For the
sake of brevity, we will not discuss these descriptive statistics of table 2 here, but they will be
informative when interpreting the results of the regressions analyses below.


4. The determinants and timing of settlements


4.1. Settlement theory and tested hypotheses

       A settlement that averts a contested vote is akin to a settlement of litigation prior to going
to a trial in court. The literature on the economics of litigation and settlement [see Spier (2007),
Wickelgren (2013) and Daugherty and Reinganum (2017) for surveys] provides insights about
why and when cases settle.

       In particular, the litigation and settlement literature analyzes three potential outcomes of
litigation situations: Such situations might go all the way to a court decision, might produce a
settlement agreement that avoids a court decision, or might be "dropped" without either a
settlement or a court decision. Similarly, we distinguish between three possible outcomes of
activist campaigns and accordingly three groups of campaigns.

       The first group comprises all campaigns that result in a settlement. The second group
includes all campaigns that go all the way to a contested vote. The third group consists of all the
campaigns that have no formalized outcome ­ that is, result in neither a settlement agreement nor
a vote. Thus, the three outcomes we consider are: settlement; contested vote; and no settlement or
contested vote.

       The third group of campaigns ­ those without a formal resolution that have no settlement
or contested vote ­ is likely heterogeneous. Some of these campaigns might be ones that the activist
drops or aborts without achieving any of its objectives, say, because the activist concludes that it
does not have sufficient support among shareholders to have a credible threat to win board seats
that would enable the activist to extract a settlement or proceed to a contested vote. In some of
these cases, however, the activist might be able to achieve or expect some change despite the lack
of a formal resolution. To begin, the activist might hope that the kick-in-the-pants provided by the
campaign will have a positive effect on future decisions of the incumbent directors and their
responsiveness to shareholder interests. Furthermore, the incumbent directors might without any

                                                10
formal agreement take some action ­ say, announce an immediate buyback ­ that could make the
activist sufficiently content to drop its campaign or, alternatively, could reduce the potential
support that the activist might obtain among other shareholders and thus force the activist to
abandon the campaign.

        The making of such immediate concessions by the incumbent directors to avoid a contested
vote or a formal settlement can be regarded as "informal settlement." However, such informal
settlements are more limited in what they can provide the activist relative to the formal settlements
on which we focus. Because the securities laws would require the incumbent directors to disclose
any commitment that incumbent directors make to undertake some future action or any
commitment that they obtain from the activist in return for actions they take, any situation with
such commitments would be classified as a formal settlement in our dataset. Thus, informal
settlements can involve changes that the incumbents take right away without accompanying
commitments by the activist, but such informal settlements cannot include binding commitments
by incumbent directors to take any future action or appointment of directors favored by the activist
accompanied by a standstill or other commitment by the activist. Although informal settlements
and the incumbent steps they consist of are thus more limited in the forms they can take, Section
8 presents evidence that campaigns without a settlement or a contested vote are still followed by
an elevated probability that certain outcomes favored by activists will occur, and this evidence is
consistent with the presence of informal settlements.


4.2 The determinants of reaching a settlement or contested vote

        In examining the determinants of campaign outcomes, let us begin by discussing what will
determine whether a campaign will result in a formal outcome ­ that is, a settlement agreement or
a contested vote ­ or will be ended by the activist without such a formal outcome of either a
settlement or a contested vote.
        The literature on the economics of litigation and settlement indicates that cases will end
with either a settlement or a court decision only if the plaintiff has sufficiently good odds of
winning at trial (Bebchuk (1984), Spier (2007), Bebchuk and Klement (2012)). Without such odds,
a rational plaintiff will not choose to bear the costs of pursuing the litigation all the way to a court
decision, and a rational defendant will not agree to a settlement if the plaintiff's low odds of
winning deprive it of a credible threat to pursue the litigation to a court decision. For activism

                                                  11
campaigns, this economic logic implies that a campaign will be more likely to end with either a
settlement or a contested vote when the activist's odds of winning seats in a contested vote are
higher. Without sufficiently good odds for winning seats in a contested vote, a rational activist will
be discouraged from bearing the costs of pursuing the proxy fights all the way to a contested vote,
and rational incumbents will be less inclined to agree to a settlement with an activist that does not
have a credible threat to win seats in a contested vote. Thus, we can put forward the following
hypothesis:
Hypothesis H1: The likelihood of a campaign leading either to a settlement or a contested vote is
positively related to the odds that the activist would prevail in a contested vote.


4.3. The determinants of the choice between settlement and a contested vote

         We now turn to discuss, for the campaigns that result in a formal outcome of either a
settlement agreement or a contested vote, what will determine whether there will be a settlement
or a contested vote. The economic literature on settlement decision indicates that a driving force
for settlement are the efficiency gains that could result ­ and could be shared by the two sides ­
from avoiding the deadweight costs of trial. The larger these trial costs, the stronger the incentive
to settle (Spier (2007), Prescott and Spier (2016)).

         Similarly, in the case of an activism campaign, settlement would save the costs that the two
sides would have to bear in the event of going all the way to a contested vote. Accordingly, the
larger these costs, the stronger the incentive to have a settlement rather than a contested vote. The
costs of a contested vote include the out-of-pocket costs of running a proxy fight all the way; a
dissident's costs of running a proxy fight can easily rise to millions of dollars (Gantchev (2013)).12
However, for the incumbent directors and CEO, the most important source of costs might well be
the expected reputational costs that going all the way to a contested vote might impose. Resisting
an activist runs the risk of alienating other investors if the defense is perceived as unnecessary, and
attacks on incumbent directors by the activist in a contest can produce substantial reputation costs
for these directors, which the directors might have to bear irrespective of the outcome of the contest

12
  In the Trian Partners vs. DuPont proxy fight in 2015, the activist spent $8 million launching the contest and DuPont
spent $15 million to defend. See, USA Today, 05/19/2015, "DuPont spent $15M to keep activist investor off board."
In the more recent Trian Partners vs. P&G proxy fight in 2017 the two sides were estimated to have spent at least $60
million. See, New York Times, 10/16/2017, "Procter & Gamble's Count Shows How Close Proxy Vote Was." While
the dissident might already have incurred part of these costs at the time when the settlement is negotiated, many
settlements specify that the activist is reimbursed part or all of its contest-related expenses.

                                                         12
(Fos and Tsoutsoura (2014); Gow, Shin, and Srinivasan (2016)). Indeed, winning a heated proxy
fight does not preserve the reputation of incumbent CEOs either. For example, after winning a
proxy contest against Trian Partners in May 2018, DuPont CEO Ellen Kullman resigned only five
months later.

         Thus, the prospect of avoiding the expected reputational damage of a bruising proxy fight
going all the way provides an incentive to have a settlement rather than a contested vote.
Accordingly, we put forward the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis H2: The likelihood of an activism campaign leading to a settlement rather than a
contested vote is positively related to incumbents' reputation concerns.


4.4. Analysis of the determinants of settlements

         We test Hypotheses H1 and H2 using multinomial logit regressions that include three
groups of campaigns as parallel outcomes: a) settled campaigns, b) campaigns that lead to a
contested vote, and c) campaigns that lead neither to settlement nor to a contested vote. The
relevant sample includes all activism campaigns (with non-missing information) launched by
hedge funds over the period from 2000 to 2013.
         We include the following explanatory variables listed and discussed below. The first set of
variables, from the activist's stake to the target firm's past performance, serve as proxies for the
activist's having good odds of winning a contested vote. The subsequent set of variables, from
director age to analyst coverage, serve as proxies for the reputation concerns of the incumbents.13
         The activist's stake: A larger stake for an activist is associated with an increased likelihood
of success in a contested vote. The activist's stake provides it with votes on which it can always
count in a proxy contest. In addition, because a large stake provides the activist with stronger
incentives to increase value and can signal the activist's confidence in the prospects of value
appreciation, having a large stake can help the activist obtain votes from other shareholders.
         Insider Ownership: Conversely, when incumbents hold a larger stake in the firm, their
chances of winning a potential proxy fight increases. Accordingly, large insider ownership is
associated, other things equal, with lower odds for a victory by the activist in a contested vote.


13
   Even though untabulated analyses show that 44.4% of settlement agreements are preceded by the activist formally
filing proxy material, we do not include such filings as determinants of the three groups (settlement, contested proxy
vote, neither) because there is no variation in this variable for those campaigns that reach a contested vote.

                                                         13
         Target firm's share-class structure: The activist's chances in a contested vote are likely to
be diminished when the target has a share structure with multiple classes. In such cases, the shares
with superior voting rights are likely to be disproportionately held by insiders or shareholders
affiliated with them and thus improve the incumbents' chances of prevailing in a contested vote.
         The average market reaction to past campaign launches: The higher the stock price
reaction to the initial announcement of activism, the higher the market's expectation of the benefits
that the activism campaign could bring about and thus the greater the market's approval of the
activism campaign. Thus, an activist track record of high initial market reactions to the activist's
initiation of campaigns is likely to reflect the market's viewing the activist as capable of bringing
about value increases. Such a market view is likely to increase the support that the activist would
be able to obtain form other shareholders in a contested vote and thus improve the activist's
chances in such a vote.14
         Success in past engagements: Similarly, when an activist has a track record of successful
past campaigns, the activist is more likely to have good relationships with, and enjoy a good
reputation among, institutional investors. Thus, such a track record can be expected to be
associated with improved chances in a contested vote.
         Settlements in past engagements: Similarly, when an activist has a track record of obtaining
settlements in past engagements, the activism is likely to have the characteristics that enabled it to
have been viewed by the incumbents in such past engagements as having had good chances of
success in a contested vote. Thus, such a track record is again likely to be associated, other things
equal, with improved chances in a contested vote in the current engagement.
         Proxy fights in past engagements: To have good chances in a contested vote, the activist
must be open to, and have the necessary know-how and resources for, running a proxy fight. A
track record of running proxy contests in past engagements implies that the activist is open to
running a proxy fight and has experience in doing so.
         Past firm performance: Poor past target firm performance (we measure performance using
Tobin's Q, ROA, and past stock returns) has negative consequences for investors' perception of
the incumbents. Thus, poor past performance of the target bolsters the odds of activist success in
a proxy contest.


14
  We do not use the stock market reaction to the 13(d) filling in the considered campaign, but rather such stock price
reactions to the initiation of earlier campaigns by the activist, due to endogeneity concerns.

                                                         14
         Directors Older than 70: Old incumbent directors ­ whether executives of the firm or
outside directors ­ can be expected to have lower reputational concerns. Such directors are unlikely
to be present in the market for directorships for a long time. All else equal, this shorter horizon of
older directors thus decreases their reputation concerns.
         Directors' Average Number of Directorships: Incumbent directors with more other
directorships enjoy a higher reputation stock and have more seats to lose in case their reputation
is tarnished.15 Fos and Tsoutsoura (2014) show that directors who are targets in a contested vote
lose directorships they hold at other firms. Hence, holding directorships at other firms can be
expected to be associated with higher reputational concerns for the directors.
         CEO or Board Chair up for Election: The CEO and the chair of the board (if different from
the CEO) are key decision-makers on the response to activists. When the company has a staggered
board, these individuals are not always up for election in the coming shareholder meeting. When
either of these two important directors is up for election, success by the activist in a contested vote
in the coming shareholder meeting might lead to the personal defeat and humiliation of these key
decision-makers on the incumbent team. In such a case, these decision-makers will face the
potential for a direct personal reputational cost that they would not similarly face if they were not
up for reelection. Therefore, when the CEO or the board chair are up for election, the expected
reputational costs pushing the key decision-makers toward settlement are likely to be stronger.
         Analyst Coverage: Proxy contests that are more publicly visible are likely to have a more
significant effect on the incumbents' reputation. Vega (2006) shows that the number of analysts
following a company is strongly positively related to media coverage. Therefore, we use this
variable as a proxy for the visibility ­ and hence potential reputational consequences ­ of a
contested vote.
         In Panel A of Table 3, we report the results of the multinomial models that test Hypothesis
H1, which predicts that the credibility of the activist's threat is positively related to the likelihood
of an activist campaign leading to a settlement or a contested vote (the first campaign subgroup)
or a proxy contest (second subgroup), relative to neither of these two outcomes (third subgroup).16
The relative propensity to settlement (contested vote) relative to neither settlement nor proxy vote

15
   Jiang, Wan, and Zhao (2016) show that directors with higher stock of external reputation exhibit more reputation
concerns.
16
   We do not include all the different proxies of the credibility of the activist's threat and for incumbents' reputation
concerns in one regression because of multicollinearity concerns and because of the significant drop in sample size
due to missing values.

                                                          15
is shown in the odd-numbered (even-numbered) columns. The coefficients represent the change in
the odds ratio that a campaign leads to a settlement (or proxy vote) relative to the base outcome,
associated with a unit change in the independent variable.
         Consistent with the hypothesis, we find that a number of proxies for the credibility of the
activist's threat are related to the probabilities of a campaign leading either to settlement or proxy
vote. Specifically, activists with a better reputation as measured by the market reaction to past
campaign announcements and the number of past campaign successes are more likely to obtain a
settlement or to go to a proxy vote. When controlling for these two proxies, activists with a large
number of past campaigns are less likely to reach a settlement or a contested election, implying
that the mere number of past engagements does not increase the credibility of the activist. 17 A track
record of reaching settlements in past campaigns is associated with a higher propensity to settle
the focal campaign and a track record of running proxy fights in the past is related to a higher
probability of reaching the proxy vote stage again.
         Target firm ownership structure is also an important determinant of the credibility of the
activist's threat and, in turn, whether campaigns lead to a settlement or a proxy vote. For campaigns
with above-median activist ownership relative to campaigns with below-median activist stake size,
the coefficient of 1.85 indicates that the odds ratio for settlement relative to the base outcome
increases by 85%. If a target firm has multiple share classes, the odds ratio of settlement decreases
by 54%. Furthermore, the extent of insider ownership is negatively related to the likelihood of
settlement and proxy vote relative to the base state.
         Depending on the specification, we find some support for weaker past target firm
performance increasing the probabilities of settlement and vote. This finding is consistent with
weaker performance increasing the credibility of the activist's threat, potentially because of the
dissatisfaction of other shareholders.
         Taken together, these results are consistent with Hypothesis H1 and imply that activist
reputation, target firm ownership structure, and, to a lesser extent, target firm performance play a




17
   One fund in our sample, GAMCO, has close to 100 campaigns. Even after dropping campaigns with more than 29
past campaigns (which is the 90th percentile) the number of past campaigns remain negatively and significantly related
to the probability that the focal campaign leads to a settlement. When we exclude the other activist reputation proxies,
the number of past campaigns remains negatively related to the probability that the current campaign leads to a
settlement or proxy vote, albeit insignificantly so. Given the potential multicollinearity of the different activist
reputation proxies, we do not include all of them in the same regression.

                                                          16
key role in determining the credibility of the activist's threat, which in turn affects the probabilities
of the engagement ending without either a settlement or a contested vote.
         We also examine whether and how proxies for incumbents' reputation concerns are related
to the probabilities of settlement and contested election vis-à-vis the base outcome. The results are
presented in Panel B of Table 3. We find that boards whose directors and independent directors
hold a larger amount of board positions are less likely to settle while boards with a larger number
of old (independent) directors are more likely to participate in contested elections. The latter result
is consistent with reputation being less of a concern among older directors. In addition, we find
that the relative likelihood of settlement increases when the board chair is up for election and when
the campaign is more visible due to higher analyst coverage.
         Table 4 completes the test of multinomial regressions to test Hypothesis H2, which predicts
that the probability of an activism campaign leading to a settlement vis-à-vis a contested proxy
vote increases in incumbents' reputation concerns. Specifically, Table 4 compares the likelihood
of settlement to that of the base outcome of a contested proxy vote. We find some support for
Hypothesis H2, which predicts that incumbents' reputation concerns are positively related to the
relative likelihood of settlement.
         In particular, the odds ratio of settlement vis-à-vis contested proxy vote is 2.9 times as high
when the board chair is up for election, consistent with reputation concerns being particularly
strong for the chairs of target firm boards. When the activism campaign is more visible the relative
likelihood of settlement also increases, consistent with the public visibility of a potential proxy
fight increasing incumbents' reputation concerns. While these findings support Hypothesis H2, we
find no evidence that the other proxies for incumbents' reputation concerns, the number of old
directors, the average number of directors' outside board positions, and whether the CEO is up for
election, are associated with the more settlements versus contested votes.18
         In Table 4, we also examine whether the proxies for the credibility of the activist's threat
are related to the relative likelihood of settlement. We find that higher market reactions to the
activist's past campaigns and the number of past proxy fights favor contested votes while the
number of past settlements and above-median activist ownership favor settlement. We find no
consistent pattern for target firm performance.

18
  In addition to proxying for incumbents' reputation concerns, these measures might also capture the ability of these
directors and boards to monitor the CEO. For example, directors with a large number of directorships might be too
"busy" to monitor properly (Fich and Shivdasani (2006); Falato, Kadyrzhanova, and Lel (2014)).

                                                         17
4.5. The timing of settlements

        Having examined the determinants of settlements, we would like to conclude this section
by considering the timing of settlements. The literature on the economics of settlement and
litigation has shown that divergent expectations regarding the outcome of trial can be an
impediment to obtaining a settlement [see, e.g., Shavell (1982)]. When the parties have symmetric
expectations regarding the expected outcome of trial, there would always be a range of settlements
that would be viewed by both parties as superior to trial. However, divergence of expectations
might sometimes narrow or eliminate the range of settlements that would be viewed as superior to
trial by both parties. As a result, the discovery process and the arrival of information as trial nears
can facilitate an out-of-court settlement.
        Similarly, for the case of an activist campaign, divergence of expectations between the two
sides about the expected effect of a contested vote can impede the reaching of a settlement.
However, as the two sides get closer to the company's shareholder meeting, the information the
two sides get from their proxy solicitors and from their communications with institutional investors
can be expected to provide them with better ability to predict the expected outcome of a contested
vote and to narrow any widely divergent expectations regarding this expected outcome.
Accordingly, with respect to the timing of settlements, we hypothesize that that settlements are
more likely to occur closer to the shareholder meeting in which a contested vote would otherwise
take place rather than earlier on.
        To test this hypothesis, we gather information about the timing of settlement agreements
within the period between the start of the activist campaign and the company's first subsequent
annual shareholder meeting (AGM) in which a contested vote could take place. For the 211
settlements that occur within this period, we find that the length of time between campaign start
and the subsequent shareholder meeting has a mean (median) of 188 days (184 days), slightly more
than six months. Consistent with settlements being more likely to occur during the second half of
this period rather than the first part, about 70% of settlements take place after the mid-point of the
period between campaign launch and AGM; and the ratio of (i) the time between the settlement
and the AGM to (ii) the time between campaign launch and AGM has a mean (median) value of
is 0.38 (0.35).
        Furthermore, when we divide the period between campaign launch and the AGM into three
equal-length sub-periods, we find that about 47% of settlements fall during the third sub-period,

                                                  18
and about 84% fall during the second and third equal-length sub-periods, with only about 16% of
settlements falling into the first equal-length period. We reject the uniform-distribution null
hypothesis of one-third of the settlements falling proportionately in each sub-period with a Chi-
Square test (test statistic is 31.91, p-value below 0.001).


5. Settlement terms: The focus on board composition

          Activist hedge funds are ultimately interested in implementing operational or leadership
changes that they believe would substantially increase the value of their shares. Operational
changes include a major transaction such as a divestiture of a peripheral division, and sale of the
company or a major part of its assets. Leadership changes often focus on replacing the CEO with
another individual who would be expected to perform better or change the company's strategic
direction.

          However, rather than a settlement agreement that requires such specific changes ­ that is,
that specifies some direct action the board committed to take ­ the parties can make an agreement
that focuses on changing some of the individuals on the board of directors and leaves the possibility
of making operational and leadership changes to decisions by the board down the road. For
example, in the Sotheby's case, Third Point campaigned against the CEO and the strategic plan he
was pursuing. The settlement agreement signed in May 2014 provided board seats for Third Point
founder Dan Loeb and two of his associates but kept Sotheby's CEO William Ruprecht in place.
Subsequently, in November 2014, Ruprecht stepped down and Dan Loeb handpicked Tad Smith
from Madison Square Garden for replacement.

          In this Section, we show that such cases should be expected, and indeed are, most common.
We begin with a theoretical discussion, putting forward three considerations that can be expected,
individually or in combination, to lead parties to focus on board turnover and avoid inclusion of
direct action terms. We then proceed to look at the evidence and show that it is consistent with the
theory.




                                                  19
5.1. Theory


5.1.1 Incomplete contracting

         The first reason for why we do not expect settlement agreements to contract on operational
or leadership changes relates to the theory of incomplete contracting developed over the years by
Oliver Hart and his co-authors, which is discussed in detail in Hart's Nobel Prize Lecture on the
subject (Hart (2017)). 19 The incomplete contracting paradigm focuses on situations in which
contracting parties have primarily an interest in some subsequent ex post actions or outcomes, but
contracting on such ex post actions is impossible due to the costs or limits on what courts can or
will verify and enforce ex post [see Aghion and Bolton (1992) for a well-known application of the
insights of incomplete contracting to explain financial contracting choices that focus on corporate
influence and control arrangements].

         We argue that our setting is one in which directly contracting on the ex post operational
changes sought by the activists is often not feasible. Consider a hedge fund activist that would like
to have a target sold. If a well-specified offer from an outside buyer is not yet available, the
settlement agreement cannot require the acceptance of a specific sale offer, and requiring the
company to be sold later on would be impractical. To begin, how and whether a sale should be
pursued would depend on contingencies that would be difficult or impossible for a court to verify
and enforce. When and at what price it would be optimal to sell would depend on what offers a
search for buyers would generate and what would take place in the market in the meantime.
Furthermore, and relatedly, corporate law rules preclude directors from making a binding and
irreversible commitment to recommend a sale without leaving a "fiduciary out" that would allow
them to avoid a sale if doing so would in their judgment be best for shareholders.

         To be sure, incumbent directors could commit to establishing a board committee to explore
a sale. However, as long as the team of incumbent directors does not change, the activist could
well be reasonably concerned that, not having been interested in a sale earlier, the incumbents
could explore the option perfunctorily rather than wholeheartedly and that a sale would remain
unlikely. Thus, to increase the likelihood that the company will effectively pursue a sale, it would


19
  We are grateful to Oliver Hart for a detailed discussion of the applicability of the incomplete contracting paradigm
to our setting, and the consistency of our findings with an incomplete contracting view.

                                                         20
be best for the activist to add to the board directors that the activist believes would be open to or
interested in a value-enhancing sale.

          Similarly, consider a case in which the hedge fund activist is not merely interested in firing
the current CEO but also in the quality and fit of the CEO's successor. Such a successor might not
be readily available at the time the settlement agreement and, given that courts would have
difficulty verifying the quality and fit of a chosen CEO versus alternatives, it would not be feasible
for the activist to secure the high-quality choice the activist seeks by requiring such a choice in the
settlement agreement. Thus, to increase the likelihood that the company will down the road choose
the successor CEO in the manner sought by the hedge fund activist, it would be best for the activist
to add to the board directors that the activist believes would be likely to push for such a CEO
choice.

          We note that while some changes sought by activists are difficult or impossible to contract,
others are not. In particular, including the firing of the CEO in the settlement agreement is not
precluded by incomplete contracting considerations. However, there are two other considerations
that might keep such changes out of settlement agreements.


5.1.2 Face-saving benefits and reputational concerns

          Another reason for keeping operational or leadership changes out of settlement agreements
relates to incumbents' reputation concerns. Specifically, postponing operational and leadership
changes until after the settlement can provide face-saving benefits to the incumbent CEO and
directors, impose lower reputational costs on them, and thus increase the parties' joint surplus from
making an agreement. For example, if the settlement agreement were to include a provision
requiring the departure of a CEO, the CEO's being fired would be salient and the CEO would bear
substantial reputational costs. Furthermore, in this case, the incumbent directors might be viewed
as "throwing the CEO under the bus," and thus would bear reputational costs as well.

          By contrast, if the CEO were to announce her departure several months down the road after
the settlement agreement, the departure can be attributed to changes in the personal circumstances
of the CEO and not be unambiguously viewed as a firing. For example, in the Sotheby's case, the
hedge fund activist strongly campaigned against the CEO but accepted a settlement agreement that
did not include the CEO's removal. Six months after the settlement the company announced that


                                                   21
the CEO was stepping down "by mutual agreement," and the lead independent director lavishly
praised the departing CEO, stating that "[m]y fellow Directors and I salute Bill's unwavering
dedication and the many significant contributions he has made to Sotheby's for more than three
decades."

        Similarly, if the incumbent directors accept a settlement provision requiring the sale of a
division that they have been resisting during the campaign, they might be viewed as capitulating
under pressure to accept a strategy they do not favor. By contrast, if such a change is made by the
new board several months down the road, it can be presented as a consequence of discussions on
the board, and the resulting development of views, or a change in the company's circumstances.

        Taken together, incumbents' reputation concerns during activism campaigns represent
another reason for why settlements are unlikely to contract on CEO turnover or operational
changes. In addition, the presence of reputation concerns also suggests that incumbent directors
should be hesitant to agree to settlement terms that specify the immediate departure of some of
them. Allowing incumbent directors to retire several months or even years following the settlement
is more face-saving to them than their departure being stipulated under activist pressure in the
settlement agreement.


5.1.3 Asymmetric information

       Thus far we discussed situations in which the activist is certain that it prefers a certain
change. However, as is emphasized and analyzed by the model of Corum (2018), there might be
situations in which the activist recognizes that the board of directors has private information that
would be useful for evaluating whether a given change would be value-enhancing.

        Suppose that the board of directors has private information that is useful for assessing
whether the incumbent CEO is still the best match for the target firm or whether a subsidiary of
the firm would be worth more if sold or spun off. In this case, the best course of action for the
hedge fund activist might be to defer the decision on the change, have new directors whose
judgment the activist respects join the board and obtain the private information possessed by the
board, and have these directors participate in making a decision down the road regarding the CEO
or the spin-off.



                                                22
5.2 Evidence


5.2.1 Board turnover v. direct action

         The discussion in Section 5.1 suggests that, due to incomplete contracting, reputation
concerns of incumbent directors, and informational asymmetry between incumbents and the
activist, settlements commonly will not contract on direct actions such as CEO turnover or the sale
of the firm. Instead, settlements should commonly be expected to contract on the identity of the
agents that may choose among those actions down the road. The goal of the activist is to introduce
into the boardroom individuals that are expected or likely to be open to the type of changes that
the activist seeks. Following the theory in Section 5.1, we therefore test the following hypothesis
regarding the frequency of settlements that specify board turnover and direct actions.

Hypothesis H3: The proportion of settlements specifying director turnover is higher than the
proportion of settlements specifying direct actions such as CEO turnover of strategic transactions.

         Panel A of Table 5 reports the frequency of board turnover and direct actions specified in
399 settlement agreements reached in campaigns that were launched between 2000 and 2013.
Settlements on average are significantly more likely to stipulate board turnover (85.71% of
settlements) than direct actions such as the sale or merger of the firm or of parts of the firm or CEO
turnover (8.27% of settlements). This difference is statistically significant at the 0.1% level.
Furthermore, the proportion of settlements that only specify board turnover and no actions
(79.95%) is also significantly larger than the proportion of settlements that only specify actions
(2.51%).

         Panel B of Table 5 shows that the actions that settlements do stipulate include CEO
departure (5.3%), sale or merger of the firm (2.5%), and sale of a part of the firm's assets (0.5%).
Other settlement terms that are more difficult to classify as actions include the formation of
strategic transaction committees (5.76%), the `exploration of strategic alternatives' (4.76%), and
the announcement of new or increased buyback programs (5.26%).20 Taken together, the evidence



20
  The creation of a Strategic Transaction Committee and the claim to `explore strategic alternatives' do not represent
actions as they may or may not result in a strategic transaction. Similarly, announcements about buyback programs
are difficult to classify because firms have significant discretion about whether and when to execute and complete
buyback programs.

                                                         23
that presented in Table 5 indicates that, consistent with Hypothesis H3, activists use settlement
negotiations to contract for board changes rather than direct actions.


5.2.2 Face-saving benefits and reputational concerns

        The discussion of incomplete contracting in Section 5.1 indicates that the nature of some
outcomes desired by activists, such as selling the firm down the road to a buyer yet to be identified,
is not practically contractible. However, some other outcomes desired by activists, such as
replacement of the CEO, can be contracted upon. We therefore now turn to examine whether the
two other factors discussed in section 5.1., face-saving benefits and informational asymmetry,
contribute to the infrequent incorporation of direct actions in settlement terms.

        Beginning with the role of face-saving considerations, we begin by observing patterns
suggesting that incumbent directors are sensitive to face-saving considerations. Panel B of Table
5 shows that 84% of settlements result in the appointment of new directors while director
departures only occur in 37.6% of cases. Similarly, while the average number of new directors
added in a settlement is 1.79, the average number of departures is only 0.87. This difference is
statistically significant at the 0.1% level.

        Figure 1 plots the number of director additions and director departures in the 11 years
around settlement agreements and provides additional evidence that the rate of director addition is
significantly higher than the rate of director departure in the year of settlement. In addition, this
figure shows that while the addition rate reverts back to normal levels in the year following the
settlement, the departure rate remains high in the ensuing years, which suggests that many
incumbent directors are allowed to depart quietly in the years following the settlement rather than
being publicly ousted via the settlement agreement.

        Panel C of Table 5 shows that, for settlements that specify 1, 2, 3, 4, or more director
additions, the average number of director departures is consistently below the number of additions.
Consistent with the patterns in Figure 1, this leads to statistically significant temporary increases
in the board size of target firms. In unreported analyses, we find consistent evidence showing that
target firm board size increases in the year of the settlement and then gradually reverts back to
normal levels in the ensuing years. These findings suggest that the low rate of director departures



                                                 24
(relative to director additions) specified in the settlement is not driven by an increase of the optimal
board size of these firms.

         While the above evidence indicates that reputational considerations are present in the
settlements sample, there likely exists some variation in reputation concerns among incumbent
directors and CEOs. Specifically, reputational concerns should be weaker if directors and CEOs
have already reached customary retirement age and thus do not expect to participate in the labor
market much longer. Therefore, we test the following hypotheses:

Hypothesis H4: The probability of a settlement specifying director departure or CEO departure is
negatively related to the strength of incumbent directors' and CEOs' reputation concerns.

         Panel A of Table 6 tests this hypothesis. The dependent variables identify settlement terms
that are most costly to incumbents' reputation, namely CEO departure and director departure. The
independent variables are proxies for directors' and CEOs' reputation concerns related to whether
they have reached customary retirement age. We find that the higher the number of septuagenarian
directors or outside directors on the board, the greater the probability of settlement terms
specifying director departure and the higher the number of director departures. For example, for
each director on the board who is older than 70 years, the likelihood of director departure increases
by 8.3 percentage points. We also find that if the CEO is close to retirement (above 62 years of
age), the probability of settlement terms specifying CEO departure increases by 7.7 percentage
points, an effect that is economically large though not statistically significant.21
         These results are consistent with incumbents the parties' being more likely to incorporate
departures directly in the settlement terms when reputational concerns, and thus the face-saving
benefits from delaying departures, are greater.22 Thus, the results are consistent with Hypothesis
H4. However, we acknowledge that these results are also subject to the alternative explanation that
the identified positive relation between director/CEO age and immediate (i.e. stipulated in
settlement) director/CEO departures because the presence of old directors/CEOs implies stronger




21
  The CEO age cutoff is similar to Kaplan and Minton (2012) and Jenter and Lewellen (2015).
22
  We do not find evidence that other variables which could be regarded as a proxies for incumbents' reputation
concerns, such as the aggregate number of incumbents' directorships and analyst coverage, are not associated with
settlement terms. Also, we find no evidence that, whereas a board with its chair up for re-election is more likely to
enter a settlement with the activist (Table 4), having the chair up for re-election is not associated with the nature of
settlement terms.

                                                          25
entrenchment which the activist wishes to break up right away in the settlement rather than later.
These two different explanations are difficult to disentangle.


5.2.3 Asymmetric information

       Finally, we turn to examine whether the informational asymmetry between incumbents and
activists also contributes to the infrequent incorporation of direct actions among settlement terms.
As is suggested by the discussion in section 5.1.3 and the model of Corum (2018), informational
asymmetry can prevent the activist from fully understanding whether certain outcomes would
indeed be value-enhancing and thus to prefer that a decision regarding them be deferred. Below
we investigate whether the infrequent incorporation of direct actions in settlement terms is at least
partly due to such informational asymmetry.
       To this end, we exploit the fact that information asymmetry between incumbents and the
activist likely differs in the cross-section of activism campaigns. Given this variation, the
informational asymmetry explanation suggests the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis H5: The probability of settlements specifying direct actions is negatively related to the
extent of information asymmetry between incumbents and the activist.

       We follow prior literature [see, e.g., Minton and Schrand (1999) and Zhang (2006)] in
using cash flow volatility as a proxy for informational asymmetry. In Panel B of Table 6, the
independent variable of interest, serving as a proxy for information asymmetry between
incumbents and the activist, is the firm's cash flow volatility over the past five years. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the settlement terms include direct actions whose
value consequences can be better assessed using private information possessed by the board, such
as the sale or merger of the firm, the sale of parts of the firm's assets, and CEO departure. Across
several specifications, we find a negative association between our proxy for informational
asymmetry and the likelihood that settlement terms specify such direct actions. These finding are
consistent with Hypothesis H5 and thus the predictions suggested by the informational asymmetry
factor and the model of Corum (2018).




                                                 26
6. Effects on Board Composition


      In the preceding Section, we argued that settlement terms are likely to focus commonly on
director turnover rather than the type of leadership and operational changes which activists
ultimately seek to obtain to enhance share value, and we provided evidence consistent with this
hypothesis. In this Section, we investigate the board composition changes brought about by
settlements. Among other things, we analyze the extent to which the board turnover produced by
settlements is abnormal; the type of directors that settlements introduce; the post-settlement board
turnover changes that follow to reverse the temporary increase in board size that settlements often
produce; and whether settlements lead to an improvement in board monitoring capabilities as
evidenced by director characteristics and shareholder votes in director elections.


6.1. Methodology

        To verify that the extent of board turnover specified in the settlement agreement is indeed
abnormal, and to examine whether settlement agreements are followed by changes in board
composition, CEO turnover, and operational changes, we need to find control firms with similar
ex ante characteristics as settlement firms prior to the settlement. In addition, we want to control
for any potential relation between the initial activist intervention and board turnover as this relation
is distinct from the effect of the settlement. Finally, we also want to filter out the relation between
contested proxy votes and board turnover. Thus, our analyses of the consequences of settlement
include six groups, three treatment groups and three matched control groups, as described below.

        The first treatment group is the subsample of campaigns that leads to a settlement and the
year of treatment is the year in which the settlement agreement is reached. The corresponding
control group consists of untargeted firms and is matched based on the year of the settlement. This
implies that treated and control firms have similar observable characteristics during the years
leading up to the settlement year. The second treatment group consists of the subsample of
campaigns that neither experience a settlement nor a contested proxy vote. The treatment year is
the year of the initial intervention and untargeted control firms are matched based on that year.
The third treatment group includes campaigns that lead to a contested vote. The treatment year is
the year in which the proxy fight is announced, and we find a third control group of untargeted
firms based on that year.

                                                  27
         We use three propensity-score matching iterations to find control firms for the three
treatment groups. The variables that we include in the propensity score matching regressions are
Ln(Market Cap)t-1 (the natural logarithm of market capitalization lagged by one year), ROAt-1,
ROAt-3, Tobin's Qt-1, and Tobin's Qt-3, based on the earlier findings that small and underperforming
firms are more likely to be targeted (Brav et al. (2008)) while, among the population of target
firms, large and underperforming firms are more likely to settle or be subject to a contested vote
(see Table 3). Then we match treated and control firms on the resulting propensity score. For each
firm in the three control groups, we require the placebo year to be the same year as the treatment
year and we require the matched firm to be in the same two-digit SIC industry to control for
unobserved industry trends and macro-economic conditions.

         For each treated firm, we select at most five matched control firms (without replacement)
but we delete treatment-control pairs that belong to the worst 5% of matches with respect to the
absolute distance between the two propensity scores. Appendix B-3 in the Data Appendix shows
that covariate balance is satisfied in all 21 mean-comparison tests and pre-event parallel trends
tests in ROA and Tobin's Q between treated and control firms. To build the final dataset, we collect
data on dependent and independent variables for the 11 years around the treatment year for treated
firms, or the matched placebo year for control firms.

         For each outcome variable, we present three difference-in-differences regression
specifications. We cluster standard errors by firm across all specifications. The first estimates the
difference in the outcome variable from pre to post settlement year relative to the difference in the
outcome variable from pre to post placebo year.

              , =  +  +   [ + ], +     [ + ], + ,                                                 (1)
where i and t represent firm and year fixed effects, respectively. d[s+k] with 5k5 is a set of
indicator variables for the year relative to the settlement or placebo year. Year s-1 is the omitted
base year. Thus, d[s+k] capture the difference in the level of the dependent variable among control
firms between years s-1 and s+k. In this model, the level effect associated with the Settlement
firms is subsumed by the firm fixed effects. The dummies Settlement · d[s+k] capture the change
from s-1 to s+k in the difference in the dependent variable between firms that settle and control
firms.




                                                 28
       The approach summarized in equation (1) only relies on campaigns that were settled and
matched control firms, and therefore does not control for the potential association between the
initial activist intervention and the dependent variable. To mitigate concerns that such association
confounds the results, we use a second regression specification in which we include the second
treatment group, i.e., target firms that neither reach a settlement nor a proxy vote and their matched
control firms. These firms were matched on the year of initial intervention. To further control for
the potential confounding effect of the initial intervention among settling firms and their matched
control firms, we identify the year of the initial intervention for firms that reach a settlement and
assign that year to their matched control firms as a placebo intervention year. Then we estimate
equation (2).

        , =  +  +    +   [ + ], +     [ + ],
            +   [ + ], +     [ + ], + ,                                                           (2)
where d[t+k] with 5k5 is a set of indicator variables for the year relative to the initial
intervention year or relative to the placebo year. As before, year t-1 is the omitted base year. The
coefficient of Settlement captures the difference in the dependent variable between target firms
that settle and matched control firms in year s-1. The level effect of firms treated by Activism is
subsumed by the firm fixed effects. The dummies Activism · d[t+k] capture the change from t-1
to t+k in the difference in the dependent variable between target firms and control firms. The
advantages of this matching approach are that we can control for any association between the
initial intervention and the outcome variables such that the difference-in-differences estimates
around the settlement year capture the effect of settlement over and above the effect of the initial
intervention. In the final model (3) we further add firms that experience a voted contest, as well as
their matched control firms, to be able to compare the changes in the dependent variables around
settlement to the changes around voted contests.

        , =  +  +    +   [ + ], +     [ + ],
             +   [ + ], +     [ + ],
             +  ·  +   [ + ], +     [ + ], + ,                                                    (3)
where d[c+k] with 5k5 is a set of indicator variables for the year relative to the announcement
year of a proxy fight that went to a vote or relative to the placebo year. Year c-1 is the omitted
base year. The coefficient of VotedContest captures the difference in the dependent variable


                                                 29
between target firms that experience a proxy fight and matched control firms in year c-1. The
dummies VotedContest · d[c+k] capture the change from c-1 to c+k in the difference in the
dependent variable between firms that experience a contested vote and control firms.


6.2. Abnormal board turnover

       Table 5, discussed above, shows that 84% of settlements stipulate director additions and
37.6% director departures. Figure 1, which plots the annual number of director additions and
departures for settlement firms and matched control firms, provides a first indication that the
amount of board turnover specified in these settlement agreements is indeed abnormal. We observe
no difference between treatment and control firms before the settlement but a peak in both the
addition and departure of directors among treated firms in the year of the settlements. The average
abnormal number of director additions (departures), i.e., in excess of control firms, is 1.43 (0.85)
during the year of the settlement.

       This asymmetry in the addition vs. departure implies that the boards of settlement firms
expand around the year of settlement. In untabulated analyses we find that the average board size
increases from about 8.3 directors prior to the settlement to a peak of 9.1 the year after the
settlement is reached. Following the year of the settlement or placebo, treated and control firms
show similar trends in board additions, but settlement firms experience significantly higher board
departures than control firms, so that treated firms' board size gradually adjusts to pre-settlement
levels. These patterns are consistent with incumbent directors being allowed to "retire" from target
firm boards in a face-saving way in the years following settlement agreements.

       Table 7 maps the pattern shown in Figure 1 into a linear regression framework. In this
table, the dependent variables are Number of Director Additions and Number of Director
Departures. The observations are recorded at the firm-year level for all target and control firms
covered in the Board Magazine Directors Database universe between 2000 and 2013. The
coefficients on Settlement  d[s+k] represent the difference-in-differences estimates and clearly
confirm the patterns in Figure 1: Both additions and departures spike in the year of the settlement
relative to the year before, with an average of 1.3 to 1.4 new directors and 0.74 to 0.84 departing
ones. These estimates represent an "abnormal" increase in board turnover relative to matched
control firm years and are statistically significant. We continue to find strong abnormal increase
in board turnover among settlement firms when we use year s-2 as the benchmark period instead
                                                30
of year s-1 as reported at the bottom of Table 7. Also consistent with Figure 1, firms that eventually
settle do not experience a higher rate of board turnover prior to the settlement compared to control
firms. We find some director additions in the year following settlement and continue to observe
abnormally high numbers of director departures until two years after settlement. This result further
supports the claim that settlement agreements allow incumbent directors to exit in a face-saving
way in the months or even years following the settlement.

        The regression framework allows us to explore related effects. In columns 2, 3, 5, and 6,
we include indicators capturing abnormal changes in board turnover around the year of the initial
activist intervention, which typically takes place one year prior to the year of settlement if there is
one. Table 7 indicates that the initial intervention per se is associated with abnormal increases in
board turnover but again in an asymmetric way: while we observe abnormal increases in new
director additions in the year of campaign launch, t+1, and t+2, we find evidence of abnormal
director departures only in year t+2. By controlling for the time window surrounding the initial
activist intervention, we effectively disaggregate total board turnover following settlements into
turnover associated with the initial activist intervention and the incremental turnover that is directly
related to the settlement. Importantly, estimates of the increase in board turnover around the year
of the settlement remain statistically and economically significant after controlling for the changes
that are associated with the initial activist engagement.

        Finally, columns 3 and 6 document evidence for abnormal board turnover around contested
proxy votes. We find 1.4 new director additions above the normal level in the first year following
the proxy fight announcement and between 0.3 and 1.1 abnormal director departures in years c,
c+1, and c+2. These magnitudes suggest that settlements potentially provide a less costly avenue
to achieve a similar level of board turnover as proxy fights do. Unlike settlements and initial
activism campaign launches, proxy fights are preceded by an abnormal amount of director
departures three years prior to contest announcement.


6.3. Activist directors

        Having established the magnitude of board turnover following activist engagements in
general, and settlement agreements in particular, we now turn to the characteristics of the directors
that are added and removed. We provide evidence that activism campaigns are indeed associated
with the addition of new directors and that settlements are associated with the appointment of more
                                                  31
pro-activist directors than campaigns not leading to a settlement. To examine whether activists
indeed influence the appointment of directors, we proxy for the relationship between activists and
directors by separating newly-added directors into three mutually-exclusive categories: (i)
directors that are affiliated with the activist fund; (ii) directors that are not affiliated with but
(publicly) favored by the activist; and (iii) other directors.

        The status of "favored but not affiliated" is based on manual classification from proxy
materials and news searches. The dummy variable is coded as one for directors who are not
employees of the fund but there is evidence of any of the following: a) they are described in media
accounts as being selected or desired by the fund; b) they appear, on the fund's proxy material, as
directors that the fund would like to choose for replacements in case some directors are unable to
continue serving on the board; c) they have to resign if the fund falls below a certain ownership
threshold; or d) they have previously been appointed by the fund during other campaigns.

        Panel B of Table 5 already provides some indication that hedge fund activists are indeed
involved in the selection of the new directors who join target firm boards following settlement
negotiations. In 51.9% of the settlements, directors affiliated with the activist fund join the board,
and in 52.4% of cases the added directors are favored by, though not affiliated with, the activists.
The average number of activist-affiliated (activist-desired) directors added is 0.65 (0.94).

        In this Section, we examine the activist's influence on the choice of new directors more
thoroughly. Table 8 documents the likelihood that a new director who is added to the board
following the initial intervention, settlement or proxy contest is activist-affiliated, activist favored
but unaffiliated, or neither of these two. We include new directors who are added within five years
following the initial intervention, up to 2013, which is the year in which we lose access to the
Board Magazine data base. Activists are unlikely to place directors on the boards of untargeted
companies so Table 8 only includes target firm-years post intervention and no matched control
firms. We treat any of the years 3, 4, and 5 following the initial intervention as the omitted base
years if they do not overlap with the three-year periods following settlements or proxy fight
announcements.

        The results provide strong support for activists' role in the selection of new directors. In
the year of settlement, the likelihood that a new director is affiliated with the activist, is between
18.6 and 24 percentage points higher than in years t+3 through t+5 following the initial


                                                  32
intervention. In addition, the probability of new directors being unaffiliated with but desired by
the activist increases by 19 and 30 percentage points, while the likelihood that a new director is
not desired by the activist is between 44 to 50 percentage points lower. We find some weak
evidence that the number of activist affiliated new directors is abnormally low in year s+2
following the settlement, likely driven by the observation in Table 7 that by s+2, the settlement
has no effect anymore on the number of new board additions. We find that the abnormally high
number of newly-added unaffiliated-but-desired directors and other directors continues until year
s+1 but with lower magnitude.

       These results hold after controlling for dummies that capture the type of director additions
following the initial intervention and following proxy contest announcements. For the first three
years following the initial intervention, we find increased probabilities of new activist-affiliated
directors and activist-desired directors and fewer other directors added to the board, although the
magnitudes are lower than those observed during the settlement year. Similarly, we find a higher
likelihood of activist-affiliated and activist-desired directors, and lower other directors, added to
target firm boards in the year of and the year following proxy contest announcement.

       Though the board turnover around initial intervention, during proxy fights, and following
settlement is statistically significant and economically meaningful, it reflects changes that are in
most cases, strict minority relative to the full size of a board (typically 8 ­ 9 directors). The
activist's strategy is thus about influence rather than control of the board. The activists, even if
successful, are not able to dominate the boardroom or to dictate corporate policy. Instead, they aim
at persuading other shareholders to support their candidates, and then influencing decision-making
inside the boardroom. Such a strategy differentiates hedge fund activists from the corporate raiders
of the 1980s who tended to seek outright control, as well as limits the scope for extraction of
private benefits.


6.4 Personal characteristics of new and departing directors

       Some institutional investors, such as BlackRock and State Street, have publicly expressed
concerns about the directors who are added to corporate boards as a result of settlements rather
than victory in a proxy fight where institutional investors would have a say. We aim to assess these
concerns about the quality of the new directors in two ways. First, we examine the personal
characteristics of the directors who enter (and leave) the board following settlement agreements.
                                                 33
Second, we test in the next section whether activist-affiliated and activist-desired directors receive
lower voting support at annual general meeting elections.

       To examine the personal characteristics of directors who enter and leave the boardroom
following settlement agreements, we focus on three director traits that are likely to proxy for their
effectiveness as overseers. The first is a dummy variable Age > 70 for directors who are at least in
their seventies. The second is Connectedness, which is the number of different listed companies a
director served on as a board member over the five preceding years. This measure assumes that
directors preserve personal connections they made in the recent past (Stuart and Yim (2010)). For
the departure analysis, we also use the variable Tenure, defined as years of service on the current
board, which might reflect both experience and entrenchment.

       Table 9 shows the results of linear probability regressions on all director-year observations
for treatment and control firms covered in the Board Magazine Directors Database. To increase
statistical power by decreasing the number of interaction terms to estimate, we aggregate the years
around the settlement, around proxy fight announcement, and around the initial activist
intervention into three-year periods. d[POSTS], d[POSTD] , and d[POSTC] are equal to zero in
the three years prior to the settlement year, initial intervention year, or contest announcement year,
respectively, and equal to 1 in the three years afterwards. The incremental probability of the
addition or departure of directors with certain characteristics post settlement is captured by the
three-way interaction terms Settlement · d[POSTS] · Age>70, Settlement · d[POSTS] ·
Connectedness, and Settlement · d[POSTS] · Tenure. Similarly, we define three-way interactions
for the initial intervention and the announcement of voted proxy contests.

       What is noteworthy about this analysis is how the characteristics of the directors involved
in board turnover differ when turnover is associated with the initial activist intervention versus
with a settlement. We find that in the [s, s+2] period following a settlement, target firms show an
abnormal increase in the appointment of more well-connected directors and an abnormal decrease
in the appointment of older directors relative to control firms. We observe a similar but weaker
pattern of director appointments around the time of initial intervention and following the
announcement of proxy fights that go to a vote. With respect to director departures, the likelihood
of incumbent directors with longer tenure to resign increases abnormally following settlement
agreements and following proxy fight announcements, but not following the initial intervention.


                                                 34
       Taken together, these results imply that following settlements, boards end up being
comprised of fewer old directors, and more shorter-tenured and better-connected directors than
prior to the settlement, thereby arguably increasing board effectiveness according to the general
consensus from the literature (Core, Holthausen, and Larcker (1999), Larcker, So, and Wang
(2013), Nili (2016), Huang and Hilary (2018)).


7. Stock market reactions

       In examining stock market reactions, the literature has paid close attention to the stock
price reactions accompanying the initial campaign launch disclosure (usually the filing of SEC
13(d) schedules) that alert the market to the purchase of a significant stake by an activist. The
existing literature to date has provided consistent evidence indicating that hedge fund activism
announcements lead to a price increase on the order of about 4.5% during the 20-day window
which is not reversed in the longer term (for up to five years) for the time period of 1994 to 2016.23
Moreover, this positive reaction from the stock market is justified by the ex post improvement in
both operating performance and corporate governance, e.g., increases in the return on assets and
in CEO pay-for-performance. (e.g., Bebchuk, Brav, and Jiang (2015)).

       We first examine the market reaction to the announcement of a settlement agreement. Panel
A of Table 10 shows that there is a statistically significant, 1.16% average buy-and-hold abnormal
return in excess of the value-weighted market benchmark during the [t-2, t+2] day window around
the settlement date; the results are slightly stronger if the time window is expanded to [t-3, t+3] .

       When we use the estimates of abnormal returns as a dependent variable in Panel B of Table
10, then high-impact settlements (those that stipulate at least 3 director additions or departures, or
a strategic transaction, or CEO turnover) earn an extra 3 percentage points compared to non-high
impact settlements. This result is consistent with prior literature documenting higher
announcement and holding-period returns for activism campaigns that result in board turnover,
takeovers, and other forms of corporate restructurings (Greenwood and Schor (2009); Becht,
Franks, Grant, and Wagner (2017)).




23
     See the updated analysis provided by Brav,           Jiang,   and   Barry   (2019),   available   at:
http://people.duke.edu/~brav/HFactivism_March_2019.pdf.

                                                 35
          Among the components of high-impact settlements, strategic transactions (sale or merger
of the firm or of parts of the firm's assets) generate the highest short-term returns, specifically,
between 8.1% and 8.9% above the average abnormal return of settlements in which no strategic
transaction is specified. CEO turnover is associated with an insignificant abnormal price increase
of about 2.6%. These results are consistent with Corum (2018) who predicts that settlements,
which specify the ultimate outcomes that activists seek, will generate larger market reactions.

          Finally, in untabulated analysis, looking back in time, we compare the abnormal returns
around the initial campaign announcement for the sample of campaigns that subsequently lead to
a settlement with campaigns that do not. We find that the former have a significantly greater market
reaction at campaign announcement than the latter. Specifically, for a 5 (7) day window centered
on the campaign announcement date, we find market-adjusted buy-and-hold returns of 3.74%
(4.2%) for campaigns that were eventually settled and only 2.59% (2.89%) for campaigns that
were not settled. This pattern is consistent with markets viewing settlements favorably and being
able to identify at the outset that some campaigns are more likely to results in settlement than
others.

          Overall, the results presented in this Section are consistent with the market reacting
favorably to settlements, viewing their direct and indirect effects as overall value-increasing. The
results are also inconsistent with shareholders viewing privately-negotiated settlement agreements
as devices for activist rent extraction that are overall value-reducing for other shareholders.


8. The aftermath of settlements

          We have seen that, although hedge fund activists are ultimately interested in leadership and
operational changes, settlement agreements often focus on the introduction of new directors. We
have argued that activists seek to obtain such new directors in order to facilitate the subsequent
occurrence of leadership and operational changes. In this Section, we test the hypothesis which, in
line with the incomplete contracting, asymmetric information, and reputational concerns theories,
predicts the occurrence of CEO turnover and operational changes in the years following settlement
agreements:
Hypothesis H6: Settlement agreements are positively associated with the occurrence of future
CEO turnover and operational changes.


                                                  36
       To test this hypothesis, we employ the same empirical methodology that we developed in
Section 6.1, which relies on propensity-score matched samples and difference-in-differences
estimation. Below we analyze in turn how settlements are associated with subsequent CEO
turnover, shareholder payouts, strategic transactions, and operating performance. We conclude by
examining whether there is post-settlement evidence of rent extraction by the activist at the
expense of other shareholders.


8.1. CEO turnover

       While the high portion of settlement agreements that contractually specify director
additions (84%) suggest that the above documented board renewal is directly attributable to the
settlement agreement, only very few settlements stipulate the ouster of the incumbent CEO (5.3%).
While this result is consistent with Hypothesis H3, it might still seem puzzling given that Becht,
Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2009) find that replacing target firms' CEOs is an important mechanism
through which activists can implement their objectives. In line with this claim, untabulated
analyses show that CEO turnover spikes to an annual rate of 28%, in the year after settlement, up
from a pre-settlement average of about 12% annually, and significantly higher than the rate of
turnover among matched control firms of 11%. CEO turnover reverts back to 14% by the third
year following settlement and lingers at about that rate until the fifth year. Taken together, these
results suggest that the CEO is allowed to resign "quietly" after the settlement as opposed to her
ouster being publicly announced in the settlement agreement.

       Table 11 examines CEO turnover around initial activist interventions, the announcement
of proxy fights that go to a vote, and settlement agreements in a regression framework using a
similar difference-in-differences specification as in Table 7. In the year of the settlement
agreements, the CEO turnover rate at target firms increases by between 6.3 and 7.7 percentage
points in excess of the change in CEO turnover at control firms during the same time. This
abnormal increase grows even further in the first year following the settlement with an abnormal
increase (relative to the year prior to the settlement or placebo year) of between 13.2 and 14
percentage points. Importantly, we do not observe abnormal turnover prior to the settlement and
the difference-in-differences estimates revert back to zero by year s+2 or s+3. Taken together,
these results provide strong support for Hypothesis H6 that settlements facilitate leadership
changes down the road.

                                                37
       In the years following the announcement of voted proxy contests, we find increases in the
CEO turnover rate that are of similar magnitude compared to CEO turnover following settlements,
suggesting again that settlements might be a less confrontational, and hence cheaper, means to
achieve similar leadership changes as going all the way to a vote. We also document a significant
increase in abnormal CEO turnover in the year of the initial intervention and the two subsequent
years. This result is in line with the notion that many activism campaigns are successful in
replacing the CEO even in the absence of an explicit settlement or proxy vote, potentially signaling
the presence of informal settlements.

       To the extent that activists attempt to replace CEOs at target companies as a way to restore
governance and performance, this effort should be reflected in an increased sensitivity of CEO
turnover to performance. To this end, we test whether activism, settlement agreements, and proxy
fights affect the relation between prior firm performance and CEO turnover. Specifically, we run
a linear probability model for CEO turnover at the firm-year level that is similar to the model in
Table 9. The key independent variables are three-way interaction terms between indicator variables
for the time periods around the launching of activism campaigns, settlement agreements, and proxy
fight announcements and a measure of prior-year stock return performance (e.g., Settlement ·
d[POSTS] · Stock Returns for settled campaigns). Table 12 reports the results, which suggest that
CEO turnover following settlements is different, namely more performance-based, than CEO
turnover following initial activist interventions or following the announcement of voted proxy
contests.

       The negative and statistically significant main effect on Stock Returns shows that past stock
return performance is negatively related to the likelihood of CEO turnover among control firms in
the pre-placebo period, which is a standard finding in the governance literature (e.g., Kaplan and
Minton (2012)). Most important in our finding is that the negative and significant coefficient on
Settlement · d[POSTS] · Stock Returns is around three times as large as the Stock Returns baseline
effect, which means that the abnormal (i.e. control firm adjusted) increase in the CEO turnover-
performance sensitivity among target firms from pre to post settlement is economically significant.
For the initial intervention or the year following the announcement of proxy fights that go to a vote,
we find no significant increase in the relation between CEO turnover and firm performance.
Overall, the empirical evidence implies that activists oust CEOs more selectively following
settlement agreements.

                                                 38
8.2. Shareholder payouts

         Activists often seek an increase in shareholder payouts, and Brav, Jiang, Partnoy and
Thomas (2008) document increases in payout among target firms following activist interventions.
As we show in Table 5, however, a share buyback is directly stipulated in only 5.3% of our
settlement agreements. When we go beyond the contractual stipulations in the settlement and
examine the annual level of payout in the years surrounding the settlement date, we find that payout
yield, which is the sum of dividends and share repurchases scaled by the firm's market
capitalization, spikes in the year that the settlement agreement is filed. This can be seen in Table
13. In the settlement year, target firm payout yield increases by 1.1 to 1.2 percentage points, in
excess of the change in payout among control firms, compared to the year prior to settlement or
placebo. These magnitudes are economically significant given the average payout yield of around
4% observed in the 11 years surrounding the settlement agreement. However, we find some
evidence that payout yield was lower among firms that ultimately settle compared to matched
control firms in the pre-settlement years. This suggests that activists do not demand unreasonable
payout from target firms but rather revert target firm payout back to normal levels.

         Similar to the CEO turnover-performance analyses, settlements are different from the
initial intervention or proxy fights also with respect to payout. We find no evidence of abnormal
changes in payout following activism campaign launch or the announcement of proxy contests that
go to a vote. Overall these results support Hypothesis H6 that settlement agreements facilitate the
distribution of free cash flow to shareholders in the future.


8.3. Strategic transactions

         Prior research documents activists' ability to put target firms into play ( Greenwood and
Schor (2009), Burkart and Lee (2015), Boyson, Gantchev, and Shivdasani (2017), Corum and
Levit (2018)). However, only about 8% of settlement agreements signal the possibility for a
strategic transaction.24 As discussed in the development of Hypothesis H3, strategic transactions
such as selling the target firm are difficult to contract on in the settlement due to incomplete
contracting, asymmetric information, and potential reputation concerns but, as Hypothesis H6



24
  2.5% of agreements specify the sale of the firm or a merger, another 0.5% the sale of parts of the firm's assets, and
5.8% stipulate the formation of a Strategic Transaction Committee on the board of directors.

                                                          39
predicts, settlements can be used to facilitate a transaction later on. Thus, in this section we
examine whether the likelihood of target firms being sold increases in the aftermath of settlements.

           In Table 14, we include only those years following the initial intervention or placebo year
and find an increase in the probability of target firm stock market delisting following settlements.
Importantly, this increase in overall delisting propensity is driven by those delistings that are
related to mergers and acquisitions (M&A) or going-private transactions, while we find no increase
in distress-related delistings post settlement. Estimates of the abnormal probability of M&A or
going-private transactions is about 6.7 percentage points higher than controls in the year of the
settlement. After controlling for the dynamics of delistings around the initial intervention, the
abnormal likelihood of an acquisition or going private transaction among settlement targets
decreases to 2.6 percentage points in the year of settlement relative to control firms. While this is
an economically large magnitude given an average in-sample likelihood of M&A or going-private
transactions of 5.4% the estimate is statistically insignificant at conventional levels.

           For the years following initial activist interventions, we find that the likelihood of stock
market delistings is abnormally high, which is almost entirely driven by M&A and going private
transactions. The rate of distress-related delistings is marginally higher among target firms
compared to control firms only in the third year following the campaign launch year. For proxy
contests, we find some evidence that delistings occur less frequently in the year of and the year
following the announcement year, which could be a partly mechanical relation however if those
are the years during which contests are actually voted on. In other words, we cannot observe a
contested vote if the company has delisted prior to the shareholder meeting. In the third year
following proxy fight announcement, we find that the probability of delisting increases, which is
driven by M&A and going private transactions. While the results for settlement agreements alone
are weak, collectively, these findings imply that target firms are more likely to delist for favorable
reasons (M&A and going private) than control firms, refuting the claim that hedge fund activists
destabilize target firms.25




25
     For an example of such claims, see Reuters, 11/16/2015, "The Cannibalized Company."

                                                        40
8.4. Operating performance

       Several prior studies on hedge fund activism document deterioration in ROA and Tobin's
Q among target firms prior to the intervention, and a full recovery afterwards [for recent evidence,
see Bebchuk, Brav, and Jiang (2015) and Gantchev, Gredil, and Jotikasthira (2018)]. In this
section, we examine whether post-intervention performance increases are similar among activism
campaigns that lead to a settlement or to a proxy vote. The first three columns of Table 15 examine
ROA. In columns 2 and 3, we find target firm performance indeed deteriorates from year t-3
through the year of the initial intervention. From year t+1 through t+5, ROA improves but this
improvement turns significant only by t+5. In columns 1 to 3, we find little evidence that
settlements are followed by improvements in profitability relative to controls. Only in the first year
following the settlement do we observe an abnormal improvement in ROA, but this is not sustained
in later years. For voted proxy contests, however, we observe significant incremental
improvements in profitability in four out of five years following the contest announcement.

       Columns 4 to 6 present the results for Tobin's Q. We find significant abnormal (i.e., in
excess of control firms) improvements in Tobin's Q relative to the year before settlement. These
improvements start materializing in the year of the settlement, which is consistent with the market
reaction to settlement disclosure presented in Table 10. For campaigns that lead to a proxy vote,
the coefficients on Voted Contest · d[c+1] through Voted Contest · d[c+5] also show an increasing
pattern, but these coefficients are not statistically significant, potentially due to the small number
of voted proxy contests. Four out of the five coefficients on the interaction terms identifying the
years following the initial intervention are positive but none of them attain statistical significance
at conventional levels.

       These results suggest that more confrontational campaigns, such as those that lead to a
settlement or a proxy vote, are associated with stronger improvements in firm valuations, which is
inconsistent with the claim that performance improvements associated with activism are entirely
due to stock picking. These findings also provide some support for Hypothesis H6 and the claim
that settlements facilitate operational changes down the road and that these changes are value
enhancing.




                                                 41
8.5. Rent-extraction?

       Commentators and some institutional shareholders have expressed the concern that
settlements, which activist hedge funds and incumbents make without other shareholders being
present at the bargaining table, enable hedge fund activists to push for a short-term agenda to
extract rents from other shareholders with a longer investment horizons. We find, however, that
the average length of engagement is 979 days for campaigns that are settled and 660 days for
campaigns that are not settled, which is a statistically significant difference. This long period for
settled campaigns is natural to expect since a settlement takes time to obtain and takes additional
time to bear fruit. This pattern is inconsistent with a concern that settlements push companies in
directions favored by agents with very short time horizons.

       In this concluding subsection we further examine this concern. In particular, we investigate
whether settlements enable activists to pressure incumbents to a) accept the appointment of new
directors who are not favored by other shareholders and/or b) buy out the activist privately-
negotiated transactions that might resemble the "greenmail" practices of the 1980s. Thus, we find
no evidence to support the rent-extraction concern.


8.5.1 Self-serving director appointments

       First, we test whether directors added to the board during settlement negotiations, that is,
without the vote of other shareholders, are perceived by investors as less qualified or committed.
Specifically, we examine director voting outcomes at target firms' annual general meet ings for
those new directors whose names we can match to director names in the ISS Voting Analytics
data. Table 16 reports the results of analyses where the dependent variables are the fraction of
votes supporting (column 1) or against (column 2) a particular director in a given year, or the
fraction of votes withheld (column 3). The directors whose voting results are considered are
classified into four mutually-exclusive categories based on whether they were added following a
settlement and, among directors added afterwards, whether they are affiliated with, desired by, or
unrelated to ("Other") the activist. These classifications are captured by three indicator variables
with the fourth group, the omitted base case, being incumbent directors who were already on the
target firm's board prior to campaign launch.




                                                 42
        Columns 1 and 2 of Table 16 show that directors who are added to the board following a
settlement (irrespective of whether affiliated with or desired by the activist) generally receive
significantly more votes in their favor and fewer withheld votes compared to incumbent directors.
Specifically, new activist-affiliated directors receive 1.7 percentage points more in their favor (1.8
percentage points less against them) than incumbent directors. For activist-desired directors, these
differences increase to 3.8 percentage points for supporting votes and 3.9 percentage points for
disapproving votes, respectively, which is similar to the third category of other new directors. At
the bottom of the table, partial F-tests show that activist-desired directors receive more voting
support (and less dissent) than activist-affiliated directors but there is no significant difference
between activist-affiliated directors and other directors. Taken together, our results provide no
evidence that directors who join boards following settlements receive lower voting support than
incumbent directors and we find no evidence that activist-affiliated or activist-desired directors are
less popular than other new directors.


8.5.2 "Greenmail"

        Some commentators have expressed concern that target companies might buy out the
activist in some settlements, and that settlements might thus enable activists to extract rents at the
expense of other shareholders similar to economic rents corporate raiders might have extracted
during the 1980s through "greenmail."26 We investigate whether such a concern is empirically
justified.

        To this end, we search for information about privately negotiated buybacks in the
settlement agreements and other company disclosures, Capital IQ, SDC Platinum, and FactSet
Shark Watch. We find that only 19 settlements out of 399 during our period were followed by a
privately-negotiated buyback that enabled the activist to sell shares to the issuer. Furthermore, in
a large majority of these cases, the record indicates that the buyback was executed without a
premium to the market price, and in the remaining cases we were unable to determine the price of
the transaction. Thus, we find no evidence supporting the greenmail concern.




26
  See , e.g., Wall Street Journal, 6/11/2014, "Activist Funds Dust Off 'Greenmail' Playbook" and Forbes, 2/19/2016,
"Greenmail Lives! Activist RiverNorth Folds At Fifth Street After A Tannebaum-Led Buyout."

                                                        43
9. Conclusion

       Settlement agreements between the activist and the target's board have been playing an
increasingly important role in the corporate governance landscape. Using a comprehensive hand-
collected data set, we provide the first systematic analysis of the drivers, nature, and consequences
of such settlement agreements.

       We identify the factors that determine the likelihood of a settlement, showing that the
evidence is consistent with settlements being more likely when the activist has a credible threat to
win board seats in a proxy fight and when incumbent directors face significant reputation concerns.
We then document that settlements bring about major changes in board composition rather than
provide directly the operational changes that activists seek, but that settlements are followed by
such changes, including increases in CEO turnover, increased payout to shareholders, and
improvements in valuation. We find no evidence that settlements allow activists to appoint
directors who are not supported by other shareholders or that they enable the extraction of
economically meaningful rents through greenmail. Indeed, the disclosure of settlements is
accompanied by positive stock price reactions. Our analysis highlights the importance of
settlements. It also provides an empirical foundation on which future examination of settlements
and activist engagements more generally can build.




                                                 44
Appendix A
Variable definitions.
                                                Settlement characteristics
High Board Turnover is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the settlement agreement stipulates that at least 3 new
directors join the board or at least 3 incumbent directors leave the board and equal to 0 otherwise.
Strategic Transaction is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the target firm merges or sells itself or sells part of its
assets and equal to 0 otherwise.
CEO Departure is equal to 1 if the settlement agreement stipulates that the CEO will leave the company and equal
to 0 otherwise.
High Impact Settlement is an indicator variable equal to 1 if 'High Board Turnover' is equal to 1 or 'CEO
Departure' is equal to 1 or `Strategic Transaction' is equal to 1 and equal to 0 otherwise.
Buy & Hold Industry-Adjusted Return is the continuously-compounded industry-adjusted share price performance
around the date the settlement agreement is reached.
        Identifiers for time relative to initial activist intervention, proxy fight announcement or settlement
13D is equal to 1 for hedge fund activism target firms and equal to 0 otherwise.
Settlement is equal to 1 for target firms that settle with the activist and equal to 0 otherwise.
Voted Contest is equal to 1 for target firms that experience a contested proxy vote and equal to 0 otherwise.
d[t+k] with -5k5 is a set of indicator variables equal to 1 in year k relative to the initial intervention year or
placebo year and equal to 0 otherwise.
d[s+k] with -5k5 is a set of indicator variables equal to 1 in year k relative to the settlement year or placebo year
and equal to 0 otherwise.
d[c+k] with -5k5 is a set of indicator variables equal to 1 in year k relative to the proxy fight announceme nt year
(for voted proxy contests) or placebo year and equal to 0 otherwise.
d[POSTD] is equal to 0 in years t-1 through t-3 around the initial activist intervention or placebo year and equal to
1 in years t through t+2.
d[POSTS] is equal to 0 in years s-1 through s-3 around the settlement year or placebo year and equal to 1 in years
s through s+2.
d[POSTC] is equal to 0 in years c-1 through c-3 around the proxy fight announcement year (for voted proxy
contests) or placebo year and equal to 1 in years c through c+2.
                                        CEO, board and director characteristics
CEO Age > 62 is equal to 1 if the CEO is older than 62 and equal to 0 otherwise.
# Director Additions is the number of new directors on the board.
# Director Departures is the number of directors that leave the board.
Favored and Affiliated Director is equal to 1 if a new director is affiliated with the activist and equal to 0
otherwise.
Favored but Unaffiliated Director is equal to 1 if a new director is favored by but unaffiliated with the activist and
equal to 0 otherwise.
Other New Director is equal to 1 if a new director is neither desired by nor affiliated with the activist.
Favored and Affiliated Director Added Following Settlement is equal to 1 for activist-affiliated directors who were
added to the board following a settlement and equal to 0 otherwise.
Favored but Unaffiliated Director Added Following Settlement is equal to 1 for activist-desired but unaffiliated
directors who were added to the board following a settlement and equal to 0 otherwise.
Other New Director Added Following Settlement is equal to 1 for directors who were added to the board following
a settlement but are neither activist-affiliated nor activist-desired and equal to 0 otherwise.
Age > 70 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the director is older than 70 and equal to 0 otherwise.
# Directors Older than 70 is the number of directors who are older than 70.
# Outside Directors Older than 70 is the number of outside directors who are older than 70.
Connectedness is the number of other boards the director served on over the past 5 years.
Tenure is the number of years the director has been on the board of the company
Directors' Average # Directorships is the average number of directorships held by incumbent board members.
Outside Directors' Avg # Directorships is the average number of directorships held by incumbent outside directors.
Board Chair Up for Election is equal to 1 if the board chair is up for election at the next shareholder meeting.
CEO Up for Election is equal to 1 if the CEO is up for election at the next shareholder meeting.
Fraction of Votes Supporting Director is the proportion of votes at the annual meeting supporting the director.
Fraction of Votes Against Director is the proportion of votes at the annual general meeting against the director.
Fraction of Votes Withheld is the proportion of votes at the annual general meeting withheld in a director election

                                                          45
Appendix A (continued)
                                          Activism campaign characteristics
# Campaigns is the number of campaigns launched by the activist in the past 5 years.
# Settlements is the number of settlements reached by the activist in the past 5 years.
# Successful Campaigns is the number of campaigns launched by the activist in the past 5 years during which the
activist achieved its campaign goals.
Market Reaction Past Campaigns is the average buy-and-hold market-adjusted return over a 7-day window
centered on the campaign announcement date for all campaigns launched by the activist in the past 5 years.
# Proxy Fights is the number of proxy fights launched by the activist in the past 5 years.
Proxy Fight is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the activist has threatened a proxy fight and equal to 0 otherwise.
High Activist Ownership is an indicator variable equal to 1 for campaigns with activist ownership above the
sample median and equal to 0 otherwise.
                                       Company characteristics and outcomes
Market Cap is the target firm's market capitalization in millions.
Multiple Share Classes is equal to 1 if the target firm's share structure includes multiple classes.
Analyst Coverage is the number of sell-side analysts covering the firm.
ROA is earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation over lagged total assets.
Tobin's Q is the sum of the book value of debt and the market value of equity scaled by the sum of the book value
of debt and the book value of equity.
Book / Market is the book value of equity scaled by the market value of equity.
Insider Ownership is the percentage of shares held by incumbent executives and directors.
Cash Flow Volatility is the standard deviation of operating cash flows over the past five years.
Abnormal Returns Pre-13D is the market-adjusted share price performance over the 12 months leading up to the
13(d) filing.
Stock Returns is equal to the continuously-compounded stock return over the calendar year.
Delisting is an indicator variable equal to 1 the year of a stock market delisting and equal to 0 otherwise.
Acquisition / Going Private Delisting is an indicator variable equal to 1 in the year of a stock market delisting that
is related to merger and acquisition or going private transactions and equal to 0 otherwise.
Distress Delisting is an indicator variable equal to 1 in the year of a stock market delisting that is related to
financial distress based on the CRSP delisting codes and equal to 0 otherwise.
Payout Yield is the sum of dividends and repurchases divided by market capitalization
CEO Turnover is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the CEO leaves the firms and equal to 0 otherwise.




                                                          46
References

Aghion, P., Bolton, P., 1992. An incomplete contracts approach to financial contracting. The Review of
     Financial Studies 59(3), pp. 473-494.
Appel, I. R., Gormley, T. A., Keim, D. B., 2018. Standing on the shoulders of giants: The effect of passive
     investors on activism. Working paper.
Aslan, H. Kumar, P., 2016. The product market effects of hedge fund activism. Journal of Financial
     Economics 119(1), pp. 226-248.
Back, K., CollinDufresne, P., Fos, V., Li, T., Ljungqvist, A., 2018. Activism, strategic trading, and
     liquidity. Econometrica, 86(4), pp. 1431-1463.
Bebchuk, L. A., 1984. Litigation and settlement under imperfect information. The RAND Journal of
     Economics, pp. 404-415.
Bebchuk, L., Brav, A., Jiang, W., 2015. The long-term effects of hedge fund activism. Columbia Law
     Review 115(5).
Bebchuk, L. A., Brav, A., Jackson, R. J., Jiang, W., 2013. Pre-disclosure accumulations by activist
     investors: Evidence and policy. Journal of Corporation Law, 39(1), pp. 1-34.
Bebchuk, L., Klement, A., 2012. Negative-expected-value suits. In: Sanchirico, C. (Ed), Procedural Law
     and Economics.
Becht, M., Franks, J., Mayer, C. Rossi, S., 2009. Returns to shareholder activism: Evidence from a clinical
     study of the Hermes UK Focus Fund. Review of Financial Studies 22(8), pp. 3093-3129.
Becht, M., Franks, J. R., Grant, J., Wagner, H. F., 2017. The returns to hedge fund activism: An international
     study. Review of Financial Studies 30(9), pp. 2933-2971.
Bourveau, T., Schoenfeld, J., 2017. Shareholder activism and voluntary disclosure. Review of Accounting
     Studies, 22(3), pp. 1307-1339.
Boyson, N. M., Gantchev, N., Shivdasani, A., 2017. Activism mergers. Journal of Financial Economics,
     126(1), pp. 54-73.
Boyson, N. M., Ma, L., Mooradian, R. M., 2016. Serial activists. Working paper.
Boyson, N. M., Mooradian, R. M., 2011. Corporate governance and hedge fund activism. Review of
     Derivatives Research 14(2), pp. 169-204.
Boyson, N. M., Pichler, P., 2019. Hostile resistance to hedge fund activism. Review of Financial Studies
     32(2), pp. 771-817
Brav, A., Jiang, W., Kim, H., 2015a. The real effects of hedge fund activism. Review of Financial Studies
     28(10), pp. 2723-2769.
Brav, A., Jiang, W., Kim, H., 2015b. Recent advances in research on hedge fund activism: Value creation
     and identification. Annual Review of Financial Economics 7, pp. 579-595.
Brav, A., Jiang, W., Ma, S., Tian, X., 2018. How does hedge fund activism reshape corporate innovation?.
     Journal of Financial Economics, 130(2), pp. 237-264
Brav, A., Jiang, W., Partnoy, F., Thomas, R., 2008. Hedge fund activism, corporate governance, and firm
     performance. The Journal of Finance 63(4), pp. 1729-1775.
Burkart, M., Lee, S., 2015. Hedge fund activism vs. hostile takeover bids. Working paper.
Cheng, C. A., Huang, H. H., Li, Y., Stanfield, J., 2012. The effect of hedge fund activism on corporate tax
     avoidance. The Accounting Review 87(5), pp. 1493-1526.
Cheng, C.S., Huang, H. H., Li, Y., 2015. Hedge fund intervention and accounting conservatism.
     Contemporary Accounting Research 32(1), pp. 392-421.
Clifford, C. P., 2008. Value creation or destruction? Hedge funds as shareholder activists. Journal of
     Corporate Finance 14(4), pp. 323-336.
Coffee, John, Jackson, R. J., Mitts, J. R., R. E. Bishop, 2019. Activist directors and agency costs: What
     happens when an activist director goes on the board?. Cornell Law Review 104, 381-466.
Collin-Dufresne, P., Fos, V., 2015. Do prices reveal the presence of informed trading?. The Journal of
     Finance 70(4), pp. 1555-1582.


                                                     47
Core, J. E., Holthausen, R. W., Larcker, D. F., 1999. Corporate governance, chief executive officer
     compensation, and firm performance. Journal of Financial Economics 51(3), pp. 371-406.
Corum, A.A., 2018. Activist Settlements. Working Paper.
Corum, A. A., Levit, D., 2019. Corporate control activism. Journal of Financial Economics.
Daugherty. A. J. Reinganum, 2017. Settlement and trial: Selected analyses of the bargaining environment.
     In: Parisi, F., Oxford Handbook of Law and Economics.
Edmans, A., Fang, V. W., Zur, E., 2013. The effect of liquidity on governance. The Review of Financial
     Studies 26(6), pp. 1443-1482.
Falato, A., Kadyrzhanova, D., Lel, U., 2014. Distracted directors: Does board busyness hurt shareholder
     value?. Journal of Financial Economics, 113(3), pp. 404-426.
Fich, E. M., Shivdasani, A., 2006. Are busy boards effective monitors?. The Journal of Finance, 61(2), pp.
     689-724.
Fos, V., 2017. The disciplinary effects of proxy contests. Management Science 63(3), pp. 655-671.
Fos, V., Jiang, W., 2016. Out-of-the-money CEOs: Private control premium and option exercises. Review
     of Financial Studies 29(6), pp. 1549-1585.
Fos, V., Tsoutsoura, M., 2014. Shareholder democracy in play: Career consequences of proxy contests.
     Journal of Financial Economics 114(2), pp. 316-340.
Gantchev, N., 2013. The costs of shareholder activism: Evidence from a sequential decision model. Journal
     of Financial Economics 107(3), pp. 610-631.
Gantchev, N., Gredil, O., Jotikasthira, C., 2018. Governance under the gun: Spillover effects of hedge fund
     activism. Forthcoming Review of Finance.
Gantchev, N., Jotikasthira, C., 2017. Institutional trading and hedge fund activism. Management Science,
     64(6), pp. 2930-2950.
Gantchev, N., Merih Sevilir, Anil Shivdasani, 2019, Activism and empire building, working paper.
Gow, I. D., Shin, S. P., Srinivasan, S., 2014. Activist directors: Determinants and consequences. Working
     paper.
Gow, I. D., Shin, S. P., Srinivasan, S., 2016. Consequences to directors of shareholder activism. Working
     paper.
Greenwood, R., Schor, M., 2009. Investor activism and takeovers. Journal of Financial Economics 92(3),
     pp. 362-375.
Guo, J., Utham, V., Wang, G.J., 2019. Shepherds in wolves' clothing? Hedge fund activism using corporate
     divestitures. Working paper.
Hart, O. (2017). Incomplete contracts and control. American Economic Review, 107(7), pp. 1731-52.
He, Y. E., Li, T., 2018. The benefits of friendship in hedge fund activism. Working paper.
Hege, U., Zhang, Y., 2019. Activism pressure and the market for corporate assets. Working paper.
Huang, S., Hilary, G., 2018. Zombie board: Board tenure and firm performance. Journal of Accounting
    Research, 56(4), pp. 1285-1329.
Jenter, D., Lewellen, K., 2015. CEO preferences and acquisitions. The Journal of Finance, 70(6), pp. 2813-
    2852.
Johnson, T., Swem, N., 2017. Reputation and investor activism. Working paper.
Jiang, W., Wan, H., Hao, S., 2016. Reputation concerns of independent directors: Evidence from individual
     director voting. Review of Financial Studies 29(3), pp. 655-696.
Jiang, W., Li, T., Mei, D., 2018. Influencing control: Jawboning in risk arbitrage. The Journal of Finance,
     73(6), pp. 2635-2675.
Kaplan, S. N., Minton, B. A., 2012. How has CEO turnover changed?. International Review of Finance,
     12(1), pp. 57-87.
Kim, Sehoon, 2018. Hedge fund activism and internal capital markets. Working paper.
Klein, A., Zur, E., 2009. Entrepreneurial shareholder activism: Hedge funds and other private investors.
     The Journal of Finance 64(1), pp. 187-229.
Klein, A., Zur, E., 2011. The impact of hedge fund activism on the target firm's existing bondholders.
     Review of Financial Studies 24(5), pp. 1735-1771.

                                                    48
Krishnan, C. N. V., Partnoy, F., Thomas, R., 2016. The second wave of hedge fund activism: The
      importance of reputation, clout, and expertise. Journal of Corporate Finance 40, pp. 296­314.
Larcker, D. F., So, E. C., Wang, C. C. Y., 2013. Boardroom centrality and firm performance. Journal of
      Accounting and Economics 55(2), pp. 225-250.
Levit, D., 2018. Soft shareholder activism. Forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.
McCahery, J. A., Sautner, Z., Starks, L. T., 2016. Behind the scenes: The corporate governance preferences
      of institutional investors. The Journal of Finance 71(6), pp. 2905-2932.
Mietzner, M., Schweizer, D., 2014. Hedge funds versus private equity funds as shareholder activists in
      Germany--differences in value creation. Journal of Economics and Finance 38(2), pp. 181-208.
Minton, B. A., Schrand, C., 1999. The impact of cash flow volatility on discretionary investment and the
      costs of debt and equity financing. Journal of Financial Economics, 54(3), pp. 423-460.
Nili, Y., 2016. The "New Insiders": Rethinking independent directors' tenure. Hastings Law Journal 67(6).
Norli, Ø., Ostergaard, C., Schindele, I., 2015. Liquidity and shareholder activism. Review of Financial
      Studies 28(2), pp. 486-520.
Prescott, J.J., Katharyn E. Spier, 2016. A comprehensive theory of civil settlement, 91 New York University
      Law Review, 59.
Schoenfeld, J., 2018. Action-based contracts between firms and shareholders. Working paper.
Shavell, S., 1982. Suit, settlement, and trial: A theoretical analysis under alternative methods for the
      allocation of legal costs. Journal of Legal Studies 11, pp. 55-82.
Spier, K., 2007. Litigation. In: Polinsky, M., Shavell, S., The Handbook of Law and Economics, North
      Holland.
Stuart, T. E., Yim, S., 2010. Board interlocks and the propensity to be targeted in private equity transactions.
      Journal of Financial Economics 97(1), pp. 174-189.
Sunder, J., Sunder, S. V., Wongsunwai, W., 2014. Debtholder responses to shareholder activism: Evidence
      from hedge fund interventions. Review of Financial Studies 27(11), pp. 3318-3342.
Swanson, E., Young, G., 2017. Are activist investors good or bad for business? Evidence from capital
      market prices, informed traders, and firm fundamentals. Working paper.
Vega, C., 2006. Stock price reaction to public and private information. Journal of Financial Economics,
      82(1), 103-133.
Wickelgren, A. L., 2013. Law and economics of settlement. In: Arlen, J. (Ed.), Research Handbook on the
      Economics of Tort Law.
Zhang, X. F., 2006. Information uncertainty and stock returns. The Journal of Finance, 61(1), pp. 105-137.




                                                      49
Figure 1
Director additions and departures around settlement agreements.
This figure plots the average number of new directors joining the board (top) and incumbent directors leaving the
board (bottom) around the year of a settlement agreement and around a placebo year for matched control firms. The
sample of settlements consists of all settlement agreements reached between hedge fund activists and target companies
during campaigns that were launched between 2000 and 2013. We select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-
matching on the year that the settlement agreement is reached. See Section 6.1. Year 0 on the x-axis represents the
year during which the settlement agreement was reached.

                                           Number of Director Additions
               2.50


               2.00


               1.50


               1.00


               0.50


               0.00
                       -5     -4      -3      -2      -1          0    1      2    3     4      5

                                                   Control            Settlement



                                       Number of Director Departures
               1.60

               1.40

               1.20

               1.00

               0.80

               0.60

               0.40

               0.20

               0.00
                       -5     -4      -3      -2      -1          0    1      2    3     4      5

                                                   Control            Settlement




                                                             50
Table 1
Incidence of settlements and proxy votes over time.
This table documents the distribution of all activism campaigns that were launched between calendar years 2000 and 2013 and the percentage of those
interventions that led to settlement agreements between the activist and the target company, the percentage of campaigns that went to a proxy vote, the percentage
of campaigns that were settled or went to a proxy vote or both (over the life of a campaign, both outcomes can occur sequentially), and the percentage of settled
campaigns relative to all campaigns that were either settled or went to a proxy vote or both.
Panel A. Activism campaign outcomes over time
    Year      Activism Campaigns              Settlements              Voted Contests          Settlements + Voted Contests                 Settlements
                                          Activism Campaigns         Activism Campaigns             Activism Campaigns             Settlements + Voted Contests
    2000                 116                      3%                          3%                             5%                                 50%
    2001                  93                      3%                          4%                             8%                                 43%
    2002                 138                      7%                          8%                            14%                                 50%
    2003                 128                      9%                          4%                            13%                                 71%
    2004                 158                      8%                          7%                            13%                                 57%
    2005                 254                      11%                         4%                            15%                                 73%
    2006                 344                      12%                         3%                            14%                                 82%
    2007                 410                      11%                         4%                            15%                                 74%
    2008                 332                      15%                         8%                            22%                                 71%
    2009                 166                      16%                         3%                            19%                                 87%
    2010                 201                      19%                         3%                            22%                                 84%
    2011                 213                      17%                         5%                            21%                                 82%
    2012                 217                      20%                         2%                            21%                                 93%
    2013                 242                      21%                         6%                            27%                                 78%
   Total                3012                      13%                         5%                            17%                                 76%
 (Average)




                                                                               51
Table 1 (continued)
Panel B. Proxy contest outcomes over time
  Year          Proxy Contests            Proxy Contests    Voted Contests   Settled Contests   Withdrawn Contests
                                       Activism Campaigns   Proxy Contests   Proxy Contests      Proxy Contests
  2000                 8                       7%               38%                38%                 25%
  2001                 8                       9%               50%                13%                 38%
  2002                22                       16%              50%                32%                 18%
  2003                18                       14%              28%                56%                 17%
  2004                24                       15%              46%                38%                 17%
  2005                33                       13%              33%                42%                 24%
  2006                39                       11%              26%                69%                  5%
  2007                46                       11%              35%                52%                 13%
  2008                49                       15%              51%                33%                 16%
  2009                15                       9%               33%                40%                 27%
  2010                20                       10%              35%                40%                 25%
  2011                24                       11%              42%                38%                 21%
  2012                21                       10%              19%                62%                 19%
  2013                34                       14%              44%                41%                 15%
  Total              361                       12%              38%                45%                 17%
(Average)




                                                                    52
Table 2
Descriptive statistics on activist interventions.
This table reports descriptive statistics on activist characteristics and target characteristics separately for activism campaigns that lead to a settlement agreement,
a proxy vote, or none of the above. The sample covers campaigns launched between 2000 and 2013. The number of observations on the different variables differs
depending on the availability of information on that variable. All variables are defined in Appendix A.

                                                        Settled Campaigns (n=399)           Campaigns w/ Proxy Vote (n=137)           Other Campaigns (n=2,490)
                                                        Mean      Median     StDev           Mean       Median        StDev           Mean     Median     StDev
Activist Track Record
  Market Reaction Past Campaigns                        0.04         0.04        0.06        0.06           0.06           0.06        0.03        0.02         0.07
  Ln (# Settlements)                                    0.69         0.69        0.76        0.45           0.00           0.68        0.26        0.00         0.51
  Ln (# Proxy Fights)                                   0.66         0.69        0.76        0.68           0.69           0.79        0.42        0.00         0.62
  Ln (# Campaigns)                                      1.75         1.79        1.09        1.52           1.61           1.18        1.74        1.61         1.27
  Ln (# Successful Campaigns)                           1.56         1.61        0.78        1.60           1.61           0.74        1.27        1.10         0.70
Ownership Structure
  Multiple Share Classes                                0.03         0.00        0.16        0.02           0.00           0.14        0.07        0.00         0.26
  High Activist Ownership                               0.58         1.00        0.49        0.46           0.00           0.50        0.49        0.00         0.50
  Insider Ownership                                     0.11         0.07        0.13        0.10           0.06           0.14        0.15        0.08         0.18
Incumbents' Reputation Concerns
  # Directors Older than 70                             0.88         0.00        1.25        1.03           1.00           1.28        0.73        0.00         1.10
  # Outside Directors Older than 70                     0.83         0.00        1.19        0.97           1.00           1.22        0.68        0.00         1.04
  Directors' Avg # Directorships                        1.62         1.56        0.51        1.63           1.57           0.54        1.64        1.50         0.57
  Outside Directors' Avg # Directorships                1.68         1.60        0.57        1.67           1.60           0.58        1.71        1.60         0.63
  CEO Up for Election                                   0.85         1.00        0.36        0.75           1.00           0.43        0.79        1.00         0.41
  Board Chair Up for Election                           0.87         1.00        0.33        0.77           1.00           0.42        0.78        1.00         0.41
  Ln (Analyst Coverage)                                 1.30         1.39        1.07        1.09           1.10           1.00        0.86        0.69         0.94
Firm Performance
  ROA                                                    0.06        0.08        0.17         0.04           0.07          0.20        0.05         0.08        0.21
  Tobin's Q                                              1.72        1.29        1.66         2.00           1.32          2.35        1.90         1.36        1.92
  Abnormal Returns Pre-13D                              -0.15       -0.20        0.46        -0.12          -0.15          0.36       -0.08        -0.18        0.90
Control Variables
  Market Cap                                            2613         338        6503         1497            384          3833        1205         211         3804




                                                                                 53
Table 3
The determinants of settlements and proxy vote vs other campaign outcomes.
The analyses in this table predict whether a campaign leads to a settlement (columns 1, 3, 5, 7), or a proxy vote
(columns 2, 4, 6, 8). For campaigns that neither lead to a settlement nor to a proxy vote, these dependent variables
are equal to 0. The sample includes hedge fund activism campaigns launched between 2000 and 2013. The sample
size differs across models depending on the availability of the independent variables. The models are estimated using
multinomial logit regressions. The coefficient estimates represent relative risk ratios. Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity; z-statistics appear in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level, respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.
Panel A. Activist track record, and ownership structure
Predicted Outcome                    Settlement Proxy Vote Settlement Proxy Vote Settlement Proxy Vote
Base Outcome                                  Campaigns that Neither Lead to a Settlement Nor to a Proxy Vote
                                           (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
Activist Track Record
Market Reaction Past Campaigns          1.052*      1.167***
                                         (1.94)       (2.93)
Ln (# Campaigns)                      0.354***      0.353***
                                        (-8.56)      (-4.15)
Ln (# Successful Campaigns)           4.309***      4.070***
                                         (8.58)       (4.66)
Ln (# Settlements)                                                2.624***         1.214
                                                                     (9.41)        (1.10)
Ln (# Proxy Fights)                                                  0.990       1.437**
                                                                    (-0.10)        (2.44)
Ownership Structure
Multiple Share Classes                                                                         0.455**         0.471
                                                                                                (-2.21)       (-1.09)
High Activist Ownership                                                                       1.850***         1.144
                                                                                                 (4.58)        (0.57)
Insider Ownership                                                                             0.272***       0.060**
                                                                                                (-2.71)       (-1.99)
Firm Performance
ROA                                      0.591        0.350          0.692         0.554         1.223        0.355*
                                        (-1.32)      (-1.63)        (-1.09)       (-1.12)        (0.54)       (-1.74)
Tobin's Q                              0.879**        1.048          0.942         1.034        0.893*         1.035
                                        (-2.26)       (0.68)        (-1.20)        (0.66)       (-1.78)        (0.56)
Abnormal Returns Pre-13D                 0.834        1.087          0.833         0.855         0.846         0.811
                                        (-1.33)       (0.59)        (-1.49)       (-1.09)       (-1.33)       (-1.00)
Control Variables
Ln (Market Cap)                       1.208***      1.193***      1.124***      1.203***      1.215***      1.297***
                                         (4.58)       (2.67)         (3.17)        (3.22)        (4.15)        (3.88)
Observations                             1,773        1,773          2,488         2,488         1,822         1,822
Pseudo R-Squared                         0.104        0.104         0.0624        0.0624         0.044         0.044




                                                         54
Table 3 (continued)
Panel B. Incumbents' reputation concerns
Predicted Outcome                        Settlement   Proxy Vote  Settlement     Proxy Vote      Settlement    Proxy Vote     Settlement   Proxy Vote
Base Outcome                                                   Campaigns that Neither Lead to a Settlement Nor to a Proxy Vote
                                             (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)
Incumbents' Reputation Concerns
# Directors Older than 70                  1.067        1.141*
                                           (1.31)       (1.84)
Directors' Avg # Directorships           0.714***        0.925
                                          (-2.75)       (-0.41)
# Outside Directors Older than 70                                      1.075        1.157*
                                                                       (1.38)        (1.90)
Outside Directors' Avg # Directorships                               0.732***        0.878
                                                                      (-2.87)       (-0.79)
CEO Up For Election                                                                                 0.713         1.161
                                                                                                   (-0.85)       (0.37)
Board Chair Up For Election                                                                        2.249*         0.783
                                                                                                    (1.94)       (-0.63)
Ln (Analyst Coverage)                                                                                                         1.483***       1.016
                                                                                                                                (4.75)       (0.12)
Firm Performance
ROA                                       0.588*         0.498        0.575*         0.487          0.698         1.507         0.742         0.603
                                          (-1.67)       (-1.33)       (-1.73)       (-1.35)        (-0.76)       (0.48)        (-0.98)       (-0.99)
Tobin's Q                                  0.922         0.987         0.923         0.989          0.951         1.043        0.919*         1.020
                                          (-1.63)       (-0.23)       (-1.63)       (-0.20)        (-0.61)       (0.42)        (-1.68)        (0.39)
Abnormal Returns Pre-13D                  0.774*         0.868        0.776*         0.856          0.815         0.974         0.864         0.866
                                          (-1.92)       (-1.00)       (-1.91)       (-1.06)        (-0.95)       (-0.36)       (-1.31)       (-1.03)
Control Variables
Ln (Market Cap)                          1.297***     1.244***       1.290***      1.249***      1.291***       1.359***        1.046       1.217**
                                           (6.29)       (3.47)         (6.30)        (3.62)        (4.69)         (4.29)        (0.94)       (2.54)
Observations                               2,458        2,458          2,454         2,454          946            946          2,488        2,488
Pseudo R-Squared                           0.024        0.024          0.024         0.024         0.036          0.036         0.026        0.026




                                                                          55
Table 4
The determinants of settlement vs proxy vote.
This table documents the campaign, activist, and target characteristics that predict the occurrence of a settlement
agreement versus a proxy vote among the subset of campaigns that lead either to a settlement or a proxy vote. The
sample includes hedge fund activism campaigns launched between 2000 and 2013. The sample size differs across
models depending on the availability of the independent variables. The models are estimated using multinomial logit
regressions. The coefficient estimates represent relative risk ratios. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity;
z-statistics appear in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.
Predicted Outcome                                                                Settlement
Base Outcome                                                                     Proxy Vote
                                                       (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)     (5)       (6)       (7)
Activist Track Record
Market Reaction Past Campaigns                      0.901*
                                                    (-1.85)
Ln (# Campaigns)                                     1.006
                                                     (0.02)
Ln (# Successful Campaigns)                          1.059
                                                     (0.17)
Ln (# Settlements)                                            2.161***
                                                                 (4.07)
Ln (# Proxy Fights)                                            0.689**
                                                                (-2.23)
Ownership Structure
Multiple Share Classes                                                     0.965
                                                                          (-0.05)
High Activist Ownership                                                   1.618*
                                                                           (1.86)
Insider Ownership                                                          4.539
                                                                           (1.03)
Incumbents' Reputation Concerns
# Directors Older than 70                                                            0.935
                                                                                    (-0.82)
Directors' Avg # Directorships                                                       0.772
                                                                                    (-1.20)
# Outside Directors Older than 70                                                            0.929
                                                                                            (-0.84)
Outside Directors' Avg # Directorships                                                       0.834
                                                                                            (-0.97)
CEO Up For Election                                                                                    0.614
                                                                                                      (-0.98)
Board Chair Up For Election                                                                          2.874**
                                                                                                      (2.07)
Ln (Analyst Coverage)                                                                                          1.460**
                                                                                                                (2.51)
Firm Performance
ROA                                                  1.689       1.248    3.443* 1.181 1.182 0.463               1.232
                                                     (0.74)      (0.37)    (1.82) (0.28) (0.28) (-0.84) (0.36)
Tobin's Q                                          0.839**       0.911     0.863 0.934 0.933 0.912               0.901
                                                    (-2.10)     (-1.35) (-1.64) (-0.93) (-0.96) (-0.75) (-1.49)
Abnormal Returns Pre-13D                             0.767       0.974     1.044 0.892 0.907 0.837               0.997
                                                    (-1.46)     (-0.14) (0.18) (-0.61) (-0.52) (-0.80) (-0.02)
Control Variables
Ln (Market Cap)                                      1.013       0.935     0.936 1.042 1.033 0.950              0.859*
                                                     (0.18)     (-1.05) (-0.85) (0.58) (0.47) (-0.62) (-1.75)
Observations                                         1,773       2,488     1,822 2,458 2,454            946      2,488
Pseudo R-Squared                                     0.104       0.062     0.044 0.024 0.024 0.036               0.026



                                                          56
Table 5
The content of settlement agreements.
This table outlines the terms specified in settlement agreements between activist hedge funds and their target
companies. Panel A tabulates the number of settlement agreements that specify board changes or direct actions.
Panel B provides descriptive statistics on individual settlement terms. The frequencies represent the number and
percentage of settlement agreements that led to a certain outcome. The averages represent the average number of
director additions or departures per settlement. Panel C compares the number of director departures to the number
of director additions. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively (two-
tailed).
Panel A. Proxies for board turnover and direct actions
                                                                                    # Settlements      % Settlements
Director Turnover                                                                        342               85.71
Sale | Merger | Asset Sale | CEO Departure                                                33                8.27
Director Turnover Only                                                                   319               79.95
Sale | Merger | Asset Sale | CEO Departure Only                                           10                2.51
Director Turnover & Sale | Merger | Asset Sale | CEO Departure                           352               88.22

Panel B. Individual settlement terms
                                                                          # Settlements    % Settlements     Average
Addition of New Director(s)                                                    335            83.96           1.79
Addition of Director(s) Affiliated with Activist                               207            51.88           0.65
Addition of Director(s) Favored by but Unaffiliated with Activist              209            52.38           0.94
Addition of other Director(s)                                                   57            14.29           0.22
Director Departure(s)                                                          150            37.59           0.87
CEO Departure                                                                   21             5.26             -
Sale or Merger of Target Firm                                                   10             2.51             -
Sale of a Part of the Firm's Assets                                              2             0.50             -
Formation of Strategic Transactions Committee                                   23             5.76             -
Exploration of Strategic Alternatives w/o Committee                             19             4.76             -
Buyback Program Related Announcement                                            21             5.26              -

Panel C. Director additions and departures
   # Director        # Settlements with # Settlements with             Average # of            Average Change in
  Additions per         0, 1, 2, 3, 4, >4    Director               Director Departures           Board Size
   Settlement        Director Additions    Departures
         0                      64               7                          0.22                  -0.22    **
         1                     120              21                          0.30                   0.70    ***
         2                     127              53                          0.59                   1.41    ***
         3                      49              37                          1.80                   1.20    ***
         4                      19              13                          2.26                   1.74    ***
   More than 4
    Additions
 (Average = 5.8)                20              19                          4.50                   1.30    ***




                                                         57
Table 6
Cross-sectional variation in settlement terms.
This table examines cross-sectional differences in settlement terms. Panel A examines whether incumbents' reputation concerns are related to whether director
departures and CEO departures are stipulated in the settlement. Panel B tests the relation between information asymmetry between firm insiders and outsiders
and the stipulation of actions such as the sale or merger of the firm, the sale of part of the firm's assets, and CEO turnover in the settlement agreement. The sample
includes settlements for activism campaigns that are launched between 2000 and 2013 but the number of observations differs with the availability of data on the
independent variables. All models are estimated using OLS or linear probability models. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity; t-statistics appear in
parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.
Panel A. Incumbents' reputation concerns and settlement terms
Dependent Variable                               Director      # Director        Director        # Director       Director    # Director          CEO          CEO
                                                Departure      Departures       Departure        Departures      Departure   Departures       Departure     Departure
                                                     (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)          (8)
# Directors Older than 70                        0.083***       0.170**
                                                   (3.47)         (2.42)
Directors' Average # Directorships                -0.007          -0.196
                                                  (-0.09)        (-1.09)
# Outside Directors Older than 70                                               0.086***          0.179**
                                                                                  (3.32)            (2.28)
Outside Directors' Avg # Directorships                                            -0.023           -0.188
                                                                                  (-0.35)          (-1.10)
Ln (Analyst Coverage)                                                                                              -0.005        0.020          -0.034
                                                                                                                  (-0.10)        (0.14)         (-1.40)
CEO Age > 62                                                                                                                                                  0.077
                                                                                                                                                              (1.28)
ROA                                               -0.269          -1.012          -0.260           -0.996          -0.187       -0.810          -0.158      -0.373**
                                                  (-1.33)        (-1.40)          (-1.28)          (-1.38)        (-0.93)       (-1.14)         (-1.34)      (-2.36)
Tobin's Q                                          0.013          -0.035           0.012           -0.036          0.012        -0.033           0.015        0.015
                                                   (0.70)        (-0.90)          (0.67)           (-0.90)         (0.74)       (-0.96)          (1.35)       (1.48)
Abnormal Returns Pre-13D                          -0.010          -0.004          -0.013           -0.008          0.014         0.105          -0.002        0.009
                                                  (-0.15)        (-0.02)          (-0.19)          (-0.05)         (0.22)        (0.64)         (-0.09)       (0.33)
Ln (Market Cap)                                   -0.008          0.015           -0.007            0.013          -0.010       -0.026         0.024**        0.010
                                                  (-0.42)         (0.27)          (-0.36)           (0.24)        (-0.36)       (-0.33)          (1.98)       (1.26)
Industry & Year FE                                  Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
Observations                                        335            335              335              335            339           339             339          300
R-Squared                                          0.170          0.239            0.169            0.239          0.139         0.218           0.252        0.279
Adjusted R-Squared                                -0.001          0.082           -0.002            0.082          -0.032        0.063           0.104        0.127




                                                                                 58
Table 6 (continued)
Panel B. Information asymmetry and settlement terms
Dependent Variable                                                Prob (Sale | Merger | Asset Sale | CEO Departure)
                                         (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)         (7)          (8)
Cash Flow Volatility                -0.00004**      -0.00004**   -0.00006*      -0.00006*      -0.00004**      -0.00004*   -0.00006*    -0.00005
                                       (-2.41)        (-2.07)      (-1.93)        (-1.79)         (-2.50)        (-1.85)      (-1.94)     (-1.65)
Ln (Market Cap)                                                   0.00859        0.00934                                     0.00670     0.00904
                                                                    (0.93)         (0.88)                                     (0.64)       (0.79)
ROA                                                                                              -0.05306       -0.13359    -0.07566    -0.16228
                                                                                                  (-0.35)        (-0.88)      (-0.47)     (-1.04)
Tobin's Q                                                                                       0.02325*        0.02278*     0.02170     0.02092
                                                                                                   (1.67)         (1.77)      (1.57)       (1.62)
Abnormal Returns Pre-13D                                                                         -0.00517       -0.00342    -0.00417    -0.00196
                                                                                                  (-0.19)        (-0.12)      (-0.15)     (-0.07)
Industry & Year FE                     No              Yes            No            Yes              No            Yes          No          Yes
Observations                           310             290           310            290             306            286          306         286
R-Squared                             0.003           0.255         0.006          0.257           0.027          0.282        0.028       0.284
Adjusted R-Squared                    0.000           0.117        -0.001          0.117           0.014          0.136        0.012       0.135




                                                                       59
Table 7
Board turnover around settlement agreements.
This table presents difference-in-differences analyses of board turnover around settlement agreements. Columns 1 to 3 examine
the number of new directors on the board and models 4 to 6 the number of director departures. For target firms that settle ("Settled
Campaigns"; all columns), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the year that the settlement
agreement is reached. For target firms that experience a proxy contest vote (columns 3 and 6), we select untargeted control firms
by propensity-score-matching on the proxy contest announcement year. For target firms that experience neither settlement nor
proxy contest vote ("Other Campaigns"; columns 2, 3, 5, 6), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on
the year of the initial activism announcement which, in most cases, is the year of the first 13D filing. The tabulated coefficients
measure how the difference between treatment firm board turnover and control firm board turnover has changed from the year
before treatment/placebo (the omitted base year) to year s±k, t±k, or c±k. Treatment can either be the settlement year (for settled
campaigns) or the proxy fight announcement year (for those proxy fights that went to a vote) or the year of the initial activism
announcement (for "Other Campaigns" and "All Campaigns"). Columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 (columns 3 and 6) include dummies for
the Settlement (Voted Proxy) main effect. All columns include a set of 11 d[s±k] dummies, one for each year relative to the
settlement year (for treatment firms) and matched placebo year (for control firms). In addition, columns 2, 3, 5, 6 (columns 3 and
6) include a set of 11 d[t±k] (d[c±k]) dummies, one for each year relative to the initial campaign launch year (proxy fight
announcement year) and matched placebo year. At the bottom of the table, p-values of partial F-tests indicate the statistical
significance of difference-in-differences estimations of board turnover around settlement agreements using year t-2 as the base
year. Coefficients and standard errors clustered by firm are estimated using OLS. T-statistics appear in parentheses. ***, **, *
denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.
Dependent Variable                         # Director Additions                               # Director Departures
Sample                            Settled         Settled          All               Settled         Settled           All
                               Campaigns &     Campaigns,     Campaigns &         Campaigns &      Campaigns,     Campaigns &
                               Control Firms       Other      Control Firms       Control Firms       Other       Control Firms
                                              Campaigns &                                        Campaigns &
                                              Control Firms                                      Control Firms
                                     (1)             (2)            (3)                 (4)             (5)             (6)
Settlement · d[s-5]              -0.207**         -0.110         -0.135              -0.087          -0.058          -0.063
                                   (-1.99)        (-1.06)        (-1.34)             (-0.81)         (-0.55)         (-0.62)
Settlement · d[s-4]                -0.003          0.082          0.057              -0.110          -0.087          -0.092
                                   (-0.02)         (0.70)         (0.52)             (-1.05)         (-0.85)         (-0.94)
Settlement · d[s-3]                -0.158         -0.102         -0.124              -0.033          -0.022          -0.021
                                   (-1.55)        (-1.01)        (-1.29)             (-0.32)         (-0.22)         (-0.21)
Settlement · d[s-2]                -0.116         -0.098         -0.117              -0.071          -0.090          -0.087
                                   (-0.95)        (-0.82)        (-1.02)             (-0.64)         (-0.85)         (-0.86)
Settlement · d[s]                1.399***       1.299***        1.270***            0.840***        0.742***        0.743***
                                   (9.51)          (9.00)         (9.02)              (6.49)          (5.88)          (6.04)
Settlement · d[s+1]               0.328**         0.237*         0.215*             0.375***         0.256*         0.253**
                                   (2.48)          (1.87)         (1.74)              (2.78)          (1.94)          (1.97)
Settlement · d[s+2]                 0.147          0.119          0.100             0.493***        0.416**         0.414***
                                   (1.00)          (0.84)         (0.73)              (2.90)          (2.58)          (2.63)
Settlement · d[s+3]                 0.008          0.023         -0.002               0.185           0.165           0.160
                                   (0.06)          (0.16)        (-0.02)              (1.29)          (1.20)          (1.17)
Settlement · d[s+4]                 0.055          0.064          0.039               0.191           0.169           0.160
                                   (0.26)          (0.32)         (0.19)              (0.82)          (0.76)          (0.73)
Settlement · d[s+5]                 0.000         -0.008         -0.030               0.082           0.043           0.035
                                   (0.00)         (-0.05)        (-0.17)              (0.44)          (0.24)          (0.20)
13D · d[t-5]                                     -0.095*         -0.083                              -0.068          -0.065
                                                  (-1.73)        (-1.54)                             (-1.28)         (-1.23)
13D · d[t-4]                                      -0.054         -0.037                              -0.047          -0.035
                                                  (-1.04)        (-0.73)                             (-0.93)         (-0.71)
13D · d[t-3]                                      -0.065         -0.055                              -0.050          -0.046
                                                  (-1.38)        (-1.18)                             (-1.05)         (-0.97)
13D · d[t-2]                                      -0.015         -0.003                              -0.040          -0.043
                                                  (-0.31)        (-0.06)                             (-0.84)         (-0.93)
13D · d[t]                                       0.101**        0.112**                               0.078           0.070
                                                   (2.01)         (2.29)                              (1.63)          (1.49)




                                                                60
Table 7 (continued)
13D · d[t+1]                                   0.171***        0.201***              0.068      0.076
                                                 (3.23)          (3.86)              (1.32)     (1.51)
13D · d[t+2]                                   0.125**         0.114**             0.150**    0.149**
                                                 (2.23)          (2.08)              (2.36)     (2.39)
13D · d[t+3]                                    -0.004           0.006              -0.038     -0.042
                                                (-0.06)          (0.12)             (-0.68)    (-0.74)
13D · d[t+4]                                    -0.009           0.008              -0.012      0.001
                                                (-0.15)          (0.13)             (-0.18)     (0.02)
13D · d[t+5]                                     0.038           0.054              -0.028     -0.018
                                                 (0.61)          (0.88)             (-0.46)    (-0.30)
Voted Contest · d[c-5]                                         0.435**                          0.286
                                                                 (2.20)                         (1.41)
Voted Contest · d[c-4]                                          -0.125                         -0.025
                                                                (-0.90)                        (-0.17)
Voted Contest · d[c-3]                                           0.005                         0.307*
                                                                 (0.03)                         (1.74)
Voted Contest · d[c-2]                                           0.120                          0.101
                                                                 (0.78)                         (0.78)
Voted Contest · d[c]                                             0.191                        0.339**
                                                                 (1.14)                         (2.18)
Voted Contest · d[c+1]                                         1.421***                       1.076***
                                                                 (5.85)                         (4.44)
Voted Contest · d[c+2]                                           0.226                        0.807***
                                                                 (1.31)                         (3.03)
Voted Contest · d[c+3]                                          -0.073                          0.192
                                                                (-0.49)                         (1.09)
Voted Contest · d[c+4]                                           0.254                          0.230
                                                                 (1.15)                         (1.02)
Voted Contest · d[c+5]                                          -0.043                          0.008
                                                                (-0.19)                         (0.04)
Firm & Year FE                    Yes              Yes            Yes       Yes      Yes         Yes
Observations                     12,922          80,864         85,867    12,922   80,864      85,867
Adjusted R-Squared               0.150            0.183          0.184     0.157    0.197       0.197
P-Values for Partial F-Tests Comparing Coefficients
  S · d[s] vs. S · d[s-2]        0.000            0.000         0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000
  S · d[s+1] vs. S · d[s-2]      0.001            0.011         0.012     0.002     0.016      0.018
  S · d[s+2] vs. S · d[s-2]      0.071            0.127         0.126     0.000     0.001      0.001
  S · d[s+3] vs. S · d[s-2]      0.407            0.407         0.431     0.114     0.105      0.117
  S · d[s+4] vs. S · d[s-2]      0.445            0.448         0.467     0.267     0.248      0.270
  S · d[s+5] vs. S · d[s-2]      0.546            0.627         0.638     0.402     0.449      0.483




                                                          61
Table 8
Activist-favored directors following settlement agreements.
This table documents the annual probability of activist-affiliated (column 1), activist favored but unaffiliated (column 2), and other directors (column 3) being
added to the boards of activism target companies following settlement agreements. Since hedge fund activists unlikely place directors on the boards of untargeted
companies, this analysis excludes control firms and target firm-years prior to the intervention. The time period identifiers measure the annual level of the
dependent variable relative to the average level among activism targets in years 3 to 5 following the activist intervention. Coefficients and standard errors clustered
by firm are estimated using linear probability models. T-statistics appear in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.

Dependent Variable          Prob (Favored and Affiliated Director)        Prob (Favored but Unaffiliated Director)                 Prob (Other New Director)
Sample                       Settled       Settled           All           Settled        Settled          All              Settled          Settled         All
                           Campaigns     Campaigns      Campaigns         Campaigns     Campaigns      Campaigns          Campaigns       Campaigns     Campaigns
                                          & Other                                        & Other                                            & Other
                                         Campaigns                                      Campaigns                                         Campaigns
                                (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)                (7)             (8)           (9)
Settlement · d[s]           0.240***      0.186***       0.187***           0.194        0.302***       0.306***           -0.443**        -0.492***    -0.500***
                              (3.10)         (6.11)         (6.41)          (1.63)         (6.73)         (7.00)            (-2.43)          (-8.34)      (-8.59)
Settlement · d[s+1]           0.076          0.037          0.046           0.079        0.155***       0.165***            -0.160         -0.194***    -0.213***
                              (1.00)         (0.84)         (1.07)          (0.70)         (3.02)         (3.27)            (-1.01)          (-3.17)      (-3.56)
Settlement · d[s+2]          -0.023       -0.070**       -0.067**           0.004          0.035          0.028              0.016            0.034        0.038
                             (-0.31)        (-2.52)        (-2.50)          (0.03)         (0.97)         (0.74)             (0.09)          (0.84)        (0.92)
13D · d[t]                                0.095***       0.092***                         0.057**         0.021                            -0.148***    -0.109***
                                             (4.20)         (4.22)                         (2.15)         (0.76)                             (-3.93)      (-2.82)
13D · d[t+1]                              0.069***       0.070***                          0.026          0.000                            -0.091***     -0.065**
                                             (3.94)         (4.04)                         (1.64)         (0.00)                             (-3.67)      (-2.36)
13D · d[t+2]                               0.043**        0.036**                         0.030**         0.003                            -0.069***      -0.035
                                             (2.45)         (2.08)                         (2.13)         (0.17)                             (-2.93)      (-1.35)
Voted Contest · d[c]                                      0.118**                                       0.256***                                        -0.360***
                                                            (2.08)                                        (4.29)                                          (-3.74)
Voted Contest · d[c+1]                                   0.119***                                       0.210***                                        -0.324***
                                                            (2.72)                                        (4.04)                                          (-4.26)
Voted Contest · d[c+2]                                      0.055                                         0.084                                           -0.120
                                                            (1.41)                                        (1.39)                                          (-1.39)
Firm & Year FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes          Yes
Observations                   792           3,059          3,369            792           3,059          3,369               792             3,059        3,369
Adjusted R-Squared            0.058          0.104          0.102           0.170          0.259          0.257              0.223            0.324        0.329




                                                                                 62
Table 9
Board renewal around settlement agreements.
This table presents triple-difference analyses of the relation between director characteristics and the probability of director turnover around settlement agreements.
Columns 1 to 3 examine additions of new directors and columns 4 to 6 departures of incumbent directors. For target firms that settle ("Settled Campaigns"; all
columns), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the year that the settlement agreement is reached. For target firms that experience
a proxy contest vote (columns 3 and 6), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the proxy contest announcement year. For target
firms that experience neither settlement nor proxy contest vote ("Other Campaigns"; columns 2, 3, 5, 6), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-
matching on the year of the initial activism announcement (in most cases the year of the first 13D filing). The tabulated coefficients measure how the difference
between treatment firms and control firms in the relation between director characteristics and director turnover changes from the three years before
treatment/placebo (POST=0) to the year of and the two years following treatment/placebo (POST=1). Treatment can either be the settlement year (for settled
campaigns) or the proxy fight announcement year (for those proxy fights that went to a vote) or the year of the initial activ ism announcement (for "Other
Campaigns" and "All Campaigns"). Columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 (columns 3 and 6) include dummies for the Settlement (Voted Proxy) main effect. All columns include
a dummy variable d[POSTS] that is equal to 1 in the year of and the two years following the settlement year (for treatment firms) or placebo year (for control
firms) and equal to 0 in the three years prior to the settlement or placebo. In addition, columns 2 and 3 (column 3) include another d[POSTD] (d[POSTC]) dummy
that is equal to 1 in the year of and the two years following the initial intervention year or matched placebo year (proxy fight announcement year or matched
placebo year) and equal to zero in the three years prior to the initial intervention year or placebo year (proxy fight announcement year or placebo year). All
columns include the main effects for the different director characteristics. All relevant two-way interactions are included. Coefficients and standard errors
clustered by firm are estimated using linear probability models. T-statistics appear in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.

Dependent Variable                                          Prob (Director Addition)                                     Prob (Director Departure)
Sample                                             Settled          Settled       All Campaigns &               Settled           Settled       All Campaigns &
                                                Campaigns &       Campaigns,         Control Firms           Campaigns &       Campaigns,        Control Firms
                                                Control Firms  Other Campaigns                               Control Firms Other Campaigns
                                                               & Control Firms                                               & Control Firms
                                                       (1)             (2)                 (3)                    (4)                (5)                 (6)
Settlement · d[POSTS] · Age >70                   -0.047***        -0.037**            -0.037**                 -0.031            -0.044              -0.046
                                                    (-2.87)         (-2.38)             (-2.40)                 (-0.98)           (-1.47)             (-1.58)
Settlement · d[POSTS] · Connectedness               0.011*          0.010*              0.010*                  -0.002            -0.002              -0.002
                                                     (1.85)          (1.78)              (1.83)                 (-0.37)           (-0.44)             (-0.35)
Settlement · d[POSTS] · Tenure                                                                                 0.003**           0.003**             0.003**
                                                                                                                (2.34)             (2.29)              (2.48)
13D · d[POSTD] · Age >70                                                -0.009              -0.010*                                0.009               0.012
                                                                        (-1.56)              (-1.85)                               (0.78)              (1.00)
13D · d[POSTD] · Connectedness                                         0.004**              0.004**                               -0.000              -0.001
                                                                         (2.27)              (2.08)                               (-0.10)             (-0.46)
13D · d[POSTD] · Tenure                                                                                                            0.000               0.000
                                                                                                                                   (0.55)              (0.19)



                                                                                  63
Table 9 (continued)
Voted Contest · d[POSTC] · Age >70                                 -0.029*                         -0.006
                                                                    (-1.69)                        (-0.14)
Voted Contest · d[POSTC] · Connectedness                             0.002                        -0.010*
                                                                    (0.40)                         (-1.65)
Voted Contest · d[POSTC] · Tenure                                                                0.007***
                                                                                                    (3.26)
Firm & Year FE                               Yes      Yes            Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes
Observations                               66,054   362,992        386,402    66,054   362,992    386,402
Adjusted R-Squared                          0.033    0.040          0.040      0.041    0.043       0.044




                                                              64
Table 10
Market reaction to settlement agreements.
This table documents the stock market reaction to settlement agreements. Panel A shows the average market reaction and Panel B examines the determinants of
the market reaction. The stock market reaction is measured over a 5-day window and a 7-day window centered on the date on which the settlement agreement is
filed. We measure the buy and hold return on the target firm over these windows relative to the buy and hold return on the value-weighted market index. The
sample includes settlements for activism campaigns that are launched between 2000 and 2013 and for which we have information on the market reaction and
control variables. Coefficients and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are estimated using OLS. T-statistics appear in parentheses. ***, **, * denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.
Panel A: Average market reaction
                                                                                             Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return
Event window                                                   Average                   Observations               Standard error          t-statistic
(t-2, t+2)                                                      1.16%                         374                      0.0043                  2.71
(t-3, t+3)                                                      1.28%                         374                      0.0049                  2.60

Panel B. Determinants of the market reaction
                                                          Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return (t-2, t+2)              Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return (t-3, t+3)
                                                       (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)            (8)
High Board Turnover                                  0.020*                                                0.021*
                                                     (1.87)                                                 (1.65)
CEO Departure                                                     0.026                                                0.027
                                                                  (1.20)                                               (1.16)
Strategic Transaction                                                       0.081***                                            0.089***
                                                                              (2.64)                                              (2.91)
High Impact Settlement                                                                     0.029***                                            0.031***
                                                                                              (2.79)                                             (2.61)
Proxy Fight                                          -0.012      -0.011      -0.013          -0.014        -0.010     -0.009     -0.011         -0.013
                                                     (-1.33)     (-1.24)     (-1.50)         (-1.63)       (-0.97)    (-0.87)    (-1.11)        (-1.25)
Ln (Market Cap)                                       0.000       0.000       0.001          -0.000         0.002      0.002      0.002          0.002
                                                     (0.03)       (0.17)      (0.31)         (-0.05)        (0.68)     (0.81)     (0.96)         (0.60)
Book / Market                                        -0.004      -0.003      -0.001          -0.004         0.003      0.003      0.005          0.003
                                                     (-0.48)     (-0.42)     (-0.16)         (-0.48)        (0.28)     (0.32)     (0.55)         (0.28)
Observations                                           360         360         360             360           360        360        360            360
R-Squared                                             0.015       0.009       0.032           0.028         0.012      0.007      0.028          0.024
Adjusted R-Squared                                    0.004      -0.002       0.021           0.017         0.001     -0.004      0.017          0.013




                                                                            65
Table 11
CEO turnover around settlement agreements.
This table presents difference-in-differences analyses of CEO turnover around settlement agreements. For target
firms that settle ("Settled Campaigns"; all columns), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-
matching on the year that the settlement agreement is reached. For target firms that experience a proxy contest vote
(column 3), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the proxy contest announcement
year. For target firms that experience neither settlement nor proxy contest vote ("Other Campaigns"; columns 2, 3),
we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the year of the initial activism announcement
(in most cases the year of the first 13D filing). The tabulated coefficients measure how the difference between
treatment firm CEO turnover and control firm CEO turnover has changed from the year before treatment/placebo
(the omitted base year) to year s±k, t±k, or c±k. Treatment can either be the settlement year (for settled campaigns) or
the proxy fight announcement year (for those proxy fights that went to a vote) or the year of the initial activism
announcement (for "Other Campaigns" and "All Campaigns"). Columns 2 and 3 (column 3) include dummies for
the Settlement (Voted Proxy) main effect. All columns include a set of 11 d[s±k] dummies, one for each year relative
to the settlement year (for treatment firms) and matched placebo year (for control firms). In addition, columns 2 and
3 (column 3) include another set of 11 d[t±k] (d[c±k]) dummies, one for each year relative to the initial campaign
launch year (proxy fight announcement year) and matched placebo year. At the bottom of the table, p-values of
partial F-tests indicate the statistical significance of difference-in-differences estimations of CEO turnover around
settlement agreements using year t-2 as the base year. Coefficients and standard errors clustered by firm are estimated
using OLS. T-statistics appear in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.
Dependent Variable                                                Prob (CEO Turnover)
Sample                             Settled Campaigns &          Settled Campaigns, Other All Campaigns & Control
                                       Control Firms             Campaigns & Control                     Firms
                                                                          Firms
                                               (1)                          (2)                            (3)
Settlement · d[s-5]                         -0.029                        -0.004                        -0.003
                                            (-0.94)                      (-0.14)                        (-0.11)
Settlement · d[s-4]                          0.010                        0.034                          0.036
                                             (0.32)                       (1.09)                         (1.21)
Settlement · d[s-3]                         -0.003                        0.011                          0.013
                                            (-0.10)                       (0.36)                         (0.44)
Settlement · d[s-2]                         -0.010                        -0.003                        -0.002
                                            (-0.31)                      (-0.09)                        (-0.05)
Settlement · d[s]                          0.077**                       0.063*                         0.064*
                                             (2.18)                       (1.84)                         (1.94)
Settlement · d[s+1]                       0.140***                      0.132***                      0.134***
                                             (3.43)                       (3.33)                         (3.48)
Settlement · d[s+2]                          0.056                        0.059                         0.061*
                                             (1.44)                       (1.54)                         (1.66)
Settlement · d[s+3]                          0.007                        0.027                          0.027
                                             (0.19)                       (0.76)                         (0.79)
Settlement · d[s+4]                          0.003                        0.031                          0.031
                                             (0.07)                       (0.81)                         (0.84)
Settlement · d[s+5]                         -0.021                        0.003                          0.004
                                            (-0.44)                       (0.07)                         (0.10)
13D · d[t-5]                                                              -0.021                        -0.019
                                                                         (-1.37)                        (-1.33)
13D · d[t-4]                                                              -0.007                        -0.009
                                                                         (-0.50)                        (-0.65)
13D · d[t-3]                                                              -0.015                        -0.016
                                                                         (-1.14)                        (-1.21)
13D · d[t-2]                                                              0.007                          0.004
                                                                          (0.49)                         (0.32)



                                                          66
Table 11 (continued)
13D · d[t]                                                 0.035**    0.035***
                                                             (2.56)      (2.62)
13D · d[t+1]                                                0.028*     0.029**
                                                             (1.86)      (2.01)
13D · d[t+2]                                                0.032*      0.029*
                                                             (1.94)      (1.80)
13D · d[t+3]                                                 0.009       0.007
                                                             (0.57)      (0.47)
13D · d[t+4]                                                -0.014      -0.011
                                                            (-0.95)     (-0.78)
13D · d[t+5]                                                -0.016      -0.018
                                                            (-0.95)     (-1.12)
Voted Contest · d[c-5]                                                   0.048
                                                                         (1.16)
Voted Contest · d[c-4]                                                  -0.004
                                                                        (-0.10)
Voted Contest · d[c-3]                                                   0.057
                                                                         (1.23)
Voted Contest · d[c-2]                                                   0.063
                                                                         (1.30)
Voted Contest · d[c]                                                     0.018
                                                                         (0.37)
Voted Contest · d[c+1]                                                0.178***
                                                                         (2.75)
Voted Contest · d[c+2]                                                 0.147**
                                                                         (2.53)
Voted Contest · d[c+3]                                                  -0.017
                                                                        (-0.36)
Voted Contest · d[c+4]                                                 0.156**
                                                                         (2.47)
Voted Contest · d[c+5]                                                   0.006
                                                                         (0.10)
Firm & Year FE                          Yes                 Yes           Yes
Observations                          12,162               67,304       71,603
Adjusted R-Squared                     0.037               0.071         0.073
P-Values for Partial F-Tests Comparing Coefficients
  S · d[s] vs. S · d[s-2]              0.015                0.065      0.068
  S · d[s+1] vs. S · d[s-2]            0.000                0.001      0.001
  S · d[s+2] vs. S · d[s-2]            0.077                0.100      0.097
  S · d[s+3] vs. S · d[s-2]            0.648                0.425      0.445
  S · d[s+4] vs. S · d[s-2]            0.750                0.404      0.420
  S · d[s+5] vs. S · d[s-2]            0.819                0.893      0.893




                                                      67
Table 12
The CEO turnover-performance sensitivity around settlement agreements.
This table presents analyses of the CEO turnover-performance sensitivity around settlement agreements. For target
firms that settle ("Settled Campaigns"; all columns), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-
matching on the year that the settlement agreement is reached. For target firms that experience a proxy contest vote
(column 3), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the proxy contest announcement
year. For target firms that experience neither settlement nor proxy contest vote ("Other Campaigns"; columns 2, 3),
we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the year of the initial activism announcement
(in most cases the year of the first 13D filing). The tabulated coefficients on the three-way interactions measure how
the difference between treatment firms' CEO turnover-sensitivity and control firms' CEO turnover-sensitivity
changes from the three years before treatment/placebo (POST=0) to the year of and the two years following
treatment/placebo (POST=1). Treatment can either be the settlement year (for settled campaigns) or the proxy fight
announcement year (for those proxy fights that went to a vote) or the year of the initial activism announcement (for
"Other Campaigns" and "All Campaigns"). Columns 1 to 3 (column 3) include dummies for the 13D and Settlement
(Voted Proxy) main effects. All columns include a dummy variable d[POSTS] that is equal to 1 in the year of and
the two years following the settlement year (for treatment firms) or placebo year (for control firms) and equal to 0
in the three years prior to the settlement or placebo. In addition, columns 2 and 3 (column 3) include d[POSTD]
(d[POSTC]) dummy that is equal to 1 in the year of and the two years following the initial intervention year or
matched placebo year (proxy fight announcement year or matched placebo year) and equal to zero in the three years
prior to the initial intervention year or placebo year (proxy fight announcement year or placebo year). All relevant
two-way interactions are included. Coefficients and standard errors clustered by firm are estimated using linear
probability models. T-statistics appear in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.

Dependent Variable                                                    Prob (CEO Turnover)
Sample                                        Settled Campaigns &      Settled Campaigns,        All Campaigns &
                                                  Control Firms        Other Campaigns &          Control Firms
                                                                         Control Firms
                                                        (1)                     (2)                      (3)
Stock Returns                                       -0.038***               -0.029***                -0.030***
                                                      (-3.54)                 (-6.22)                  (-6.63)
Settlement · d[POSTS] · Stock Returns               -0.109***               -0.094***                -0.090***
                                                      (-3.42)                 (-3.02)                  (-2.88)
13D · d[POSTD] · Stock Returns                                                -0.015                   -0.015
                                                                              (-1.14)                  (-1.20)
Voted Contest · d[POSTC] · Stock Returns                                                                0.007
                                                                                                       (0.12)
Year FE                                                Yes                     Yes                       Yes
Observations                                          7,499                   41,076                   43,691
Adjusted R-Squared                                    0.017                   0.012                     0.013




                                                         68
Table 13
Payout policy around settlement agreements.
This table presents difference-in-differences analyses of payout yield around settlement agreements. For target firms
that settle ("Settled Campaigns"; all columns), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on
the year that the settlement agreement is reached. For target firms that experience a proxy contest vote (column 3),
we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the proxy contest announcement year. For target
firms that experience neither settlement nor proxy contest vote ("Other Campaigns"; columns 2, 3), we select
untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the year of the initial activism announcement (in most
cases the year of the first 13D filing). The tabulated coefficients measure how the difference between treatment firm
and control firm payout policy has changed from the year before treatment/placebo (the omitted base year) to year
s±k, t±k, or c±k. Treatment can either be the settlement year (for settled campaigns) or the proxy fight announcement
year (for those proxy fights that went to a vote) or the year of the initial activism announcement (for "Other
Campaigns" and "All Campaigns"). Columns 2 and 3 (column 3) include dummies for the Settlement (Voted Proxy)
main effect. All columns include a set of 11 d[s±k] dummies, one for each year relative to the settlement year (for
treatment firms) and matched placebo year (for control firms). In addition, columns 2 and 3 (column 3) include
another set of 11 d[t±k] (d[c±k]) dummies, one for each year relative to the initial campaign launch year (proxy fight
announcement year) and matched placebo year. At the bottom of the table, p-values of partial F-tests indicate the
statistical significance of difference-in-differences estimations of payout yield around settlement agreements using
year t-2 as the base year. Coefficients and standard errors clustered by firm are estimated using OLS. T-statistics
appear in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively (two-
tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.

Dependent Variable                                                   Payout Yield
Sample                           Settled Campaigns &          Settled Campaigns, Other    All Campaigns & Control
                                     Control Firms             Campaigns & Control                Firms
                                                                         Firms
                                           (1)                             (2)                          (3)
Settlement · d[s-5]                   -0.015***                        -0.010**                    -0.010**
                                        (-3.18)                         (-2.14)                      (-2.13)
Settlement · d[s-4]                     -0.008                          -0.003                       -0.002
                                        (-1.52)                         (-0.47)                      (-0.38)
Settlement · d[s-3]                    -0.010**                         -0.005                       -0.005
                                        (-2.04)                         (-1.07)                      (-1.06)
Settlement · d[s-2]                    -0.011**                         -0.008                      -0.007*
                                        (-2.27)                         (-1.63)                      (-1.65)
Settlement · d[s]                        0.011                          0.011*                       0.012*
                                         (1.60)                          (1.73)                       (1.90)
Settlement · d[s+1]                     -0.002                          -0.001                       -0.000
                                        (-0.32)                         (-0.21)                      (-0.08)
Settlement · d[s+2]                      0.005                           0.008                        0.009
                                         (0.76)                          (1.11)                       (1.30)
Settlement · d[s+3]                     -0.005                           0.000                        0.001
                                        (-0.67)                          (0.04)                       (0.16)
Settlement · d[s+4]                     -0.002                           0.005                        0.005
                                        (-0.32)                          (0.68)                       (0.79)
Settlement · d[s+5]                     -0.007                          -0.001                       -0.001
                                        (-0.91)                         (-0.16)                      (-0.11)
13D · d[t-5]                                                            -0.001                       -0.001
                                                                        (-0.24)                      (-0.32)
13D · d[t-4]                                                            -0.003                       -0.003
                                                                        (-1.12)                      (-1.38)
13D · d[t-3]                                                            -0.003                       -0.003
                                                                        (-1.47)                      (-1.45)
13D · d[t-2]                                                            -0.001                       -0.001
                                                                        (-0.50)                      (-0.49)


                                                         69
Table 13 (continued)
13D · d[t]                                                  0.001     0.001
                                                            (0.51)    (0.50)
13D · d[t+1]                                                0.004     0.004
                                                            (1.58)    (1.53)
13D · d[t+2]                                                0.002     0.002
                                                            (0.80)    (0.57)
13D · d[t+3]                                                0.001     0.000
                                                            (0.31)    (0.15)
13D · d[t+4]                                               -0.004    -0.004
                                                           (-1.15)   (-1.24)
13D · d[t+5]                                               -0.005    -0.005
                                                           (-1.53)   (-1.55)
Voted Contest · d[c-5]                                               0.025*
                                                                      (1.82)
Voted Contest · d[c-4]                                                0.010
                                                                      (1.30)
Voted Contest · d[c-3]                                                0.005
                                                                      (0.77)
Voted Contest · d[c-2]                                                0.005
                                                                      (0.56)
Voted Contest · d[c]                                                 -0.002
                                                                     (-0.35)
Voted Contest · d[c+1]                                                0.005
                                                                      (0.59)
Voted Contest · d[c+2]                                               -0.005
                                                                     (-0.63)
Voted Contest · d[c+3]                                               -0.001
                                                                     (-0.09)
Voted Contest · d[c+4]                                                0.002
                                                                      (0.22)
Voted Contest · d[c+5]                                               -0.001
                                                                     (-0.11)
Firm & Year FE                          Yes                 Yes        Yes
Observations                          14,674               88,487    93,674
Adjusted R-Squared                     0.280               0.283      0.283
P-Values for Partial F-Tests Comparing Coefficients
  S · d[s] vs. S · d[s-2]              0.000               0.002     0.001
  S · d[s+1] vs. S · d[s-2]            0.108               0.247     0.218
  S · d[s+2] vs. S · d[s-2]            0.016               0.022     0.018
  S · d[s+3] vs. S · d[s-2]            0.318               0.191     0.180
  S · d[s+4] vs. S · d[s-2]            0.186               0.049     0.048
  S · d[s+5] vs. S · d[s-2]            0.517               0.316     0.320




                                                      70
Table 14
Stock market delisting following settlement agreements.
This table presents analyses of the probability of different types of stock market delisting following settlement agreements. For target firms that settle (all columns), we select
untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the year that the settlement agreement is reached. For target firms that experience a proxy contest vote (columns 3, 6, 9),
we selected untargeted control firms by matching on the proxy contest announcement year. For target firms that experience neither settlement nor proxy contest vote (columns 2,
3, 5, 6, 8, 9), we select untargeted control firms by matching on the year of the initial activism announcement (in most cases the year of the first 13D filing). We exclude firm-years
prior to the event years. To identify the coefficients in the absence of pre-periods, we include as a base group firms that were neither targeted nor selected as matched control firms.
The tabulated coefficients measure the difference in the probability of delisting between treatment firms and matched control firms in the years following the treatment or placebo
event. Treatment event can be the settlement announcement (all columns), the proxy fight announcement (columns 3, 6, 9), or the initial activism campaign announcement (columns
2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9). All columns include a set of 6 d[s+k] dummies, one for each year relative to the settlement year (for treatment firms) and matched placebo year (for control firms).
In addition, columns 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9 (columns 3, 6, 9) include another set of 6 d[t+k] (d[c+k]) dummies, one for each year relative to the initial campaign launch year (proxy fight
announcement year) and matched placebo year. Coefficients and standard errors clustered by firm are estimated using linear probability models. T-statistics appear in parentheses.
***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.
Dependent Variable                Prob              Prob        Prob (Distress         Prob             Prob         Prob (Distress        Prob              Prob        Prob (Distress
                               (Delisting)     (Acquisition /     Delisting)       (Delisting)      (Acquisition /     Delisting)       (Delisting)     (Acquisition /     Delisting)
                                               Going Private                                        Going Private                                       Going Private
                                                 Delisting)                                           Delisting)                                          Delisting)
Sample                           Settled Campaigns & Control Firms                 Settled Campaigns, Other Campaigns &                      All Campaigns & Control Firms
                                                                                                 Control Firms
                                 (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)               (9)
Settlement · d[s]            0.064***          0.067***            0.011            0.028             0.026             0.010            0.028             0.026             0.010
                               (2.93)            (3.43)            (1.18)           (1.27)            (1.32)            (1.07)           (1.27)            (1.33)            (1.07)
Settlement · d[s+1]            0.010             0.022            -0.002           -0.005             0.002            -0.003           -0.005             0.002            -0.003
                               (0.46)            (1.23)           (-0.18)          (-0.24)            (0.11)           (-0.29)          (-0.24)            (0.10)           (-0.36)
Settlement · d[s+2]            0.009             0.003             0.000           -0.004            -0.011            -0.004           -0.004            -0.011            -0.004
                               (0.46)            (0.19)            (0.02)          (-0.21)           (-0.70)           (-0.47)          (-0.20)           (-0.71)           (-0.49)
Settlement · d[s+3]            0.008             0.009             0.009           -0.006            -0.006             0.006           -0.006            -0.006             0.006
                               (0.45)            (0.61)            (0.77)          (-0.30)           (-0.40)            (0.54)          (-0.30)           (-0.41)            (0.57)
Settlement · d[s+4]            0.021             0.010             0.003            0.009            -0.007             0.005            0.009            -0.007             0.005
                               (1.00)            (0.57)            (0.41)           (0.43)           (-0.43)            (0.69)           (0.43)           (-0.41)            (0.67)
Settlement · d[s+5]           0.048*            0.043*             0.007            0.041             0.033             0.009            0.041             0.034             0.009
                               (1.72)            (1.85)            (0.59)           (1.47)            (1.43)            (0.75)           (1.48)            (1.45)            (0.74)
13D · d[t]                                                                        0.066***          0.067***            0.004          0.066***          0.067***            0.004
                                                                                    (6.17)            (7.11)            (0.90)           (6.25)            (7.17)            (0.85)
13D · d[t+1]                                                                      0.027***          0.035***           -0.001          0.027***          0.034***           -0.001
                                                                                    (2.85)            (4.25)           (-0.24)           (2.82)            (4.23)           (-0.28)
13D · d[t+2]                                                                        0.005            0.012*             0.001            0.006            0.013*             0.003
                                                                                    (0.57)            (1.73)            (0.28)           (0.63)            (1.83)            (0.60)
13D · d[t+3]                                                                      0.021**            0.013*            0.009*          0.021**            0.013*            0.009*
                                                                                    (2.20)            (1.79)            (1.87)           (2.16)            (1.80)            (1.79)




                                                                                          71
Table 14 (continued)
13D · d[t+4]                                        0.013     0.017**   -0.000      0.013    0.018**      -0.000
                                                    (1.32)     (2.18)   (-0.07)     (1.38)     (2.21)     (-0.10)
13D · d[t+5]                                        0.015     0.023**   -0.007      0.014    0.021**      -0.006
                                                    (1.31)     (2.41)   (-1.60)     (1.30)     (2.26)     (-1.44)
Voted Contest · d[c]                                                               -0.008      0.014    -0.026***
                                                                                   (-0.23)     (0.46)     (-3.47)
Voted Contest · d[c+1]                                                             -0.006    -0.047**     -0.011
                                                                                   (-0.17)    (-2.49)     (-0.81)
Voted Contest · d[c+2]                                                              0.014      0.004       0.015
                                                                                    (0.40)     (0.12)      (0.70)
Voted Contest · d[c+3]                                                            0.115**    0.097**       0.015
                                                                                    (2.20)     (2.25)      (0.50)
Voted Contest · d[c+4]                                                              0.028     -0.001       0.012
                                                                                    (0.73)    (-0.03)      (0.78)
Voted Contest · d[c+5]                                                             -0.022     -0.022       0.010
                                                                                   (-0.63)    (-0.88)      (0.40)
Industry & Year FE         Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Observations             84,178   84,178   84,178   123,663   123,663   123,663   126,565    126,565     126,565
Adjusted R-Squared        0.044    0.028    0.027    0.036     0.023     0.021      0.036      0.023       0.021




                                                         72
Table 15
Operating performance around settlement agreements.
This table presents difference-in-differences analyses of firm performance around settlement agreements. Columns 1 to 3 examine
Return on Assets and models 4 to 6 Tobin's Q. For target firms that settle ("Settled Campaigns"; all columns), we select untargeted
control firms by propensity-score-matching on the year that the settlement agreement is reached. For target firms that experience
a proxy contest vote (columns 3 and 6), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the proxy contest
announcement year. For target firms that experience neither settlement nor proxy contest vote ("Other Campaigns"; columns 2,
3, 5, 6), we select untargeted control firms by propensity-score-matching on the year of the initial activism announcement (in
most cases the year of the first 13D filing). The tabulated coefficients measure how the difference between treatment firm and
control firm operating performance has changed from the year before treatment/placebo (the omitted base year) to year s±k, t±k,
or c±k. Treatment can either be the settlement year (for settled campaigns) or the proxy fight announcement year (for those proxy
fights that went to a vote) or the year of the initial activism announcement (for "Other Campaigns" and "All Campaigns").
Columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 (columns 3 and 6) include dummies for the Settlement (Voted Proxy) main effect. All columns include a
set of 11 d[s±k] dummies, one for each year relative to the settlement year (for treatment firms) and matched placebo year (for
control firms). In addition, columns 2, 3, 5, 6 (columns 3 and 6) include another set of 11 d[t±k] (d[c±k]) dummies, one for each
year relative to the initial campaign launch year (proxy fight announcement year) and matched placebo year. At the bottom of
the table, p-values of partial F-tests indicate the statistical significance of difference-in-differences estimations of firm
performance around settlement agreements using year t-2 as the base year. Coefficients and standard errors clustered by firm are
estimated using OLS. T-statistics appear in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively (two-tailed). All variables are defined in Appendix A.

Dependent Variable                        Return on Assets (ROA)                                     Tobin's Q
Sample                            Settled          Settled         All               Settled          Settled            All
                               Campaigns &      Campaigns,    Campaigns &         Campaigns &       Campaigns,      Campaigns &
                               Control Firms        Other     Control Firms       Control Firms         Other       Control Firms
                                               Campaigns &                                         Campaigns &
                                               Control Firms                                       Control Firms
                                    (1)               (2)           (3)                  (4)              (5)             (6)
Settlement · d[s-5]              0.025**           0.018*        0.020*               -0.027            0.143            0.119
                                  (2.23)            (1.70)        (1.93)              (-0.23)           (1.15)          (0.96)
Settlement · d[s-4]                0.014            0.008         0.010               -0.029            0.142            0.116
                                  (1.59)            (0.93)        (1.24)              (-0.33)           (1.53)          (1.25)
Settlement · d[s-3]                0.001           -0.003        -0.001               -0.109            0.059            0.028
                                  (0.18)           (-0.35)       (-0.08)              (-1.20)           (0.64)          (0.30)
Settlement · d[s-2]                0.002            0.002         0.003               -0.021           0.147*            0.117
                                  (0.35)            (0.28)        (0.55)              (-0.24)           (1.69)          (1.35)
Settlement · d[s]                 -0.001            0.003         0.005                0.050         0.223***          0.199**
                                  (-0.24)           (0.53)        (0.79)               (0.60)           (2.66)          (2.36)
Settlement · d[s+1]                0.013            0.013        0.015*                0.117          0.264**           0.239*
                                  (1.60)            (1.62)        (1.89)               (0.89)           (1.99)          (1.82)
Settlement · d[s+2]                0.004            0.000         0.003              0.251**         0.357***         0.333***
                                  (0.43)            (0.04)        (0.33)               (2.07)           (3.06)          (2.87)
Settlement · d[s+3]                0.007            0.002         0.004                0.153           0.228*            0.207
                                  (0.54)            (0.14)        (0.35)               (1.10)           (1.73)          (1.58)
Settlement · d[s+4]                0.004           -0.003        -0.000                0.234          0.337**           0.307*
                                  (0.36)           (-0.22)       (-0.00)               (1.45)           (2.05)          (1.88)
Settlement · d[s+5]                0.008            0.003         0.005                0.317          0.431**           0.397*
                                  (0.76)            (0.28)        (0.49)               (1.45)           (2.10)          (1.94)
13D · d[t-5]                                        0.007         0.006                                -0.009           -0.012
                                                    (1.25)        (1.16)                               (-0.13)          (-0.17)
13D · d[t-4]                                        0.007         0.007                                -0.024           -0.034
                                                    (1.59)        (1.43)                               (-0.37)          (-0.54)
13D · d[t-3]                                       0.008*         0.006                                -0.004           -0.003
                                                    (1.89)        (1.54)                               (-0.08)          (-0.06)
13D · d[t-2]                                      0.007**        0.005*                                -0.007           -0.002
                                                    (2.28)        (1.88)                               (-0.14)          (-0.05)
13D · d[t]                                       -0.009***     -0.009***                               -0.066           -0.067
                                                   (-3.07)       (-2.93)                               (-1.42)          (-1.49)
13D · d[t+1]                                       -0.003        -0.003                                 0.014            0.006
                                                   (-0.61)       (-0.67)                                (0.24)          (0.12)



                                                               73
Table 15 (continued)
13D · d[t+2]                                     0.001           0.000             -0.039     -0.040
                                                (0.21)           (0.06)            (-0.66)    (-0.68)
13D · d[t+3]                                     0.005           0.003              0.096      0.090
                                                (0.83)           (0.57)             (1.40)    (1.34)
13D · d[t+4]                                     0.006           0.005              0.071      0.057
                                                (1.14)           (0.94)             (0.94)    (0.79)
13D · d[t+5]                                    0.010*           0.008              0.023      0.038
                                                (1.66)           (1.45)             (0.26)    (0.46)
Voted Contest · d[c-5]                                          -0.001                        -0.210
                                                                (-0.04)                       (-0.80)
Voted Contest · d[c-4]                                           0.006                        -0.103
                                                                 (0.30)                       (-0.42)
Voted Contest · d[c-3]                                           0.009                         0.018
                                                                 (0.53)                       (0.06)
Voted Contest · d[c-2]                                           0.013                        -0.045
                                                                 (0.99)                       (-0.19)
Voted Contest · d[c]                                             0.010                         0.058
                                                                 (1.07)                       (0.52)
Voted Contest · d[c+1]                                         0.039**                        -0.073
                                                                 (2.15)                       (-0.45)
Voted Contest · d[c+2]                                           0.028                         0.088
                                                                 (1.56)                       (0.50)
Voted Contest · d[c+3]                                         0.046**                         0.154
                                                                 (2.03)                       (0.48)
Voted Contest · d[c+4]                                         0.062**                         0.324
                                                                 (2.43)                       (1.44)
Voted Contest · d[c+5]                                         0.060**                         0.219
                                                                 (2.16)                       (0.86)
Firm & Year FE                    Yes              Yes            Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes
Observations                     15,642          95,711        101,574    15,805   96,957    102,880
Adjusted R-Squared               0.752            0.704           0.71     0.536    0.515      0.514
P-Values for Partial F-Tests Comparing Coefficients
  S · d[s] vs. S · d[s-2]        0.621            0.842         0.864     0.552    0.530      0.502
  S · d[s+1] vs. S · d[s-2]      0.212            0.195         0.182     0.281    0.373      0.354
  S · d[s+2] vs. S · d[s-2]      0.859            0.898         0.961     0.065    0.152      0.141
  S · d[s+3] vs. S · d[s-2]      0.708            0.994         0.931     0.217    0.566      0.525
  S · d[s+4] vs. S · d[s-2]      0.856            0.730         0.788     0.137    0.292      0.292
  S · d[s+5] vs. S · d[s-2]      0.576            0.906         0.872     0.140    0.197      0.206
  S · d[s+1] vs. S · d[s]        0.027            0.138         0.118     0.605    0.756      0.760
  S · d[s+2] vs. S · d[s]        0.562            0.767         0.851     0.103    0.266      0.265
  S · d[s+3] vs. S · d[s]        0.489            0.911         0.992     0.476    0.972      0.954
  S · d[s+4] vs. S · d[s]        0.618            0.630         0.701     0.226    0.470      0.491
  S · d[s+5] vs. S · d[s]        0.388            0.987         0.967     0.254    0.362      0.387




                                                          74
Table 16
Settlement agreements and annual director elections.
This table examines whether directors who are affiliated with or desired by the activists and appointed to the board
following a settlement agreement receive lower voting support at future annual shareholder meetings than incumbent
directors who were already on the board before the activism campaign launch. The sample for this analysis is
restricted to settled activism campaigns. The independent variables of interest are indicator variables for the different
director classifications, the omitted base case being incumbent directors who had been on the board prior to the
activist intervention. Coefficients and standard errors clustered by firm are estimated using OLS. T-statistics appear
in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively (two-tailed). All
variables are defined in Appendix A.

                                                                    Fraction of       Fraction of        Fraction of
                                                                       Votes         Votes Against      Votes Withheld
                                                                    Supporting         Director
                                                                     Director
                                                                         (1)                (2)               (3)
Activist-Affiliated Directors Added Following Settlement              0.017**            -0.018**           0.001
                                                                       (2.44)             (-2.59)           (0.82)
Activist-Desired Directors Added Following Settlement                0.038***           -0.039***           0.000
                                                                       (3.69)             (-3.71)           (0.76)
Other Directors Added Following Settlement                            0.039**            -0.040**           0.001*
                                                                       (2.58)             (-2.59)           (1.74)
Firm & Year FE                                                          Yes                 Yes              Yes
Observations                                                           4,027               4,027            4,027
Adjusted R-Squared                                                     0.135               0.135            0.118
P-Values for Partial F-Tests Comparing Coefficients
  Affiliated Directors = Other Directors                               0.155              0.158              0.997
  Affiliated Directors = Desired Directors                             0.045              0.046              0.791
  Desired Directors = Other Directors                                  0.943              0.927              0.615




                                                          75
