                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   LUMPY DURABLE CONSUMPTION DEMAND AND THE LIMITED AMMUNITION
                       OF MONETARY POLICY

                                        Alisdair McKay
                                      Johannes F. Wieland

                                      Working Paper 26175
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26175


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




We are grateful to Adrien Auclert, Robert Barsky, David Berger, Jeff Campbell, Adam Guren,
Christopher House, Rohan Kekre, Emi Nakamura, Valerie Ramey, Jon Steinsson, Stephen Terry,
Joe Vavra, Venky Venkateswaran, Tom Winberry, Christian Wolf, and seminar participants at
Boston University, University of Michigan, the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and St.
Louis, the 2019 ASSA meetings, U.C. Berkeley, Chicago Booth, SED 2019, and the 2019 NBER
Summer Institute. Charles Fries provided excellent research assistance. Wieland is grateful to the
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago for its hospitality while completing much of this paper. The
views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alisdair McKay and Johannes F. Wieland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lumpy Durable Consumption Demand and the Limited Ammunition of Monetary Policy
Alisdair McKay and Johannes F. Wieland
NBER Working Paper No. 26175
August 2019
JEL No. E21,E43,E52

                                          ABSTRACT

In a fixed-cost model of durable consumption demand, we show that an important channel of
monetary policy transmission is to prompt households to accelerate the timing of their
adjustments. We highlight three ways in which the power of monetary policy is reduced relative
to the standard New Keynesian model. First, there is an intertemporal trade-off in aggregate
demand as encouraging households to adjust today leaves fewer households acquiring durables
going forward. Second, households make a short-term decision--adjusting now rather than in the
near future--so the short-term real interest rate is the opportunity cost of adjusting today. As a
result, forward guidance is less effective at shifting aggregate demand than contemporaneous
interest rate cuts. Third, monetary policy becomes less powerful in a recession. The literature has
debated whether fixed-cost models generate state dependence in general equilibrium; we show
that if one conditions on the magnitude of the recession, the model's state dependence is
unaffected by general equilibrium attenuation.


Alisdair McKay
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER
alisdair.mckay@gmail.com

Johannes F. Wieland
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jfwieland@ucsd.edu
1    Introduction

Expenditure on durable consumption goods is a particularly interest-rate-sensitive and volatile
component of aggregate demand. At the micro-level these expenditures are infrequent and lumpy.
Do the micro-foundations of durable goods demand affect the monetary transmission mechanism?
We explore this question using a heterogeneous-agent New Keynesian model with fixed costs for
durable adjustment.
    Our work builds on a growing literature that models aggregate demand using rich micro-
foundations for household consumption that are disciplined by micro-data.1 Most of this literature
focuses its attention on the determination of non-durable consumption and abstracts from consumer
durables. Our interest in durable goods is motivated by the fact that they are more sensitive to
monetary policy and in general more cyclical than non-durable consumption. For example, durable
goods account for 61% of the response of total consumption to an identified monetary shock (see
Section 3).
    We start with a household decision problem with incomplete markets and fixed costs of adjusting
durable holdings similar to the one developed by Berger and Vavra (2015). Since our focus is on
monetary policy transmission, we benchmark the model against the empirical sensitivity of durable
demand to interest rates using identified monetary policy shocks and quasi-experimental evidence.
House (2014) has pointed out that standard fixed-cost models have very high interest elasticities of
durable expenditure. We show that including two particular ingredients in the model are important
to match the empirical evidence, without which the model-implied interest elasticity of durable
demand is an order of magnitude larger than our empirical benchmarks. First, operating costs are
a component of the user cost of durables that is not sensitive to interest rates. Second, match-
quality shocks reduce the service flow from a household's existing durable stock and prompt an
inframarginal adjustment. We use micro-data on durable adjustments to estimate the frequency of
match-quality shocks.
    We then embed this model of lumpy durable demand within a general equilibrium context that
features nominal rigidities in the form of sticky wages. A key channel of monetary transmission is
to accelerate the timing of adjustments of household durable stocks. We stress three implications
  1
    See Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017), McKay and Reis (2016), Gornemann et al. (2016), McKay et al. (2016),
Auclert (2019), Kaplan et al. (2018), Werning (2015) among others.



                                                     1
of this mechanism for the effects monetary policy. First, a substantial part of the stimulative effect
of low interest rates arises from intertemporally shifting demand from the future. After households
have accelerated their adjustments, there are fewer households near the adjustment threshold and
demand is weaker than it otherwise would have been. Second, the decision to adjust the durable
stock has a short-term nature as marginal households are likely to adjust their durables soon in the
absence of stimulus. The opportunity cost of accelerating the adjustment is the foregone interest
over the time period that the adjustment is brought forward. As a result, short-term interest rates
are especially relevant for the timing decision, whereas forward guidance is a much less powerful in
shifting aggregate demand. Third, durable demand becomes less sensitive to stimulus if there are
fewer households near the adjustment threshold. As a result, monetary policy loses power just when
it is needed following shocks that reduce durable demand, which has been documented empirically
by Tenreyro and Thwaites (2016).
   The intertemporal shifting of demand implies that a central bank has scope to affect the am-
munition available, or "policy space," in the future. This gives some credibility to the notion that a
central bank facing an effective lower bound on nominal rates (ELB) may want to keep its powder
dry if it is concerned about weaker demand in the future.
   The implications of our model stand in contrast to standard models of the monetary transmission
mechanism. As a point of reference, consider the linearized consumption Euler equation, which is
at the heart of standard models of the monetary transmission mechanism (e.g. Woodford, 2003;
Gali, 2008). Solving the Euler equation forward and using the national income identity yields
                                                       
                                                1
                                          yt = - Et          rt+s
                                                
                                                       s=0

where yt is the log-deviation of output from its steady state value, 1/ is the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution, and rt is the deviation of the real interest rate. From this equation, we can make
three observations: (i) output is purely forward-looking and the history of interest rates is irrelevant.
Because of this, future policy space is independent of current policy. (ii) Future interest rate
reductions perfectly substitute for reductions in the contemporaneous interest rate. As a result,
forward guidance is a powerful tool for managing demand at the ELB. (iii) The effect of an interest
rate change on output is constant and unrelated to the state of the economy. These features of
standard models are mirrored in the ways many central banks operate: low-for-longer policies
(e.g. Reifschneider and Williams, 2000; Eggertsson and Woodford, 2003) are viewed as important
                                                   2
unconventional monetary policy tools and managing policy space is not viewed as an important
policy consideration.
      We summarize the quantitative magnitude of our results by calculating how large an output
gap the central bank can close today by committing to cut real interest rates 2.5 percentage points
for four quarters. We use this as a measure of policy space. This calculation is motivated by the
fact that current estimates of the nominal natural rate of interest in the U.S. are in the range of
2.5%2 and that a central bank might plausibly commit to a policy path for one year. If future
interest rates are as effective in stimulating demand as current interest rates, the central bank has
6.2 percentage points of policy space. Given that forward guidance is less powerful in our model,
policy space falls to 4.8%. If the central bank has previously done four quarters of stimulus, policy
space is reduced to 3.3%. If on top of this, there is a recession that reduces durable expenditure
by the amount observed in the Great Recession, policy space falls further to 2.0%. In the recession
scenario, policy space would have been 2.9% had the central bank not previously stimulated the
economy. These results show that monetary policy has limited ammunition during recessions and
that current stimulus can substantially reduce the central bank's ability to manage reductions in
demand in the future.
      Our findings can help resolve the forward guidance puzzle. Standard monetary models predict
implausibly large output responses to forward guidance (Del Negro et al., 2015; Carlstrom et al.,
2015). In response, one strand of literature has developed alternative models in which non-durable
consumption is less forward looking (McKay et al., 2016; Werning, 2015; Farhi and Werning, 2017;
Gabaix, 2016; Angeletos and Lian, 2018). We show that including durable goods makes aggregate
demand less sensitive to promises of lower interest rates far in the future. Though non-durable
expenditures are still quite forward looking in our model, the overall response of the economy to
monetary stimulus is shaped by the patterns of durable expenditure.
      This paper also relates to the literature on the aggregate implications of lumpiness in investment
dynamics. The literature has debated how strongly general equilibrium forces attenuate the non-
linear dynamics generated by microeconomic lumpiness (e.g. Khan and Thomas, 2008; Bachmann
et al., 2013). We show that the state-dependence of the power of monetary policy is essentially
unaffected by general equilibrium movements of the real interest rate if one holds fixed the size
  2
    See, for example, the Summary of Economic Projections of the Federal Reserve released in June 2019 in which
the central tendency of Federal Funds Rate in the longer run is the range 2.5-3.0%.


                                                      3
of the recession. This is because the size of the recession is closely linked to the decline in the
extensive margin, which acts as a sufficient statistic for state dependence in our model. This per-
spective differs from recent insights on the role of the interest elasticity of durable demand in the
aggregation of heterogeneous firm models (House, 2014; Winberry, 2018; Koby and Wolf, 2018).
The interest rate elasticity is a key determinant of the cyclicality of the extensive margin, and
thereby the degree of state dependence for a given sized shock. We instead treat the size of the
recession as an observable moment that we match, which pins down the extensive margin decline
and the loss of monetary policy effectiveness.
   Our framework builds on Berger and Vavra (2015), who document sizable state dependence of
durable expenditures in a flexible price model. We show that durable goods are also important
for the monetary transmission mechanism in other ways, specifically the reduced power of forward
guidance and the intertemporal trade-off in aggregate demand. Moreover, we provide a novel
perspective on the general equilibrium attenuation of state dependence.
   We are not the first to emphasize the importance of durable goods for the monetary policy
transmission mechanism. Our contribution to the existing literature is to show that movements
in the extensive margin of durable demand have several important implications for the monetary
transmission mechanism. In a representative agent framework, Barsky et al. (2007) show that
monetary non-neutrality is primarily determined by nominal rigidities in the durable sector, and
Barsky et al. (2016) show that this feature is important for optimal monetary policy. Sterk and
Tenreyro (2018) build an OLG model, in which redistribution away from current generations due
to inflationary monetary policy lowers real interest rates and creates a boom in durable spending.
Kaplan et al. (2018) focus on the role of illiquid assets in raising the MPC and show this increases
the importance of indirect effects in monetary transmission to non-durable consumption. Luetticke
(2019) explores how monetary policy affects household demand for liquidity with consequences for
aggregate investment in a model in which capital holdings adjust solely on the intensive margin.
   Recent work has documented another form of state dependence in monetary policy stemming
from fixed-rate mortgages (Berger et al., 2018; Eichenbaum et al., 2018). As interest rates fall,
homeowners refinance to lower interest rate mortgages, thereby reducing their mortgage payments.
This mechanism is stronger if there are more homeowners with existing high-rate mortgages, which
is the case if interest rates have been high in the past. Our results are driven by a different state


                                                 4
variable--the distribution of durable holdings relative to the adjustment thresholds.
    The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents our model of demand for durable con-
sumption goods; Section 3 discusses the interest elasticity of durable demand in the model and the
data and the roles of match-quality shocks and operating costs in reducing this elasticity; Section 4
describes the general equilibrium model with sticky wages; Section 5 presents the main results on
durable demand and the monetary policy transmission mechanism; Section 6 discusses the extent
to which general equilibrium forces attenuate the aggregate implications of lumpy durable demand;
Section 7 concludes.



2     Model of Durable Demand

We begin with the household's partial equilibrium decision problem, which forms the demand side
of the model. A key step is to discipline the model's interest rate elasticity of durable demand.
Later we will embed this demand block into a sticky-wage monetary model.


2.1    Household's Problem

Households consume non-durable goods, c, and a service flow from durable goods, s. Household
i  [0, 1] has preferences given by
                                                 
                                          E0          e-t u (cit , sit ) dt.                                  (1)
                                                t=0

The service flow from durables is generated from the household's stock of durable goods dit . For
the most part we have sit = dit , but we will complicate this relationship below.
    Households hold a portfolio of durables and liquid assets denoted ait . When a household with
pre-existing portfolio (ait , dit ) adjusts its durable stock, it reshuffles its portfolio to (ait , dit ) subject
to the payment of a fixed cost such that

                                       ait + pt dit = ait + (1 - f )pt dit ,                                  (2)

where pt is the relative price of durable goods in terms of non-durable goods, and f pt dit is a fixed
cost proportional to the value of the durable stock. Liquid savings pay a safe real interest rate rt .
The household is able to borrow against the value of the durable stock up to a loan-to-value (LTV)


                                                           5
limit 

                                         ait  -(1 - f )pt dit .                                  (3)

Borrowers pay real interest rate rt + rb , where rb is a time-invariant borrowing spread.
   The stock of durables depreciates at rate  . Following Bachmann et al. (2013), a fraction  of
depreciation must be paid immediately in the form of maintenance expenditures. This maintenance
reduces the drift rate of the durable stock so we have

                                           .
                                           dit = -(1 - )dit ,                                    (4)

where a dot over a variable indicates a time derivative. The household must also pay a flow cost
of operating the durable stock equal to pt dit . Broadly speaking these operating costs reflect
expenditures such as fuel, utilities, and taxes.
   When a household does not adjust its durable stock, its liquid assets evolve according to

                        .
                        ait = rt ait + rb ait I{ait <0} - cit + yit - ( +  )pt dit .             (5)

Household income, yit , is given by

                                                yit = Yt zit                                     (6)

where Yt is aggregate income and zit is the household's idiosyncrtic income share, which we later
interpret as idiosyncratic labor productivity. ln zit follows the Ohrnstein-Uhlenbeck process

                            dln zit = z ln zit dt + z dWit + (1 - z ) ln z
                                                                         ¯ dt,                   (7)

where dWit is a standard Brownian motion, z < 0 controls the degree of mean reversion of the
income process, z determines the variance of the income process, and z
                                                                     ¯ is a constant such that
  zit di = 1.
   We allow for the possibility that households may occasionally adjust their durables because their
existing durables are no longer a good match for them. These match-quality shocks are meant to
capture unmodeled life events that leave the household wanting to adjust for reasons other than
income fluctuations and depreciation. For example, a job offer in a distant city may prompt the
household to move houses. Or a growing family may require a larger car. We assume that a
household is in a good match when it adjusts its durables, but over time the match quality can
                                                     6
break down according to a Poisson process with intensity . Specifically, there is a state qit that
takes a value 1 when the household adjusts it durables and drops to zero with intensity . The
service flow is

                                             sit = qit dit .                                     (8)

In equilibrium, households with bad matches will adjust their durable stocks immediately. These
match-quality shocks are therefore a source of inframarginal adjustments.
   In summary, the household maximizes (1) subject to (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8). Aggre-
gate durable expenditures are determined by the individual decision rules and the distribution of
households over idiosyncratic state variables.


2.2    Calibration

We set
                                                                        (1- )
                                              1    -1          1   -1    -1
                                       (1 -  ) c
                                                        + s                     -1
                           u(c, s) =                                                 .
                                                        1-
 is the elasticity of substitution between durables and non-durables. There is a range of estimates
for this elasticity. Many housing and durable models choose an elasticity of 1, which is consistent
with estimates in Ogaki and Reinhart (1998) and the near-constant expenditure share of housing
in the NIPA (Davis and Ortalo-Magn´
                                  e, 2011). However, housing and rent expenditure shares have
trended up in the AHS, Census, and CEX survey data (Albouy et al., 2016), which is more in
line with an elasticity below one. Further, studies allowing for non-homethic preferences tend to
estimate below-unitary elasticities (Pakos, 2011; Davidoff and Yoshida, 2013; Albouy et al., 2016).
We choose an elasticity of  = 0.5, which is at the lower end of these estimates. Choosing a lower
value is conservative. To see this, suppose we used Leontief utility so that durables were in a fixed
proportion to non-durables regardless of the user cost, then the dynamics of the desired durable
stock would mimic the dynamics of non-durable consumption.
   We set  = 4 implying an IES of 1/4. This is at the lower end of the range typical in the lit-
erature. We need a low IES to match the small response of non-durable consumption to monetary
policy shocks we measure in the data (see Section 3). The durable exponent  is set to match the
average ratio of the nominal values of the total durable stock (durable goods and private residen-


                                                    7
tial structures) and annual non-durable consumption (non-durable goods and services excluding
housing) since 1970.
       Like Berger and Vavra (2015), our calibration captures a broad notion of durables, which
includes residential housing, autos, and appliances among other goods. While these goods differ in
important respects, such as their depreciation rate and the probability of adjustment, they are all
long-lasting and illiquid and purchases are lumpy and infrequent, features we stress in our analysis.
Following this broad notion, our depreciation rate  is the annual durable depreciation divided by
the total durable stock in the BEA Fixed Asset tables, again averaged since 1970. While 73% of
the value of the total durable stock consists of residential housing, this component accounts for
23% of the total depreciation owing to the low depreciation rate of structures relative to cars and
appliances. This explains why non-housing durables account for the majority (64%) of spending
on durables and are thus important in the determination of aggregate demand.
       The fixed cost of adjustment, in combination with the depreciation rate, is a key determinant
of the probability of adjustment of the durable stock. We set the fixed cost to target a weighted
average of the annual adjustment probabilities of individual durable goods. The three components
of the average are the probability that a household moves to a new dwelling (15% Bachmann and
Cooper, 2014), makes a significant addition or repair to their current dwelling (2.5% in the PSID),
or acquires a new or used car (29.6% in the CEX). We attach a weight of 0.9 to the sum of housing
moves and additions and repairs, and a weight of 0.1 to cars, based the the relative value of the
housing stock and the car stock in the BEA fixed asset tables. This yields an annual adjustment
probability of 0.19. Note that we cannot simply sum the probabilities of adjustments across durable
goods, since this would overstate the liquidity of the households' total durable position in our model.
       Our calibration of the income process uses the estimates from Floden and Lind´
                                                                                    e (2001) converted
to a continuous-time Ohrnstein-Uhlenbeck process. We set z = log(0.9136) and  = 0.2158.
       We set the steady state net real interest rate r to 2.34%. This value is the average, ex post,
real federal funds rate in terms of non-durables from 1970 to 2007. The borrowing spread rb is set
to 0.017 based on the difference between the 30-year mortgage rate and the 10-year treasury bill
rate over the same period. The discount rate  is set to match the average liquid financial asset
holdings net of mortgage and auto loans to annual GDP ratio since 1970 of 0.87.3 The borrowing
   3
    We use the same set of assets as McKay et al. (2016) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017): Currency and
checkable deposits, time and savings deposits, MMF shares, Treasury securities, agency securities, municipal securities,


                                                           8
limit is set to  = 0.8 in line with a 20% down payment requirement.
   The fraction of depreciation covered by maintenance in housing is 92% based on the sum of
intermediate goods and services consumed in the BEA housing output table and PCE on household
maintenance. For cars, PCE on motor vehicle maintenance and repair is 47% of depreciation. We
sum maintenance costs for cars and housing and divide by durable depreciation to get  = 0.35.4
   Turning to operating costs, taxes on the housing sector, PCE on household utilities, and PCE
on fuel oil and other fuels (excluding motor vehicle fuels) amount to 4.1% of the value of the housing
stock. For cars, we find that PCE on motor vehicle fuels, lubricants, and fluids amounts to 22% of
the value of the stock of vehicles. We sum the operating costs for cars and housing and divide by
the total durable stock to obtain  = 0.048.


2.3       Estimating the Arrival Rate of Match-Quality Shocks

The intensity of the match-quality shock, , does not have a natural data counterpart that lends
itself to calibration. We therefore estimate this parameter using PSID data and a variant of the
structural estimation method developed by Berger and Vavra (2015) that allows for match-quality
shocks. Since we largely follow their method, we only provide a brief overview here, with details
relegated to Appendix B.
   The estimation method centers on matching the probability of a durable adjustment as a func-
tion of the "durable gap" it  d                  
                               it - dit , where dit is the optimal durable stock based on the

current state variables. Specifically, d is the level of durables the household would adjust to if it
were forced to adjust immediately. Intuitively, in a fixed-cost model the probability of adjustment
should be greater the larger is the absolute gap, since the benefit of adjusting the durable stock is
larger.
   Gaps are easily computed in the model, since both the optimal durable choice d model and the
                                                                                 it

current durable stock dmodel
                       it    are known. In the data, we only observe current durable holdings ddata
                                                                                               it

directly. We infer data gaps using a set of observables Zdata
                                                         it , and the model-implied relationship

between them and the optimal durable stock, d data = F model (Zdata ), where F model is the model's
                                             it                it

mapping from the observables to d. We then minimize the distance between the hazard rate
corporate and foreign bonds, and mutual fund shares.
   4
      is not a convex combination of 92% and 47% because the denominator includes depreciation from durables
other than cars and housing.


                                                     9
                          Table 1: Calibration of the Full Model
Parameter   Name                                 Value    Source

Parameters of the Household's Problem
            Discount factor                      0.104    Net Assets/GDP = 0.87
            Inverse IES                          4        See Section 3
            Durable exponent                     0.585    d/c ratio = 2.64
            Elas of substitution                 0.5      See text
    r       Real interest rate                   0.023    Annual real FFR
   rb       Borrowing spread                     0.017    Mortgage T-Bill spread
            Depreciation rate                    0.068    BEA Fixed Asset
    f       Fixed cost                           0.187    Ann. adjustment prob = 0.19
            Intensity of match-quality shocks    0.155    See Section 2.3
            Required maintenance share           0.35     See text
            Operating cost                       0.048    See text
   y        Income persistence                   -0.090   Floden and Lind´
                                                                         e (2001)
            Income st. dev.                      0.216    Floden and Lind´
                                                                         e (2001)
            Borrowing limit                      0.8      20% Down payment
General Equilibrium Parameters
  G/Y       Steady state govt share              0.2      Convention
            Inverse durable supply elasticity    0.049    See Section 4
            Phillips curve slope                 0.48     See Section 4
            Real rate response to inflation      0.5      Convention




                                           10
of adjustment in model and data, hmodel ( model ) - hdata ( data ) where h( ) is the probability of
adjusting given a gap  , as well the as the distance between the distribution of gaps, f model ( model )-
f data ( data ) where f ( ) is the density at gap  . Like Berger and Vavra (2015), we allow for
measurement error in Zdata
                      it .

   The arrival rate of the match-quality shock, , is primarily identified by the hazard of adjustment
for small gaps. Intuitively, at small gaps the household should be relatively far from an adjustment
threshold due to the fixed cost, whereas adjustments at large gaps likely reflect that the household
crossed an adjustment threshold. Most of the adjustments at small gaps are therefore attributed to
the match-quality shock. As we vary , we re-calibrate the discount rate , the fixed cost f , and the
preference for durables  to match the same targets for net assets, the probability of adjustment,
and the durable-stock-to-non-durable-consumption ratio.
   Our set of observables from the PSID, Zdata
                                          it , are net liquid assets ait , the value of the durable

stock dit , and annualized consumption expenditures over the following wave c
                                                                            ¯i,t,t+2 . We compute
these same lagged and time-aggregated objects in the model to estimate d model =  +  amodel +
                                                                        it       0  1 it
                                          dmodel
2 (amodel
    it    )2 + 3 dmodel
                  it        ¯model
                        + 4 ci,t,t+2 + 5 c
                                           it
                                         ¯model
                                                +   it   using model population weights. This function
                                          i,t,t+2

explains more than 98% of the variation of d model . We then use these estimates to predict ddata
                                            it                                               it

using the observables in the data.
   We use direct information from the PSID on durable adjustments. For housing we use the
answer to whether the household has moved along with the recorded date of moving, and whether
the household made a major addition or repair to the home. If at least one move or addition/repair
takes place since the previous wave, then we record this as a durable adjustment. Similarly, for up
to three cars the PSID records whether they were acquired less than three years ago along with the
acquisition dates. If any car acquisition occurred after the previous wave, then we record this as a
car adjustment. Just like our total adjustment frequency, we weight a housing adjustment by 0.9
and car adjustments by 0.1. We also time-aggregate the hazard of adjustment in the model to two
years, in accordance with the wave length of the PSID.
   Figure 1 plots the model- and data-implied hazards of adjustment conditional on the durable
gap at the optimal parameter estimate,  = 0.155. The bootstrapped 95% confidence band is
[0.154,0.156], based on sampling households from the PSID with replacement. The model accounts
well for the upward-sloping hazard and explains 79% of the variation in the hazard rate. Note that


                                                    11
Figure 1: Hazard of adjustment conditional on the durable gap  = d - d, where d is the optimal
durable choice conditional on adjusting and d the initial durable stock. Shaded areas are 95%
confidence bands.

the probability of adjustment is substantial in both model and data for even small gaps, suggesting
that the match-quality shock is important in matching the data.5 Indeed, our estimate implies
that 74% of all adjustments are due to the match-quality process. This split between match-
quality shocks and adjustments due to depreciation or income fluctuations roughly coincides with
the stated reasons for moving house in the March CPS Supplement (see Appendix Table 5).
    In the next section we show that the idiosyncratic match-quality shocks not only help match
the microeconomic hazard of adjustment, but also help match the interest rate elasticity of durable
demand.



3    The Response of Durable Demand to Monetary Policy

In this section we estimate the response of total durable expenditure and the extensive margin of
durable adjustment to identified monetary policy shocks and we compare these empirical bench-
marks to the model's prediction. This is an important check on the model because standard
fixed-cost models imply that durable demand is extremely sensitive to incentives for intertemporal
substitution (House, 2014). We show and explain how operating costs and match-quality shocks
   5
     We estimate larger adjustment probabilities at small gaps than Berger and Vavra (2015) do because we follow
a different approach to identifying adjustments in the data. Berger and Vavra exclude durable adjustments smaller
than 20% of the value of the durable stock in part to filter out idiosyncratic moves across location.

                                                       12
substantially reduce the interest elasticity of durable demand and bring it in line with the data.


3.1       Empirical Benchmark

We estimate the response of total durable expenditure, xt , and the extensive margin of durable
purchases to an identified monetary policy shock.6 To measure the extensive margin, we construct
time series for the adjustment probabilities of housing and cars using micro-data from the PSID
and the CEX.7 We also estimate the response of the real interest rate in terms of non-durable goods
rt , aggregate income Yt , and the relative durable price pt . We then feed the income and price paths
(Yt , rt , pt ) into the model to determine model-implied path for durable expenditure, xmodel
                                                                                         t     , and
the extensive margin, Pr(adjust x)model
                                  t     . We will say that the model-implied interest elasticity of
durable demand is reasonable if xmodel
                                 t     is "close" to the empirical xt , and similarly for the extensive
margin. The logic of this strategy is that a model that is a good description of the household
block of the economy should match the observed equilibrium quantity response in reaction to the
observed equilibrium price response.
       We use monetary shocks from Romer and Romer (2004), extended by Wieland and Yang (2017),
for 1969Q1-2007Q4. We estimate local projections,
                             M                     L                   3
                    zt+k =         k,m   t-m   +         k,l zt-l +         d td + t ,   k = 0, ..., H          (9)
                             m=0                   l=1                d=1

where zt is the outcome variable,          t   is the monetary shock, and td is a time trend. The impulse
response function is the sequence {k,0 }H
                                        k=0 . Standard errors are Newey-West.

       The top-left panel of Figure 2 displays an economically sizable and statistically significant decline
in the annualized, ex post, real federal funds rate in terms of non-durables given a one-standard
deviation expansionary monetary policy shock. The top-right panel shows that real national income
(GDP) increases with a lag. In the center-left panel the relative durable price displays a small
increase but remains close to the steady state throughout the first four years.8
   6
     Appendix C details the construction of the variables used in this analysis.
   7
     We construct the annual time series for the probability of moving to a different residence using PSID data from
1969-1997 following Bachmann and Cooper (2014). Bachmann and Cooper (2014) show that the moving probability
from the PSID is in line with the shorter time series from the CPS March Supplement and the AHS. For the probability
of buying a car we use CEX data from 1980-2007. Appendix Figure A.1 shows that CEX car expenditures aggregate
well to NIPA expenditures. See Appendices C.2 and C.3 for details.
   8
     Appendix Figure A.2 shows that while the relative durable price is close to flat, both non-durable and durable
prices increase with some lag following an expansionary monetary policy shock.



                                                              13
       The center-right panel displays the cumulative real durable expenditure. (Thus, its slope is the
impulse response for real durable expenditure.) It peaks at 16% after 11 quarters. We interpret this
figure as a summarizing the real effects of a monetary policy shock on real durable expenditure,
taking into account the lags in the data. Accordingly, one can view a one-standard-deviation
expansionary monetary policy shock as raising durable expenditures by 16%. By comparison,
cumulative non-durable consumption excluding rent increases by 3%. Durable expenditure makes
up 22.9% of total consumption excluding rent, so the durable component accounts for 61% of the
total increase of consumption following a monetary shock.
       In the bottom-left panel we show that the cumulative probability of moving home peaks at
22.3% after three years9 and in the bottom-right panel the cumulative probability of acquiring a
car peaks at 9.2% after eight quarters.
       The observed impulse response functions show hump-shaped responses to the monetary shock.
Matching these dynamics is a well-known challenge and our model is no exception. What is impor-
tant for our analysis is the overall magnitude of intertemporal shifting of durable expenditure in
response to monetary policy shocks. Hence, our metric is to compare the peak of the cumulative
impulse response function for durable expenditure and the extensive margin in the data with the
same cumulative impulse response function in the model. In this way we ask the model to match
the overall magnitude of the response of total durable demand and households' willingness to shift
their durable adjustments through time. The implications of this expenditure shifting for intertem-
poral demand management and the relevant opportunity costs for durable adjustments will operate
in a similar manner even if they occur later in time.


3.2      Simulated Monetary Policy Shocks

To assess the sensitivity of durable demand to monetary policy shocks in the model we feed the
mean impulse response function for the real interest rate, rt , real GDP, Yt , and the relative durable
price, pt , into the household decision problem of Section 2 starting in steady state. We assume
that these paths come as a surprise at t = 0, but are subsequently known with certainty, and
return to steady state after 16 quarters.10 We then construct the model-implied cumulative real
   9
     The annual impulse response function is multiplied by four so that the cumulative response is comparable to the
cumulative impulse response function for quarterly series.
  10
     We found that incorporating the uncertainty around the estimated price and income responses into our model
simulation made little difference to the dynamics of durable demand.

                                                        14
Figure 2: Impulse response function of the real interest rate in terms of non-durables (top-left
panel), real GDP (top-right), the relative durable price (center-left), cumulative real durable ex-
penditure (center-right), cumulative probability of moving house (bottom-left), and cumulative
probability of buying a car (bottom-right), to a one-standard-deviation Romer and Romer mone-
tary policy shock.


                                                15
                           Durables                                              Non-Durables




Figure 3: Model simulations feeding in observed paths for (Yt , rt , pt ). The panes show the cumu-
lative response of durable expenditures (left) and non-durable spending (right). Each panel shows
the frictionless model, the model with only fixed costs, the model with fixed costs and operating
costs, and the full model.


durable expenditure and compare it to our empirical estimate. We conduct this simulation for
several versions of our model to show the contributions of operating costs and match-quality shocks.
We start with a frictionless model that omits idiosyncratic risk, operating costs and all forms of
adjustment frictions. We then add idiosyncratic risk, borrowing constraints, and fixed costs. Next,
we add operating costs and finally match-quality shocks to arrive at our full model. Each of the
models with fixed costs is calibrated to match the same durable-to-non-durable-consumption ratio,
steady state adjustment probability, and net-liquid-assets-to-GDP ratio.11
       The left panel of Figure 3 plots the results. In the frictionless model, cumulative real durable
expenditures peaks at 359%, 20 times more than their peak response in the data.12 The fixed-cost
model only fares slightly better than the frictionless model, consistent with the insights in House
(2014). Including operating costs reduces the peak response to 93%, which halves the discrepancy
with the data to a factor of 6. With the addition of match-quality shocks, the full model comes even
closer to matching the interest-elasticity of durable demand in the data. The peak real durable
  11
     In the fixed-cost model the discount rate, durable preference, and fixed cost are  = 0.085,  = 0.463 f = 0.018.
In the model with operating costs they are  = 0.086,  = 0.545 f = 0.011.
  12
     Models with high interest elasticity of durable demand will show very little fluctuation in the durables real
interest rate in equilibrium (Barsky et al., 2007). Appendix Figure A.3 plots the impulse response for the durables
real interest rate, which displays an economically sizable, persistent, and statistically significant decline following an
expansionary monetary policy shock.



                                                           16
response is 30% compared to 16% in the data.
       In the right panel of Figure 3 we show that both the frictionless and the fixed-cost model also
have difficulty matching the cumulative expenditure on non-durables. Households are spending
so much on durables that they end up cutting back on non-durables. By contrast, the models
including operating costs provide a good quantitative match. This figure motivated our choice of
a relatively low intertemporal elasticity of substitution in Section 2.
       The large interest elasticity of durable demand in the fixed-cost model is almost entirely ac-
counted for by the extensive margin response (181 of the 189 percentage point peak response).
We now show that the willingness of households to shift the timing of their durable adjustments
in our full model aligns well with the observed extensive margin responses for cars and housing.
We consider two different calibrations to tailor the model to cars and housing, respectively. The
primary difference is in the calibrations is the depreciation rate.13 As above, we simulate the im-
pulse response for the extensive margin by feeding the empirical impulse responses of Yt , rt , and
pt into the model.14 Table 2 has the results. Starting with the fixed-cost model, the extensive
margin of housing adjustments responds 13 times more in the model than in the data while the
extensive margin of car purchases is 5 times larger than in the data. The low depreciation rate
of structures accentuates the distance between model and data relative to our baseline, whereas
the high depreciation rate of cars attenuates it. Including operating costs dampens the extensive
margin response for housing, but has little effect on the response of car adjustments. Finally, in
our full model including match-quality shocks the magnitude of the extensive margin response is
close to the empirical point estimates and well within the 95% confidence interval for both cars and
housing.
  13
     Housing structures depreciate at a much slower rate, 2% per year, while cars depreciate at a much higher rate,
20% per year, than the value-weighted durable stock. The probability of adjustment is also higher for cars (7.4%
quarterly) than for housing (15% annually), and households own more housing wealth (d/c = 1.92) than car wealth
(d/c = 0.201). We recalibrate the discount rate , the fixed cost f , and the durable exponent  to match these
targets, as well as a net-liquid-asset-to-GDP ratio of 0.92 for housing and 1.31 for cars. When we include match-
quality shocks, 74% of all adjustments will come from the match-quality process, which is the same fraction as in
our estimated model for all durables. This requires  = 0.12 for housing and  = 0.22 for cars. We only subtract the
collateralized loans for the durable we calibrate to. We also allow for a higher borrowing spread rb = 0.03 in the car
model based on the average spread of four-year car loans with treasury bonds.
  14
     We use a different relative price response: for housing we use the relative price of housing to non-durable
consumption, whereas for cars we use the relative price of cars. Appendix Figure A.4 shows that these relative prices
behave similarly to the relative price for all durables.




                                                         17
Table 2: Peak Cumulative Extensive Margin Response (percent change in frequency of adjustment)

                                                        Housing         Cars

                                  Data                    22.3           9.2
                                   [95% CI ]           [6.0,38.6]    [-2.1,20.6]

                                  Fixed Cost             287.6          45.0
                                  Operating Cost          89.2          47.9
                                  Full Model              17.0           8.9


3.3     The Roles of Match-Quality Shocks and Operating Costs

Why do operating costs and match-quality shocks reduce the sensitivity of durable demand to
interest rate changes? Match-quality shocks are a source of inframarginal adjustments. We target
a certain probability of adjustment in total and by associating more of these adjustments with the
match-quality shock, fewer are attributed to households that have hit an (S, s) band. Therefore
including match-quality shocks means there are fewer households near the adjustment thresholds
who can be induced to adjust by monetary policy.15 To demonstrate this role of match-quality
shocks, Figure 4 shows the density of durable holdings in the fixed-cost model and the full model
for a particular level net liquid assets and idiosyncratic income. The vertical dashed lines show
the adjustment thresholds. The mass of households near the adjustment threshold is substantially
smaller in the full model.
    Operating costs are a component of the user cost of durables that is not sensitive to interest
rates and including them stabilizes the user cost and therefore durable demand. In Figure 4, the
adjustment thresholds shift to the right in response to monetary stimulus, but much less so in the
full model. Operating costs matter more for housing than cars in Table 2 because the depreciation
rate is relatively low for housing so adding operating costs has a big effect on the level of the user
cost.
  15
     The logic of how match-quality shocks affect the extensive margin response of durable demand has antecedents in
the literature on price setting (see Golosov and Lucas, 2007; Midrigan, 2011; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2010; Alvarez
et al., 2016).




                                                        18
                                 Fixed Cost                                                                               Full Model
                2.5                                               1                                      2.5                                               1
                          Distribution                                                                             Distribution
                          Adjustment Probability                  0.9                                              Adjustment Probability                  0.9
                          Adjustment Probability (R   2.5%)                                                        Adjustment Probability (R   2.5%)

                 2                                                0.8                                     2                                                0.8

                                                                  0.7                                                                                      0.7




                                                                        Adj Probability




                                                                                                                                                                 Adj Probability
                1.5                                               0.6                                    1.5                                               0.6
      Density




                                                                                               Density
                                                                  0.5                                                                                      0.5

                 1                                                0.4                                     1                                                0.4

                                                                  0.3                                                                                      0.3

                0.5                                               0.2                                    0.5                                               0.2

                                                                  0.1                                                                                      0.1

                 0                                                0                                       0                                                0
                      1   1.5         2         2.5           3                                                1   1.5         2         2.5           3
                                Durable stock                                                                            Durable stock

Figure 4: Distribution of households over durable holdings. The distributions shown are conditional
on net liquid assets of 1.99 and and gross income of 0.93. Net liquid assets are measured as a - d.
The adjustment thresholds are shown at their steady state positions and in response to a 2.5 p.p.
cut in the interest rate for the current quarter.


3.4     Quasi-Experimental Evidence

Monetary policy primarily stimulates durable demand by reducing the real interest rate in terms
of durables. There is also quasi-experimental evidence on how the extensive margin of durable
demand responds to the real interest rate. Mian and Sufi (2012) and Baker et al. (2019) analyze
the response of auto purchases to the Cash-for-Clunkers program and anticipated sales tax increases,
respectively. These policies can be translated into a low real interest rate in terms of durables, as
the after-tax durable price is expected to increase both when Cash-for-Clunkers ends and when the
sales tax rises. We will translate the results of these two studies into an interest elasticity of the
extensive margin and compare to our model's predictions.
   Baker et al. (2019) estimate a cumulative 12.7 percent increase in monthly auto sales leading up
to a 1 percentage point increase in sales tax (Table 3, Col. 1). This implies an annualized 12 percent
decrease in the real interest rate for cars in the month before the tax increase so the elasticity of
the extensive margin of auto sales to interest rates is about 12.7/12 = 1.1. Our conversion of the
estimates for the Cash-for-Clunkers program in Mian and Sufi (2012) yields an elasticity in the


                                                                                          19
range of 4.3 to 5.16

                       Table 3: Implied Interest Rate Elasticity for Car Purchases

                                    Data
                                         Baker et al. (2019)           1.1
                                         Mian and Sufi (2012)        4.3-5.0
                                    Model
                                         Fixed Cost                   47.7
                                         Operating Cost               35.2
                                         Full Model                    3.8


    In our model calibrated to cars we calculate the elasticity based on the impact effect of a one
month drop in the real interest in durables. As shown in Table 3, our model produces an elasticity
of 3.8, which is between those derived from Baker et al. and Mian and Sufi. The table shows
that operating costs and match-quality shocks are crucial in matching this evidence. These studies
also document a reversal in demand after the real interest rate for cars returns to normal. This
intertemporal shifting of durable demand also occurs in our model.



4     General Equilibrium Model

So far we have analyzed the durable spending response for an observed monetary policy path using
the associated income and price responses. To study alternative monetary policy experiments we
must now specify how prices and income are determined in equilibrium.


4.1    Labor Supply, Production, and Aggregate Supply

We adapt the standard sticky-wage environment developed by Erceg et al. (2000) to allow for
uninsured idiosyncratic labor productivity. Each household i supplies a continuum of differentiated
  16
     Mian and Sufi (2012) argue that cross-city variation in Cash for Clunkers explains between 340k and 398k of
additional autos sold. New vehicle sales in April and May were on average 833,000. Used vehicle sales were 36.5m
and 35.5m in 2008 and 2009, implying an average monthly sales volume of 2m. Total baseline vehicle sales are then
2.833m. The increase in vehicle sales estimated by Mian and Sufi then corresponds to 340k/2.833m - 1 = 12% to
398k/2.833m - 1 = 14% rise. Total expenditure on Cash for Clunkers was $3bn, and the vehicle stock in 2008 was
worth $1279.4bn at replacement cost. This translates into a 3/1279.4 = 0.23 percent reduction in the replacement
price, or 2.8 percent expressed as an annual rate. Therefore, the elasticity ranges from 12/2.8=4.3 to 14/2.8=5.0.


                                                       20
labor of type j  [0, 1], with hours denoted nijt . We extend the household preferences with an
additively separable disutility of labor supply
                                                                                     1
                                E0          e-t u (cit , sit ) - u
                                                                 ¯c,t                    v (nijt ) dj dt.                           (10)
                                      t=0                                        0

                                                                                                1 u(cit ,sit )
where we use the modifier on the disutility of labor, u
                                                      ¯c,t =                                   0    cit          di, to eliminate wealth
effects on labor supply.17 Labor supply is determined by a set of unions as described below so the
household takes labor supply and labor income as given. As the disutility of labor is additively
separable and labor income is outside the household's control, the decision problem we analyzed in
the previous section is unchanged.
       Final goods are produced with a technology that is linear in labor, Yt = Zt Lt , where Zt is TFP
and Lt is an aggregate of labor supply given by
                                                                                 
                                                               1       -1        -1
                                                                       
                                                Lt =               ljt      dj             ,
                                                           0

where
                                                                   1
                                                   ljt =               zit nijt di.
                                                               0

We now interpret zit as idiosyncratic labor productivity. The final good is produced by a represen-
tative firm. Prices are flexible and equal to nominal marginal cost: Pt = Wt /Zt , where Wt is the
price index associated with the aggregator Lt . The real wage is then Wt /Pt = Zt . In most of our
analysis, Zt is constant and equal to 1.
       The final good is used for several purposes: non-durable consumption, an input in the durable
production, and government consumption. Appendix E shows the market-clearing conditions.
       We obtain an upward-sloping Phillips curve through sticky nominal wages. A continuum of
unions set the wage, Wjt , of each type of labor. The union maximizes the equally-weighted utility
                                                                                                                        2
of the households subject to a Rotemberg-style adjustment cost of                                      2u
                                                                                                        ¯c,t Lt     µjt , where  is a
parameter that controls the strength of the nominal rigidity and µjt is the growth rate of Wjt
such that dln Wjt = µjt dt. Among union workers supplying type j , all labor is equally rationed,
nijt = ljt . In a symmetric equilibrium, all workers supply Lt units of labor.
  17
    We do so for computational convenience. The wealth effect in labor supply introduces an additional loop in
finding the market-clearing prices and quantities since it creates a feedback from distribution of marginal utility to
the real interest rate in the policy rule. In unreported results we have found that this wealth effect is not quantitatively
important for output dynamics.

                                                                   21
   Appendix E presents the union's problem and shows that the log-linearized symmetric equilib-
rium gives rise to the following Phillips curve

                                  .                    ¯
                                                  Yt - Y        ¯
                                                           Zt - Z
                                  t = t -            ¯   -    ¯                  ,               (11)
                                                     Y        Z

where t =   dln Pt       ¯ and Z
                               ¯ are the steady state values for output and TFP, respectively.
              dt ,   and Y
   The durable good is produced by a unit measure of perfectly competitive firms using the pro-
duction function,

                                               
                                         Xt = Zt Mt1- Ht ,

where Xt is the production of durables, Mt is the input of the non-durable good, Ht is the input of
                                          ¯ of land is made available and sold by the government at
land, and  is a constant. A constant flow H
a competitive price. Zt enters the production function here in a manner that is "land-augmenting"
so that the long-run relative price of durables is unaffected by permanent TFP shocks. The first
order conditions of this problem lead to a relative price of
                                                                         
                                                      1
                                                -1 - 1-          Xt     1-
                                  pt = (1 -  )                     ¯         ,                   (12)
                                                                Zt H

where Xt is aggregate durable goods production. Thus, (1 -  )/ is the supply elasticity of the
durable good.


4.2      Government

Monetary policy is governed either by an interest rate rule,

                                          rt = r
                                               ¯ +    t + t ,                                    (13)

where t is an exogenous shock, or equal to an exogenous path for the real interest rate as specified
below.
   Fiscal policy consists of a constant debt policy,
                                                      1
                                         At =                      ¯
                                                          ait dt = A.
                                                  0

We assume that the government levies taxes proportional to zit where the tax rate ¯t is set to
satisfy the government budget constraint so we have

                                          yit = (Yt - ¯t ) zit                                   (14)

                                                      22
and the period-by-period government budget constraint is

                                                         ¯+G
                                                 ¯t = rt A

where G is a constant level of government consumption.18 Government consumption plays very
little role in our analysis, but we include it because it is a component of aggregate demand that is
not sensitive to monetary policy.


4.3      Calibration
                                                                        
We calibrate the inverse supply elasticity of durable goods to         1-   = 0.049. Residential investment
is on average 36% of broad durable consumption expenditures (NIPA Table 1.1.5, 1969-2007). New
permanent site structures account for 58% of residential investment (NIPA Table 5.4.5). Davis
and Heathcote (2007) report that 11% of sales of new houses reflect the value of land. Therefore
payments for new land amount to a little over 2% of the expenditure on durables. However, Davis
and Heathcote (2007) also report that the existing stock of housing is paired with more valuable
land and land accounts for 36% of the value of the housing stock, which is substantially larger
than the 11% share in new housing. In our model, durables trade at a single price so there is no
distinction between the cost of creating new durables and the value of the stock. We therefore take
the mid-point of 11% and 36%, which implies that payments to land account for 5% of expenditure
on durables. We set  so as to normalize the relative price to one in steady state.
       An elastic supply of durable goods is consistent with the lack of a relative price response in
Figure 2. An elastic supply of durable goods also finds some support from Goolsbee (1998) and
House and Shapiro (2008) who present evidence on the response of capital goods prices to policies
that stimulate investment demand. House and Shapiro find little evidence of a price response and
argue for a high supply elasticity. Goolsbee argues for less elastic supply in general, but for the
categories of goods that also serve as consumer durables (autos, computers, and furniture) he finds
little price response.
       The slope of the Phillips curve is 0.48. Note that the slope of the Phillips curve is expressed in
terms of the change in annualized inflation for a unit of the output gap per year so we would need to
divide by 16 to compare to a quarterly discrete-time model, which yields a slope of 0.48/16 = 0.03.
  18
  The government also raises a small amount of revenue from selling land. In steady state this amounts to 0.5% of
GDP. For computational convenience we assume this revenue finances an independent stream of spending.

                                                       23
That value is squarely in the middle of empirical estimates (Mavroeidis et al., 2014).
                                             ¯ = 1, which implies v (1) =             -1
         We normalize steady state income to Y                                         .     Because we linearize
the Phillips curve, v (·) is already captured by the slope of the Phillips curve.



5         Effects of Monetary Policy with Lumpy Durables

We now turn to our main results. In this section we specify monetary policy in terms of paths for
the real interest rate, which can be interpreted in terms of an implicit policy for the nominal rate.19
In Section 6 and Appendix D.6 we show that the results in this section are robust to endogenous
movements in real interest rates through inflation and the interest rate rule.


5.1        Forward Guidance is Less Powerful than Contemporaneous Rates

In the presence of fixed adjustment costs, one effect of monetary stimulus is to bring forward
durable adjustments to the present that would otherwise have occurred in the future. In choosing
to accelerate an adjustment, a household is giving up the interest on savings that it would have
earned from the present until the adjustment would have otherwise occurred. Short-term interest
rates are particularly important to this decision because households that are near the adjustment
threshold are likely to adjust their durables soon even in the absence of stimulus. As a result,
lumpy durables are an effective way to mitigate the "forward guidance puzzle" (Del Negro et al.,
2015; McKay et al., 2016), whereby promises of lower interest rates arbitrarily far in the future
have the same output effect today as contemporaneous interest rate cuts.
         To demonstrate that current interest rates are more powerful in stimulating durable demand
than future interest rates, we simulate two different paths for the real interest rate. Each path
cuts the interest rate by 1 percentage point (annualized) for a single quarter, but the paths differ
in the timing of the cut.20 The first path cuts the current rate between periods 0 and 1, the
second cuts the rate between quarters 8 and 9. Fixing the real interest rate path is obviously not a
realistic description of monetary policy, but the spirit of this analysis is to demonstrate in the most
transparent way how the demand-side of the economy functions. Households perfectly foresee the
future interest rates and the evolution of the economy.
    19
     For the experiments we consider, the nominal interest rate paths track the real interest rate paths quite closely
because the inflation responses are small. See Figure A.5 in the appendix.
  20
     In this and all subsequent experiments we simulate the model in quarterly time steps.

                                                         24
      Figure 5 shows the results. The output responses shown in the figure are overwhelmingly driven
by durable demand as opposed to non-durable demand. The reduction in interest rates motivates
households to accelerate their adjustments in the quarter in which interest rates are low because
the opportunity cost of holding durables is low in that period. Before the interest rate cut, demand
is elevated due to expected capital gains on durables because the relative price of durables rises
as the interest rate cut nears. After the interest rate cut, those households that accelerated their
adjustments are no longer purchasing durables, which creates a reversal in demand.
      The notable feature of the figure is that cutting the contemporaneous interest rate is much
more effective at stimulating demand at t = 0 than is cutting future interest rates. Figure 5
shows that a contemporaneous 1% cut is three times more effective than a 1% cut two years from
now. This result stands in contrast to the standard three equation model, which predicts "perfect
substitutability" between current and future interest changes for demand at t = 0. This is shown
by the opaque, dashed lines in Figure 5. We simulate the three equation model assuming an
intertemporal elasticity of substitution equal to ^ -1 = 2.46, which implies that the interest rate
cut at t = 0 has the same output effect on impact as in the full model. Durable goods demand is
the key source of difference between our model and the three equation model. If we modify our
model to have only non-durable consumption and a larger intertemporal elasticity of substitution,
the output response to forward guidance looks very similar to the three equation model because
the model is then close to the incomplete-markets irrelevance case in Werning (2015).21
      Forward guidance is a key unconventional policy tool that central banks have used at the ELB.
Because our model implies forward guidance is less effective, a central bank facing an ELB is
less able to offset negative shocks to aggregate demand. We illustrate the importance of lumpy
durables for monetary policy ammunition ("policy space") with a simple calculation. By how much
can the central bank raise output by reducing the real interest rate by 2.5 percentage points for
four quarters? This experiment is motivated by current estimates of the nominal natural rate of
interest around 2.5%. Thus, we study a policy that cuts nominal rates to the zero lower bound while
inflation expectations remain constant. The experiment implicitly assumes that the central bank
can commit to a path for policy for four quarters but not longer than that. In response to this policy
we find that current output rises by 4.8%. For comparison, suppose that future interest reductions
 21
      See Appendix Figure A.6.



                                                  25
                                                             1.2
                                                                                1% cut at t=0: Full Model




                     Output, % deviation from steady state
                                                               1                1% cut at t=0: Three-Equation Model
                                                                                1% cut at t=8: Full Model
                                                                                1% cut at t=8: Three-Equation Model
                                                             0.8

                                                             0.6

                                                             0.4

                                                             0.2

                                                               0

                                                             -0.2

                                                             -0.4
                                                                    0   2   4        6         8         10           12
                                                                                Quarters

Figure 5: Output responses to real interest rate cuts of 1% (annualized) that last for one quarter at
horizons of 0 and 8 quarters. Full model refers to our model with lumpy durables. Three equation
model refers to the standard New Keynesian model, calibrated to yield the same impact effect on
output for the contemporaneous interest rate cut. The simulation includes endogenous changes in
aggregate income and the relative durable price. Perfect foresight transition paths.


were just as powerful as contemporaneous interest rate reductions as in the three equation New
Keynesian model, then the central bank has 6.2% of policy space. So the imperfect substitution of
future interest rates for current rates reduces policy space by 1.4 percentage points.


5.2   Intertemporal Tradeoffs in Aggregate Demand Management

In the three equation model, a history of low interest rates has no bearing on demand today. By
contrast, this history is an important determinant of aggregate demand in the lumpy durable model.
   To make this case, we fix a given path of interest rates from t = 0 onward, and ask how output
at t = 0 depends on the history of interest rates? Figure 6 simulates a real interest rate path that
lowers the real rate by one percentage point (annualized) for three quarters from t = 0 to t = 2.
The figure shows two histories. The solid line shows the effect of this policy starting from steady
state. The dashed line assumes that the economy has previously undergone two quarters of -1%
stimulus. We find that there is a substantial difference in output in t = 0 under these two scenarios
with output almost a percentage point higher in the scenario without a history of stimulus. This
is because under a history of stimulus some of the households that were going to adjust during


                                                                                26
                                                                  2
                                                                                         Conditional on steady state




                        Output, % deviation from steady state
                                                                                         Conditional on past stimulus
                                                                1.5


                                                                  1


                                                                0.5


                                                                  0


                                                                -0.5


                                                                 -1
                                                                       0   1   2              3          4              5
                                                                                   Quarters

Figure 6: Output response for two different real interest rate paths. Both scenarios have a real
interest rate 1 p.p. below steady state in periods t = 0 to 2. The scenario depicted by the dashed
red line also had the real interest rate 1 p.p. below steady state in the two previous quarters. The
scenario depicted by the solid blue line was previously in steady state. The simulation includes
endogenous changes in aggregate income and the relative durable price. Perfect foresight transition
paths.


periods 0 to 2 have already adjusted.
       We repeat our policy space calculation to show how a history of stimulus affects policy space.
Above we reported that cutting rates by 2.5% for four quarters increased output by 4.8%. If
the central bank had previously cut rates by 2.5% for four quarters, policy space falls to 3.3%.22
This result creates a dynamic trade-off for the central bank: if aggregate demand is low now, but
expected to be even lower in the future, then the central bank may want hold off on interest rate
cuts to maintain its policy space for when it is most needed. This trade-off is absent in the standard
three equation model.


5.3      Monetary Policy Loses Power in Recessions

Policy space is particularly relevant in a recession caused by a short-fall of demand. However,
the recession itself may directly reduce policy space by reducing households' willingness to hold
more durables and thereby reducing the mass of households near the adjustment threshold. This
  22
    Our policy space calculations assume a counter-factual in which real interest rates are constant both in the past
and going forward.


                                                                                   27
logic echoes Berger and Vavra (2015), who show state dependence of durable demand to a range
of shocks, including interest rate shocks, in partial equilibrium. In this section we demonstrate the
state dependent effects of monetary policy shocks when income and durable prices are determined
in equilibrium. In the next section we allow for full general equilibrium with an endogenous real
interest rate.
       We induce a recession with a permanent reduction in TFP. With lower permanent income,
households reduce their target level of durables and the economy has an overhang of durables re-
sulting in a period of low aggregate demand. Because of sticky wages, the decline in aggregate
demand creates a further decline in output beyond what is implied by the reduction in productiv-
ity.23
       As we further elaborate in Section 6, the size of the recession in durable expenditure is a key
determinant of the mass of households near the adjustment threshold. We therefore choose the
magnitude of the permanent income shock to match the 26.0% decline in real durable expenditure
during the Great Recession. This target implies a permanent decline in Zt of 4.5%. Figure 7 shows
that output initially falls more than 5% below its new steady state level.
       We illustrate the state dependence of monetary policy using our policy space experiment. That
is, we assume the central bank reacts by promising four quarters of reducing the real interest rate
by 2.5%. Figure 8 shows that monetary policy is less powerful in the recession. The impact effect
of the monetary stimulus is now 2.9% as compared to 4.8% in steady state. Thus, policy space
is almost cut in half. The reason is that the overhang of durables in the recession implies that
few households are near the adjustment threshold, and therefore few households are sensitive to
monetary stimulus.
       A history of stimulus reinforces this logic. If past monetary policy induced some individuals to
pull forward their adjustments, then these marginal adjusters are missing when the recession hits.
We quantify this effect by conditioning on a history in which the real interest rate was -2.5% below
steady state for the previous four quarters. Then, unexpectedly, the same permanent income shock
occurs.
       Past stimulus further reduces policy space for two reasons. First, the history of low interest rates
reduces aggregate demand and makes the recession more severe. Second, by reducing the number
  23
    Leahy and Zeira (2005) analyze this theoretical amplification channel and Dupor et al. (2018) argue that these
forces gave rise the sharp collapse in the U.S. auto market during the Great Recession.


                                                       28
                                                           -1.5




                     Output gap, % from new steady state
                                                            -2

                                                           -2.5

                                                            -3

                                                           -3.5

                                                            -4

                                                           -4.5

                                                            -5
                                                                          Recession
                                                           -5.5           Recession + current stimulus
                                                                          Recession + past stimulus + current stimulus
                                                            -6
                                                                  0   2    4          6          8         10            12
                                                                                 Quarters

Figure 7: Output dynamics during a recession caused by a 4.5% permanent drop in TFP. The
baseline scenario ("Recession") assumes no change in real interest rates. The other scenarios add
current stimulus (r = -2.5% for t = 0 to t = 4) and past stimulus (r = -2.5% for t = -4 to
t = 0).


of households near the adjustment threshold it makes the new stimulus less effective. Together
these effects reduce policy space to 2.0% relative to what would have occurred in the absence of
previous monetary stimulus.
    Our results imply that a lack of policy space is of particular concern when it is most needed, in a
way that is missing from simple macroeconomic models. Furthermore, the intertemporal trade-offs
facing a central bank give some credence to arguments about keeping the central bank's powder
dry.



6      General Equilibrium Attenuation of State Dependence

In the previous section we demonstrated that the power of monetary policy is state dependent, but
we assumed that the real interest rate was exogenous. There is a ongoing debate whether state
dependence survives in lumpy investment models in general equilibrium (Khan and Thomas, 2008;
Bachmann et al., 2013; Winberry, 2018; Koby and Wolf, 2018). We show that general equilibrium
does not affect our state dependence results once we condition on the (observable) size of the
recession.


                                                                                 29
                                                                  5




                      Output, % deviation from new steady state
                                                                                              Steady State
                                                                                              Recession
                                                                  4                           Recession + past stimulus


                                                                  3


                                                                  2


                                                                  1


                                                                  0


                                                                  -1


                                                                  -2
                                                                       0   1   2        3         4          5            6
                                                                                   Quarters

Figure 8: Change in output as a result of four quarters of -2.5% change in real interest rates
conditional on three scenarios: starting from steady state, during a recession caused by a permanent
decline in TFP, and during the same recession when the economy had already received four quarters
of monetary stimulus.


   In order to understand how endogenous real interest rates affect the power of monetary policy
in a recession, it is helpful to first be clear about how they affect the magnitude of the recession.
In our simulated recession, the decline in TFP leads to an overhang of durables and a decline in
durable demand below its new steady state level. The resulting decline in aggregate demand moves
the economy along the Phillips curve to lower inflation and lower real interest rates through the
monetary policy reaction function (13). The decline in real interest rates works to stabilize durable
demand. The magnitude of this stabilizing effect is determined by the combination of the slope the
Phillips curve, the coefficient on inflation in the monetary policy rule, and the interest elasticity
of durable demand. In our full model the original 26% decline in durable expenditure is reduced
to 18%. This increases the power of our policy space stimulus to 3.8%. With fixed real interest
rates we found that the same stimulus increased output by 4.8% in steady state and 2.9% in the
recession. As in Winberry (2018) and Koby and Wolf (2018), state dependence survives in general
equilibrium due to our modest interest elasticity of durable demand, but it would appear that the
degree of state dependence is diminished. However, the smaller recession in the simulation with
endogenous real interest rates is inconsistent with the magnitude of the drop in durable demand in
the Great Recession that motivated our original calculation.

                                                                                   30
                                                             5
                                                                                       Steady State: fixed r
                                                                                       Recession: fixed r




                          Output, % increase from stimulus
                                                             4                         Steady State: endogenous r
                                                                                       Recession: endogenous r
                                                             3


                                                             2


                                                             1


                                                             0


                                                             -1


                                                             -2
                                                                  0   1   2        3         4          5           6
                                                                              Quarters

Figure 9: The effect of monetary stimulus in steady state and in a recession with and without
endogenous interest rate movements. The experiment with a recession and endogenous interest
rates assumes a larger TFP shock so that the equilibrium movement in durable expenditure is the
same as in the fixed-interest rate experiment with a smaller TFP shock.


       This observation leads us to consider a different experiment in which we fix the size of the
recession across general equilibrium and partial equilibrium. We again target a 26% decline in
durable expenditures, which requires a 6.6% decline in TFP with endogenous interest rates as
compared to a 4.5% decline with exogenous real rates. We then perturb the economy with a -2.5%
shock to the interest rate rule for four quarters.24
       In Figure 9 we see that the response of output to the monetary shock is almost identical
regardless of whether real interest rates are fixed or endogenous. Therefore, general equilibrium
forces do not affect state dependence once we condition on the size of the recession.
       Figure 10 provides an explanation for this stark result. The figure shows the distribution of
durable holdings relative to adjustment thresholds after one year in the absence of durable adjust-
ments.25 The fraction of households adjusting (extensive margin) is the CDF of the distribution
  24
     While endogenous real interest rates reduce the size of a recession, they have little effect on the dynamics following
monetary shocks in steady state. This reflects the fact that monetary shocks induce intertemporal substitution, so
that positive output gaps today are largely offset by negative output gaps in the future. In the forward-looking
Phillips curve this leads to only small changes in inflation, and thus only small endogenous real rate movements. This
contrasts with the recession, in which the output gap is consistently negative and inflation consistently below target.
  25
     We simulate the model from steady state for one year assuming no adjustments take place. We construct the
distance from adjustment using the policy functions for each quarter over the first year and then average over the
four quarters.



                                                                              31
                              0.015
                                          Steady State
                                          Recession (-4.5% TFP): fixed r
                                          Recession (-4.5% TFP): endogenous r
                                          Recession (-6.6% TFP): endogenous r

                               0.01
                    Density




                              0.005




                                  0
                                 -0.15          -0.1             -0.05          0
                                         Durable Distance from Adjustment, log points

Figure 10: Distribution of durable holdings relative to adjustment thresholds after one year assum-
ing no adjustments take place. The x-axis denotes the log-point difference from the adjustment
threshold, with negative values indicating that the adjustment threshold has been crossed. The
four scenarios are (a) the steady state, (b) a -4.5% permanent TFP shock causing a recession with
a 26% drop in durable expenditure when the real rate is fixed, (c) a -4.5% permanent TFP shock
causing a recession with an 18% drop in durable expenditure when the real rate is endogenous,
and (d) a -6.6% permanent TFP shock causing a recession with a 26% drop in durable expenditure
when the real rate is endogenous.




                                                            32
at zero and the sensitivity of the extensive margin to stimulus is controlled by the density at zero.
Shifts in this distribution therefore link changes in demand for durables from the extensive margin
with changes in the sensitivity of the extensive margin to stimulus. Across simulations, shifts of
the distribution reflect movements of the adjustment threshold. For example, the recession shock
lowers the adjustment threshold, which pushes the distribution to the right. With an endogenous
decline in real interest rates, the adjustment threshold increases, which pushes the distribution to
the left.26 By choosing the shocks to target a particular size of the recession, the mass to the left
of the threshold (i.e. the CDF at zero) is nearly the same regardless of whether real interest rates
are fixed or endogenous. As a consequence, the densities of the two distributions at the adjust-
ment threshold are nearly identical, which explains why state dependence is unaffected by general
equilibrium in our experiment.
    To summarize our argument, the degree of state dependence depends on how far the adjustment
threshold moves and conditional on that the behavior of real interest rates is not important. In
this sense, movements in the extensive margin act as a sufficient statistic for state dependence in
our model. Ultimately, the data point to substantial fluctuations in the extensive margin over the
business cycle (see Bachmann and Cooper, 2014; Dupor et al., 2018).



7    Conclusion

We investigate the implications of the micro-foundations of durable goods demand for monetary
policy. In our heterogeneous agent model with fixed costs on durable adjustments, a key monetary
transmission mechanism is to accelerate the timing of durable goods purchases. A first consequence
of this channel is that the central bank faces an intertemporal trade-off for aggregate demand, as
past stimulus reduces current demand. Second, the stimulative power of long-term interest rates is
reduced, as households make a short-term decision of whether to adjust now or in the near future.
Third, monetary policy is less powerful in a recession, with this state dependence unaffected by
general equilibrium attenuation if one holds fixed the size of the recession.
    In the face of an ELB constraint, our model implies that the central bank's ability to stabilize
   26
      The degree to which general equilibrium shifts the distribution of durable gaps back towards the steady state
distribution and attenuates state dependence depends on the interest elasticity of durable demand. This point is
emphasized by House (2014), Winberry (2018), and Koby and Wolf (2018). In this sense, the interest rate elasticity
is an important determinate of state dependence for a given shock as opposed to a given recession depth.



                                                        33
the economy is substantially weaker than implied by a standard New Keynesian model. We have
not conducted a welfare analysis or solved for optimal policy, but the model points to a risk
management approach to monetary policy that preserves ammunition in light of downside risks to
future aggregate demand.




                                             34
A      Computational Appendix

We solve the model building on the routines available from Benjamin Moll's website http://www.
princeton.edu/\%7Emoll/HACTproject.htm and described in Achdou et al. (2017).


A.1     Steady state

Define k = a - d as the distance from the borrowing limit. Construct tensor grids over the state
variables (k, d, z ). Then the steady state policy function is constructed as follows:

    1. Start with an initial guess of the value function v (k, d, z ) and the value conditional on making
       an adjustment v  (k, d, z ).

    2. Solve for the optimal consumption and saving decisions when not adjusting. Compute vk
                                     f                               b . At the boundaries of v f and
       both as a forward difference vk and as a backward difference vk                         k
        b impose that the drift of k is zero. Invert v (k, d, z ) = U (c, d) to solve for cf (k, d, z ) and
       vk                                             k              c

       cb (k, d, z ), and the corresponding drift of k , sf (k, d, z ) and sb (k, d, z ). Finally, let c0 (k, d, z ) be
       the consumption consistent with zero drift. Pick among the candidates based on the following
       rule:

        (a) If sf < 0 and sb < 0 pick cb , sb .

        (b) If sf > 0 and sb > 0 pick cf , sf .

        (c) If sf < 0 and sb > 0 pick c0 , s0 .

        (d) If sf > 0 and sb < 0 pick the candidate that yields a larger value for the Hamiltonian.

       Using the solution, compute the felicity function u(c, d).

    3. Construct the transition matrix A based on the endogenous drifts of k and the exogenous
       drifts and shocks to d, z . See Achdou et al. (2017) for details.

    4. The HJB equation can now be written as min{v - u - Av, v - v  } = 0, and solved using an
       LCP solver for v . We use Yuval Tassa's solver http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/
       fileexchange/20952.

    5. Compute optimal choice of d conditional on adjusting and the corresponding v  = maxd v (k , d , z ),
       where k = d + k - ( + f )d.
                                                          35
 6. Repeat steps 1-5 until convergence.

 7. To obtain the steady state distribution, convert the policy functions for k and d conditional
      on an adjustment to index form. Fractions of an index determine the weights we assign to
      each index.

 8. Create a matrix C noadj = A - diag (). Then set all the columns in C noadj that correspond
      to adjustment points to zero. Define Aadj = A - C noadj . This matrix contains the mass at
      adjustment points that needs to be reallocated to the nodes of the optimal k , d . We assign
      this mass to the nodes surrounding k , d based on the index fractions in the previous step.
      This yields a matrix of adjustments C adj . The transition matrix is then C = C noadj + C adj .

 9. Solve 0 = Cg for the steady state distribution g .


A.2    Impulse response functions

 1. Repeat steps 1-5, iterating backward from the terminal condition vT = v . Each iteration
      reduces t by dt. Continue until t = 0 is reached.

 2. Repeat steps 7-8 for each period of the IRF. The initial distribution g0 requires a modification
      if p0 = 1. The distribution of k needs to shift since k = a - pd and a, d are fixed in that
      instant.

 3. For each t, if the adjustment thresholds change, then all the mass in gt that is in the new
      adjustment region must be immediately shifted to its new location using the procedure in
      step 8. Call the new distribution g
                                        ^t . Then compute gt+dt = g
                                                                  ^t + Ct g
                                                                          ^t dt. Repeat this step
      until t = T .

 4. In general equilibrium, update the durable price and income, and repeat the previous steps
      1-3 until convergence. For the case where the real rate is endogenous, compute the Jacobian
                                                 d at each iteration step, and use the Newton
      with respect to the real rate of durables rt
                                      d . From r d = r            pt+dt
      method to update the real rate rt         t     t             pt    calculate {rt , pt , Yt }T
                                                                                                   0 using (13),

                                               ¯, pT = 1, YT = 1, and using Yt = Xt + Ytsmooth ,
      (11), (12), the terminal conditions rT = r
                                           1
      where Y smooth = c + G + (rb - r)   0 ait Iait <0 di   is the solution for the (smooth) non-durable
      components of aggregate demand from the previous iteration.

                                                   36
B     Estimation

The estimation strategy largely follows Berger and Vavra (2015). The details of the data selection
and estimation algorithm below are meant to facilitate replication of our results.


B.1       Data

We use PSID data from 1999 through 2009.


B.1.1      Variables

Real non-durable consumption is nominal non-durable consumption in the PSID deflated by the
BEA price index for non-durables (NIPA table 1.1.4). Nominal non-durable consumption is the sum
of food expenditures, utility expenditures, home insurance, transportation expenditures, property
taxes, health expenditures, child care expenditures, and education expenditures. We exclude any
loan or lease payments from transportation expenditures to align the definition of non-durables
with our model.
    Real durable holdings are the sum of real house values and real vehicle values. Real house
values are reported nominal house values deflated by the OFHEO national house price index. For
renters we convert rent to a house value using the national house-to-rent ratio from Davis et al.
(2008) available at http://www.aei.org/housing/land-price-indicators/. The PSID records
the net wealth of up to three vehicles per household. We sum these values, add total vehicle debt
(detailed below), and deflate the sum with the BEA price index for motor vehicles (NIPA table
1.2.4).
    Real liquid asset holdings are the sum of cash and deposit holdings, stock holdings, and bond
holdings, deflated by the non-durables price index.
    We construct net real liquid assets by subtracting real debt from housing and vehicles. Mortgage
debt is directly reported and we deflate it using the non-durables price index. We construct existing
vehicle debt from the initial loan amount on all three cars and subtract the number of payments
made times the average payment amount. In less than 1% of cases this results in a negative debt
value, in which case we set vehicle debt to zero.
    Housing adjustments come from either moving or a significant addition or repair. The PSID
records the month and year of the most recent move since either the last interview (pre-2003) or

                                                    37
since January two years ago. If a move is recorded and the move falls after the previous interview,
then we code it as a housing adjustment for the current wave; otherwise it is an adjustment in
the previous wave. When the move falls in the month of the interview we break the tie based on
whether the interview was in the first or second half of the month. For significant additions and
repairs we record them as housing adjustments in the wave that they are reported.
   Car adjustments are set to one if any one of the three reported cars has been acquired since the
previous wave. This is the case if the most recent car's acquisition date is after the previous wave's
interview date, or (if there is insufficient information using the date) a new car has been acquired
less than three years ago and it was not reported in the previous wave.
   The sample weight is the household weight in the PSID.


B.1.2    Sample selection

We only keep head of households since the data is reported at the household level. We drop heads
of households 21 and younger, as well as households present for fewer than 3 waves. This selection
helps with the estimation of household fixed effects. We drop households with zero durable holdings,
or those with missing information on any variable. We winsorize all variables at the 5th and 95th
percentile.


B.1.3    Household fixed effects

We demean durable holdings by the households average durable holdings over the sample. This
accounts for permanent differences in tastes for durables across households, which are not part of the
model. We also divide non-durable consumption, liquid asset holdings, and real debt holdings by a
household's average non-durable consumption over the sample. This helps account for permanent
differences in income, which are again not part of the model.


B.1.4    Consistency with national aggregates

We divide all variables by average non-durable consumption in the sample. We then multiply each
scaled variable (durables, liquid assets, debt) by a factor so that the sample average aligns with
national aggregates from the fixed asset tables (durable-to-non-durable-consumption ratio) and
the flow of funds (liquid-asset-to-non-durable-consumption and debt-to-non-durable-consumption).


                                                 38
The rescaling is necessary because the PSID collects data for 72% of non-durable expenditures on
average (Li et al., 2010). Further, households appear to overestimate the value of their vehicles
(Czajka et al., 2003).


B.2    Estimation Algorithm

The steps of the algorithm are as follows:


  1. Solve the model for a given intensity of match quality shocks .

  2. Forecast the probability of adjustment P (a, d, y ) for each initial state (a, d, y ) over the next two
      years. Also forecast the average non-durable consumption expenditure (including operating
      and maintenance costs) c
                             ¯ for each initial state (a, d, y ) over the next two years. From the
      latter we obtain a steady-state distribution G(a, d, c
                                                           ¯).

  3. Regress the optimal durable stock d in the model on a, a2 , d, c
                                                                    ¯, d/c
                                                                         ¯ weighted using the steady-
      state distribution. The vector of estimated coefficient is  .

  4. Add measurement to the model variables a, d, c
                                                  ¯ using three independent Gaussian quadra-
                                                                   ^ (a, d, c
      tures, one for each variable. This yields a new distribution G        ¯) which includes mea-
      surement error. Note that the adjustment probabilities are based on the true underlying
      G(a, d, c
              ¯).

                                                              ^ . Integrating over  using G
  5. Compute gaps  = d - d for each point in the distribution G                           ^

      yields the pdf f ( ) in the model. Similarly integrating the probability of adjustment P (a, d, y )
                  ^ yields the hazard rate h( ) in the model.
      over  using G

                                        ¯ and our estimates  to predict d and the durable gap
  6. In the data combine reported a, d, c
       = d - d. Use the sample weights to compute f ( ) and the adjustment hazard h( ).

  7. Compute loss function L =            w( )[|f model ( ) - f data ( )| + |hmodel ( ) - hdata ( )|] where
      the weight is w( ) = 1
                           4 (f
                                model ( ) + f data ( ))(hmodel ( ) + hdata ( )). This weighting function


      attaches more weight to bins the greater the fraction of adjustments accounted for by that
      bin. Conversely, we attach little weight to regions in which both model and data predict few
      adjustments.


                                                    39
      8. Repeat steps 4,5, and 7 using a range of values for the standard deviation of the measurement
        error. Then pick the value that results in the smallest loss in 7.

      9. Repeat steps 1-8 using a range of values for . Pick the  with the smallest loss in 8.

 10. To construct standard errors, sample 1000 new datasets with replacement from the original
        dataset. Repeat steps 6 and 7 for each dataset, record the loss-minimizing value for  and
        the associated density and hazard function from both data and model.



C        Data Appendix

C.1       Variables for Impulse Response Functions

In this section we detail how we construct the variables for the empirical impulse response functions
to monetary policy shocks in figures 2 and 3 of section 3.
      The base series the set of variables in Table 4, which we download from the St Louis FRED
database.
      To construct real durable and non-durable expenditure, we first construct their respective price
indices. The problem is one where we have two components of nominal expenditure yt = x1t +
x2t (e.g., durable expenditure equals consumer durables plus residential investment), and their
respective price indices p1t and p2t . We want to construct the price index pt for yt . We first construct
                                    a =         1
average annual nominal expenditure yt           4   tyear=a yt ,   and the shares of the components, sa
                                                                                                      1t =
xa                xa
 1t
 a
yt    and sa
           2t =    a .
                   2t
                  yt     We regress one of the annual shares on an annual quadratic time trend, create
                     ¯a
the predicted values s                                  ¯a
                      1t , and use it as a weight, pt = s               ¯a
                                                          1t p1t + (1 - s1t )p1t . Real expenditure is then

calculated as yt /pt . We convert all real expenditure to per capita by dividing by population.
      We follow this procedure for both durables (consumer durables plus residential investment) and
non-durables (consumer non-durables plus services net of housing).
      For the price series of residential investment and consumer services we make specific modifica-
tions. We separate residential investment into investment into new structures and other residential
investment. For investment into new structures we use the FHFA national house price index to
capture changes in the price of land as well as the price of the new structure. For other residential
investment we use that respective price index from the BEA. The weights are based on nominal
expenditures in new residential structures and other residential investment and calculated as above.
                                                     40
                Variable Name                                    FRED Series Code
                Population                                       B230RC0Q173SBEA
                Income (GDP)                                     GDPC1
                Federal Funds Rate                               FEDFUNDS
                Consumer Durable Expenditure                     PCDG
                Residential Investment                           PRFI
                Consumer Non-durable Expenditure                 PCEND
                Consumer Service Expenditure                     PCES
                Consumer Housing Services Expenditure            DHSGRC0
                Durable Price Index                              DDURRD3Q086SBEA
                Residential Investment Price Index               B011RG3Q086SBEA
                Non-durable Price Index                          DNDGRG3M086SBEA
                Services Price Index                             DSERRG3M086SBEA
                Services Price Index: Housing                    DHUTRG3Q086SBEA
                Consumer Expenditure: Motor Vehicles             DMOTRC1Q027SBEA
                Motor Vehicles Price Index                       DMOTRG3Q086SBEA
                House Price Index                                USSTHPI
                Residential Investment: Permanent Site           A943RC1Q027SBEA
                Residential Investment: Other                    A863RC1Q027SBEA
                Residential Investment Price Index: Other        A863RG3Q086SBEA

                           Table 4: Variable names and FRED series code.

   For consumption of services we remove housing services because housing services in the model
are obtained from ht and not counted in ct . To do so we follow the same procedure as above for the
housing and non-housing component of services. But rather than adding, we subtract the housing
                                                                             ¯a
component, yt = x2t - x1t , and the price index is calculated as pt = (p2t - s               ¯a
                                                                               1t p1t )/(1 - s 1t ).

   The relative price series for durables is the price of durables divided by the price of non-durables
and services. The real interest rate is defined in terms of non-durables. It is the federal funds rate
net of realized non-durable inflation from this quarter to the next quarter.




                                                    41
C.2     PSID: Housing Adjustment Probability

This section details how we construct the time series for the probability of housing adjustment
using the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID). We use these data to measure the extensive
margin response of housing to monetary shocks in table 2 of section 3.


C.2.1     Sample

We keep only people who are heads of household and those who are in the Survey Research Center
(SRC) sample. We only use PSID data from 1969-1997 when the survey frequency is annual.


C.2.2     Adjustment Series

We use the moved since spring series to create a record of adjustments. If moved since spring is true,
we record an adjustment for that year. If moved since spring is false, we record no adjustment for
that year. If the value is missing, we stop counting until the next time an adjustment is recorded,
then count from there.
   Tenure Status Tenure status refers to knowing what type of housing (rent or own). We use
the series from the PSID labeled own/rent or what. There are also values for "other" or "not
applicable." If the values are "other" or "not applicable" we mark the tenure status as missing.
   To align with Bachmann and Cooper (2014), we set values to missing if the observation does
not have a tenure status or is lag does not have a tenure status. For example, if their observation is
in the year 1992, we will set the adjustment series to missing if we do not know whether the head
of household was owning or renting in either 1991 or 1992.


C.2.3     Weights

To weight observations in the regression, we take the mean of the family weight provided associated
with the head of household across all periods for which we have year to year housing adjustments
(1969-1997).


C.2.4     Time Series

We create a time series of the probability of adjustment by aggregating the panel using the family
weight.

                                                 42
C.3    CEX: Car acquisition probability

We use the consumer expenditure (CEX) survey from 1980-2017 to construct a quarterly time series
of the probability of a household acquiring a car or truck (used or new). We use this time series in
table 2 to measure the extensive margin response of auto purchases to monetary policy shocks.
   We download the pre-compiled files from the BLS for 1996 onwards. The CEX files before
1996 are from ICPSR. We only use the family and expenditure files. We clean the micro-data files
following Coibion et al. (2017). We drop households with negative elderly expenditure, zero total
expenditure, or zero food consumption. We sum expenditures that occur in the same month but
are reported in different interviews as recommended by the BLS. We drop households that report
more than three monthly expenditures per interview, since it is difficult to allocate the additional
monthly expenditures. We also drop interviews with fewer than three months of data.
   In the expenditure files we sum the UCC codes 450110 (new cars), 450210 (new trucks), 460110
(used cars), 460901 (used trucks). All expenditure series are net of trade-in value. This definition
aligns with the BEA definition of motor vehicle expenditure. Using the household weights, total
motor vehicle expenditure implies by the CEX tracks BEA personal consumption motor vehicle
expenditure very well (Figure A.1).
   We construct the probability of adjustment by setting an indicator equal to 1 whenever a
household's motor vehicle expenditures are positive, and aggregating the indicator using household
weights.


C.4    CPS: Reasons for moving

Reasons for moving are from the March 2001 CPS supplement. We classify these reasons according
to whether they broadly fall into life-cycle changes, which more closely correspond to our unmodeled
match-quality shocks, and sS-band reasons, which capture the traditional adjustments in fixed cost
model from a depreciating durable stock.
   We classify wanting a new/better home and cheaper housing is suggestive of durable holdings
away from target and price-sensitivity in line with the traditional fixed cost model. These account
for roughly a quarter of all adjustments, in line with our calibration of match-quality shocks.
Changes in marital status or job-related moving more closely align with life-cycle changes that are
less directly tied to interest rates. These account for roughly half of all transitions. The remaining

                                                 43
                                                  CEX and NIPA Motor Vehicle Expenditure
                                          600
                                                                                            CEX
                                                                                            NIPA
                                          500


                                          400




                            $ (billion)
                                          300


                                          200


                                          100


                                           0
                                           1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010     2015
                                                                   Date


Figure A.1: Household motor vehicle expenditure from the personal consumption expenditure
table in NIPA, and extrapolated from CEX micro-data based on NIPA definitions based on survey
weights.


quarter of moves are obviously classifiable in either category.



D     Additional Results

D.1    Price levels: non-durables and durables

See Figure A.2.


D.2    Real rate in terms of durables

See Figure A.3.


D.3    Other relative prices: residential investment and cars

See Figure A.4.


D.4    Nominal interest rate responses

Figure A.5 shows the nominal interest rate requires to implement the experiment in which the real
interest rate falls by 1% at a horizon of 8 quarters.




                                                                  44
Figure A.2: Impulse response function for the level of non-durable prices (left panel) and durable
prices (right panel) following a Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shock. Based on the
regression (9).




Figure A.3: Impulse response function for the real interest rate in terms of durables following a
Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shock. Based on the regression (9).




                                               45
Figure A.4: Impulse response function for the price of residential investment relative to the price of
non-durables and services (left panel) and the price of motor vehicles relative to the price of non-
durables and services (right panel) following a Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shock.
Based on the regression (9).




                                                                                       Real Rate
                                                                                       Nominal Rate
                                                       0
                       Interest Rate, % annualized




                                                     -0.2


                                                     -0.4


                                                     -0.6


                                                     -0.8


                                                      -1


                                                     -1.2
                                                            0   2   4        6     8     10           12
                                                                        Quarters


   Figure A.5: Response of real and nominal interest rates to a change in future interest rates.




                                                                        46
                          Table 5: What was ... main reason for moving?
                                                   Frequency    sS-Band    Life-cycle
                Change in marital status               0.84%       No          Yes
                To establish own household             1.06%       No          Yes
                Other family reason                    1.92%       No          Yes
                New job or job transfer                1.45%       No          Yes
                To look for work or lost job           0.27%       No          Yes
                To be closer to work                   0.44%        ?           ?
                Retired                                0.08%       No          Yes
                Other job-related reason               0.16%       No          Yes
                Wanted to own home, not rent           1.41%        ?           ?
                Wanted new or better house             2.47%       Yes         No
                Wanted better neighborhood             0.55%        ?           ?
                Cheaper housing                        0.76%       Yes         No
                Other housing reason                   1.52%        ?           ?
                Attend/leave college                   0.43%       No          Yes
                Change of climate                      0.08%       No          Yes
                Health reasons                         0.19%       No          Yes
                Total                                  13.64%    3.23%       6.48%


D.5      Forward Guidance in Non-Durables Model

Figure A.6 shows the forward guidance experiment in a version of our model that omits durable
goods.


D.6      General equilibrium attenuation of effects of past stimulus

The dashed opaque lines in Figure A.7 plot the original experiment in Section 5.2, in which we
compare a real rate path 1% below steady state for three quarters starting either in steady state or
continuing from two previous quarters of low real interest rates. The two solid lines repeat these
experiments as -1% shocks to the interest rate rule, and allowing for the real interest rate to respond
endogenously to inflation. The main takeaway is that the outcomes remain very similar to the

                                                  47
                                                 0.6


                 Percent change in consumption
                                                 0.5
                                                 0.4
                                                 0.3
                                                 0.2
                                                 0.1
                                                 0.0
                                                       0   2         4        6       8   10   12
                                                                      Quarters

Figure A.6: Response of aggregate consumption to 1% interest rate cut at dates 0 and 8 in model
with only non-durable consumption.


experiment with exogenous real interest rates, which already allowed for endogenous relative price
movements. Previous stimulus implies that fewer households today are crossing the adjustment
threshold, which reduces aggregate demand.
    The interest elasticity of durable demand is important to these results. Recall that past stimulus
creates a drag on demand because some households have already made their durable adjustments
in response to the previous stimulus. As explained by House (2014), with a high interest elasticity
of durable demand the existing distribution of durable holdings will have little effect on equilibrium
expenditure because small changes in prices will stabilize durable demand. That logic is not nearly
as powerful in our model as in the fixed-cost model because of the lower interest elasticity of durable
demand.



E     Details of the General Equilibrium Model

E.1    The Labor Market

The labor demand curve of each labor type j is,
                                                                                  -
                                                                           Wjt
                                                               ljt = Lt
                                                                           Wt


                                                                          48
                                                                 2
                                                                                             Conditional on steady state: endogenous r




                      Output, % deviation from steady state
                                                                                             Conditional on steady state: fixed r
                                                              1.5                            Conditional on past stimulus: endogenous r
                                                                                             Conditional on past stimulus: fixed r

                                                                 1


                                                              0.5


                                                                 0


                                                              -0.5


                                                               -1
                                                                     0             1                2                  3        4         5
                                                                                                            Quarters

Figure A.7: The effect of past stimulus with endogenous real interest rates (solid lines) and with
fixed real interest rates (dashed lines, see Figure 6 for description). The endogenous interest rates
paths are generated by a -1% shock to the monetary policy rule for periods t = 0 to 2. The figure
shows two scenarios: starting from steady state and with a history of two quarters of -1% stimulus.


so that the aggregate wage equal,
                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                        1                  1-
                                                                                                             1-
                                                                                   Wt =                     Wjt dj
                                                                                                    0

   The objective of the union is therefore,
                                                                             1
                                                                                                   Wjt                      
                max                                              e-t             uc (cit , dit )       ljt - u
                                                                                                             ¯c,t v (ljt ) - u¯c,t Lt µ2
                                                                                                                                       jt di dt
                {µjt } t=0                                               0                         Pt                       2

subject to

                                                                                       dln Wjt = µjt dt
                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                 Wjt
                                                                                             ljt = Lt
                                                                                                                 Wt

   The first order conditions of the union are,

                  jt = µjt u
                           ¯c,t Lt
                                                                                               1-                                         -
                                                                                       Wjt                   Wt                     Wjt
       djt - jt dt = -(1 - )¯
                            uc,t                                                                                       Lt dt - Lt             u
                                                                                                                                              ¯c,t vL (ljt ) dt
                                                                                       Pt                    Pt                     Wt




                                                                                                            49
   Imposing symmetry and market clearing

                                           Yt
                           µt u
                              ¯c,t            = t
                                           Zt
                                                                      Yt          Yt                     Yt
                         dt - t dt = -(1 - )¯
                                            uc,t                         dt - u
                                                                              ¯c,t vL                                  dt
                                                                      Zt          Zt                     Zt
                                               t = µ t

   The non-linear Phillips curve is then,

                              d¯
                               uc,t dYt dZt          -1                                                           Yt
                 dt =  -            -    +    t dt -       vL                                                               - 1 dt
                              u¯c,t   Yt   Zt           -1                                                        Zt

and log-linearized around the zero inflation steady-state

                                                                           ¯
                                                                      Yt - Y        ¯
                                                                               Zt - Z
                                 dt = t dt -                             ¯   -    ¯                    dt
                                                                         Y        Z

        1                                                     
where       is the Frisch elasticity. Letting  =                     gives (11).


E.2     Market Clearing

Non-durables market clearing:
                                           1                                                1
                          Yt =                 cit di + Mt + Gt + (rb - r)                      ait I(ait <0) di.
                                       0                                                0

Durable goods market clearing:
                                   1                                          1                               1
                                               ddit
                       Xt =                         - dit di + f                  Idit =dit dit +                 dit di.
                               0                dt                        0                               0

Bond market clearing:
                                                              1
                                                                  ait di = At .
                                                          0




                                                                     50
References
Achdou, Y., Han, J., Lasry, J.-M., Lions, P.-L., and Moll, B. (2017). Income and wealth distribution
  in macroeconomics: A continuous-time approach. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Albouy, D., Ehrlich, G., and Liu, Y. (2016). Housing demand, cost-of-living inequality, and the
  affordability crisis. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alvarez, F., Le Bihan, H., and Lippi, F. (2016). The real effects of monetary shocks in sticky price
  models: A sufficient statistic approach. American Economic Review, 106(10):2817­51.
Angeletos, G.-M. and Lian, C. (2018). Forward guidance without common knowledge. American
 Economic Review, 108(9):2477­2512.
Auclert, A. (2019). Monetary policy and the redistribution channel. American Economic Review,
 109(6):2333­67.
Bachmann, R., Caballero, R. J., and Engel, E. M. (2013). Aggregate implications of lumpy in-
  vestment: new evidence and a dsge model. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  5(4):29­67.
Bachmann, R. and Cooper, D. (2014). The ins and arounds in the us housing market. Working
  paper.
Baker, S. R., Kueng, L., McGranahan, L., and Melzer, B. T. (2019). Do household finances
  constrain unconventional fiscal policy? Tax Policy and the Economy, 33(1):1­32.
Barsky, R., House, C. L., Boehm, C., and Kimball, M. S. (2016). Monetary policy and durable
  goods. Working paper.
Barsky, R. B., House, C. L., and Kimball, M. S. (2007). Sticky-price models and durable goods.
  American Economic Review, 97(3):984­998.
Berger, D. and Vavra, J. (2015).      Consumption dynamics during recessions.        Econometrica,
  83(1):101­154.
Berger, D. W., Milbradt, K., Tourre, F., and Vavra, J. (2018). Mortgage prepayment and path-
  dependent effects of monetary policy. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carlstrom, C. T., Fuerst, T. S., and Paustian, M. (2015). Inflation and output in new keynesian
  models with a transient interest rate peg. Journal of Monetary Economics, 76:230­243.
Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Kueng, L., and Silvia, J. (2017). Innocent bystanders? monetary
  policy and inequality. Journal of Monetary Economics, 88:70­89.
Czajka, J. L., Jacobson, J. E., and Cody, S. (2003). Survey estimates of wealth: A comparative
  analysis and review of the survey of income and program participation. Soc. Sec. Bull., 65:63.
Davidoff, T. and Yoshida, J. (2013). Estimating consumption substitution between housing and
  non-housing goods using macro data. Technical report, Working paper.
Davis, M. A. and Heathcote, J. (2007). The price and quantity of residential land in the united
  states. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8):2595­2620.
Davis, M. A., Lehnert, A., and Martin, R. F. (2008). The rent-price ratio for the aggregate stock
  of owner-occupied housing. Review of Income and Wealth, 54(2):279­284.
                                                51
Davis, M. A. and Ortalo-Magn´e, F. (2011). Household expenditures, wages, rents. Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 14(2):248­261.
Del Negro, M., Giannoni, M. P., and Patterson, C. (2015). The forward guidance puzzle. Working
  paper.
Dupor, B., Li, R., Mehkari, M., and Tsai, Y.-C. (2018). The 2008 us auto market collapse. FRB
 St. Louis Working Paper.
Eggertsson, G. B. and Woodford, M. (2003). The zero bound on interest rates and optimal monetary
  policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003(1):139­211.
Eichenbaum, M., Rebelo, S., and Wong, A. (2018). State dependent effects of monetary policy:
  The refinancing channel. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Erceg, C. J., Henderson, D. W., and Levin, A. T. (2000). Optimal monetary policy with staggered
  wage and price contracts. Journal of monetary Economics, 46(2):281­313.
Farhi, E. and Werning, I. (2017). Monetary policy, bounded rationality, and incomplete markets.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Floden, M. and Lind´e, J. (2001). Idiosyncratic risk in the united states and sweden: Is there a role
  for government insurance? Review of Economic dynamics, 4(2):406­437.
Gabaix, X. (2016). A behavioral new keynesian model. Technical report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.
Gali, J. (2008). Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle. Princeton University Press,
 Princeton, NJ.
Golosov, M. and Lucas, R. E. (2007). Menu costs and phillips curves. Journal of Political Economy,
 115(2):171­199.
Goolsbee, A. (1998). Investment Tax Incentives, Prices, and the Supply of Capital Goods*. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1):121­148.
Gornemann, N., Kuester, K., and Nakajima, M. (2016). Doves for the rich, hawks for the poor?
 distributional consequences of monetary policy. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP11233.
Guerrieri, V. and Lorenzoni, G. (2017). Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the liquidity trap.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3):1427­1467.
House, C. L. (2014). Fixed costs and long-lived investments. Journal of Monetary Economics,
  68:86­100.
House, C. L. and Shapiro, M. D. (2008). Temporary investment tax incentives: Theory with
  evidence from bonus depreciation. American Economic Review, 98(3):737­68.
Kaplan, G., Moll, B., and Violante, G. L. (2018). Monetary policy according to hank. American
 Economic Review, 108(3):697­743.
Khan, A. and Thomas, J. K. (2008). Idiosyncratic shocks and the role of nonconvexities in plant
 and aggregate investment dynamics. Econometrica, 76(2):395­436.
Koby, Y. and Wolf, C. (2018). Understanding investment stimulus: From micro data to macro
 outcomes. Working paper.


                                                 52
Leahy, J. V. and Zeira, J. (2005). The Timing of Purchases and Aggregate Fluctuations. The
  Review of Economic Studies, 72(4):1127­1151.
Li, G., Schoeni, R. F., Danziger, S., and Charles, K. K. (2010). New expenditure data in the psid:
  Comparisons with the ce. Monthly Labor Review, 133(2):29­39.
Luetticke, R. (2019). Transmission of monetary policy with heterogeneity in household portfolios.
  University College London working paper.
Mavroeidis, S., Plagborg-Møller, M., and Stock, J. H. (2014). Empirical evidence on inflation
 expectations in the new keynesian phillips curve. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(1):124­88.
McKay, A., Nakamura, E., and Steinsson, J. (2016). The power of forward guidance revisited.
 American Economic Review, 106(10):3133­58.
McKay, A. and Reis, R. (2016). The role of automatic stabilizers in the us business cycle. Econo-
 metrica, 84(1):141­194.
Mian, A. and Sufi, A. (2012). The effects of fiscal stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 cash for
 clunkers program. The Quarterly journal of economics, 127(3):1107­1142.
Midrigan, V. (2011). Menu costs, multiproduct firms, and aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica,
 79(4):1139­1180.
Nakamura, E. and Steinsson, J. (2010). Monetary Non-neutrality in a Multisector Menu Cost
  Model. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3):961­1013.
Ogaki, M. and Reinhart, C. M. (1998). Measuring intertemporal substitution: The role of durable
 goods. Journal of political Economy, 106(5):1078­1098.
Pako s, M. (2011). Estimating intertemporal and intratemporal substitutions when both income
  and substitution effects are present: the role of durable goods. Journal of Business & Economic
  Statistics, 29(3):439­454.
Reifschneider, D. and Williams, J. C. (2000). Three lessons for monetary policy in a low-inflation
  era. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, pages 936­966.
Romer, C. D. and Romer, D. H. (2004). A new measure of monetary shocks: Derivation and
  implications. American Economic Review, 94(4):1055­1084.
Sterk, V. and Tenreyro, S. (2018). The transmission of monetary policy through redistributions
  and durable purchases. Journal of Monetary Economics, 99:124­137.
Tenreyro, S. and Thwaites, G. (2016). Pushing on a string: Us monetary policy is less powerful in
  recessions. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(4):43­74.
Werning, I. (2015). Incomplete markets and aggregate demand. Technical report, National Bureau
 of Economic Research.
Wieland, J. F. and Yang, M.-J. (2017). Financial dampening. Technical report, National Bureau
 of Economic Research.
Winberry, T. (2018). Lumpy investment, business cycles, and stimulus policy. Forthcoming in
 American Economic Review.
Woodford, M. (2003). Interest and Prices. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.


                                               53
