                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  RULES OF THUMB AND ATTENTION ELASTICITIES:
               EVIDENCE FROM UNDER- AND OVERREACTION TO TAXES

                                          William Morrison
                                          Dmitry Taubinsky

                                        Working Paper 26180
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26180


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2019




We are especially grateful to Alex Rees-Jones for many helpful conversations and input that led to
this project. We are also indebted to Xavier Gabaix for guiding us through the application of his model.
We also thank Sandro Ambuehl, Ned Augenblick, Andrew Caplin, Mark Dean, Stefano DellaVigna,
Shachar Kariv, Patrick Kline, John Leahy, Daniel Martin, Filip Matejka, Josh Schwartzstein, Amitai
Shenhav, and Philipp Strack, as well as conference and seminar participants, for helpful comments.
Afras Sial provided excellent research assistance. Taubinsky thanks the Sloan Foundation for financial
support. The experiment was approved by the Dartmouth College Committee for the Protection of
Human Subjects (CPHS), # STUDY00029784. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by William Morrison and Dmitry Taubinsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Rules of Thumb and Attention Elasticities: Evidence from Under- and Overreaction to Taxes
William Morrison and Dmitry Taubinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 26180
August 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. D9,H2

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper develops and implements a series of tests of costly attention models, in the context of consumer
misreaction to opaque prices. We derive a series of predictions about how the sign and magnitude
of misreaction varies with stakes. We then test and confirm these predictions in an experiment on consumers'
online shopping decisions in the presence of shrouded sales taxes that are exogenously varied within
consumer over time. We find that some consumers systematically underreact to sales taxes while others
systematically overreact. But when the stakes increase, consumers who tend to underreact become
more sensitive to sales taxes, while consumers who tend to overreact becomes less sensitive to sales
taxes. The collection of empirical results implies that consumers use highly heterogeneous rules of
thumb to compute the opaque tax when the stakes are low, but use costly mental effort to increase
the accuracy of their assessment of the total price when the stakes increase. We establish the results
both by using simple reduced-form tests as well as by developing new econometric techniques for
quantifying individual differences. The results are inconsistent with models in which attention is exogenous,
as well as models in which attention is endogenous and costly but prior perceptions are homogeneous.


William Morrison
University of California at Berkeley
530 Evans Hall
MC #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
wmorrison@berkeley.edu

Dmitry Taubinsky
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
dmitry.taubinsky@berkeley.edu
1        Introduction
Economists have long theorized that cognitive resources are limited, and that individuals may simplify
complex decisions by deliberately using heuristic shortcuts or by processing only a subset of available
information (for recent reviews, see Caplin, 2016; Makowiak et al., 2018; Gabaix, 2019). This view is
in line with the resource rationality framework in the cognitive sciences (Lieder and Griffiths, 2019),
which recognizes "mental effort as a domain of decision-making" (Shenhav et al., 2017).
        For example, when choosing whether or not to buy a product sold for a posted price of $17.99 and
a sales tax rate of 7%, some consumers might reduce the cognitive burden of computing the total after-
tax price by instead choosing to ignore the sales tax completely. Other consumers might approximate
the sales tax with a rough sense of how much tax they usually pay when they buy $17.99 worth of
products, including instances in which not all of the products are subject to the tax. And yet other
consumers might approximate the tax to be negligibly less than 10% of $17.99, which they compute
easily by moving the decimal point one digit to the left.
        In the first two of these example cases the consumers underreact to sales taxes--they behave as
if the taxes are smaller than they are. In the last case, the consumers overreact. When purchasing
expensive electronics or an automobile, however, consumers may choose to exert more cognitive effort
to compute the actual price that they would end up paying, thereby reducing their propensity to both
over- and underreact.
        Such deliberate, and plausibly elastic, use of cognitive shortcuts may not only play an important
role in recent findings of misreaction to sales taxes1 , but may also play a role in misreaction to shipping
and handling charges (Hossain and Morgan, 2006), energy prices (Allcott and Taubinsky, 2015), various
features of health insurance contracts (Handel and Kolstad, 2015; Bhargava et al., 2017; Abaluck and
Adams, 2017), left-digit bias (Lacetera et al., 2012; Shlain, 2019), shrouded financial fees (Heidhues
et al., 2017), and add-on charges (Gabaix and Laibson, 2006).
        The goal of this paper is to develop and implement a series of tests to investigate the interaction
between rule-of-thumb decision-making and deployment of costly attention. In the empirical studies
above, it is far from clear that misreaction results from a lack of mental effort, and that greater mental
effort would improve consumer choice. Kahneman (2003), for example, argues that "attention and
effort by themselves do not purchase rationality or guarantee good decisions," while Ariely et al. (2009)
advance the argument that mental effort is not fully controlled and may be deployed less efficiently
when large stakes "occupy the mind." Other plausible mechanisms for misreaction to opaque prices
include complete unawareness of the opaque price (e.g., Gabaix and Laibson, 2006), incorrect beliefs
generated by systematic mislearning (e.g., Hanna et al., 2014) or misleading marketing (e.g., Anagol
et al., 2017), forgetting (e.g., Bordalo et al., 2019), or a systemic lack of financial literacy that prevents
consumers from reaching the right answer (e.g., Hastings et al., 2013). Our tests allow us to gauge
the importance of costly attention mechanisms.
        We begin our investigation in Section 2 by formalizing the economic environment and several types
    See Chetty et al. 2009; Goldin and Homonoff 2013; Feldman and Ruffle 2015; Taubinsky and Rees-Jones 2018;
    1

Feldman et al. 2018; Feldman and Bradley forthcoming; Kroft et al. 2019



                                                       1
of costly inattention models. Consumers must decide whether or not to buy a good or service that has
both a transparent posted price and an opaque price. Consumers have a prior perception of the post-
tax price that they can access costlessly, and which can vary between consumers, as in our example.
We consider several formulations of the cognitive costs of updating: the Shannon cost function used
in rational inattention models,2 and the attention-weight adjustment cost function of Gabaix (2014).
       We establish that both types of cost functions have a simple reduced-form representation in our
economic setting: both models lead to consumer behavior that looks as if the consumer places some
(possibly stochastic) weight on the opaque price (e.g., Chetty et al., 2009; DellaVigna, 2009). We
call this weight the revealed valuation weight, or just valuation weight for short, because it is easily
estimated from observable price variation, as in the reduced-form regression models used to quantify
under- and overreaction in applied empirical work. In the context of sales taxes, a valuation weight of,
e.g.,  = 0.4 means that imposing a sales tax of size t decreases demand as much as increasing posted
prices by 0.4t would decrease demand. In other words,  = 0.4 means that consumers are 40 percent
as responsive to taxes as fully attentive consumers would be.
       The underlying costly attention models discipline the reduced-form valuation weights in several
straightforward and economically meaningful ways. First, they imply that if there are individual
differences, then these should be persistent across different levels of stakes; e.g., consumers who tend
to overreact at moderate stakes should also tend to overreact at higher stakes. Second, the costly
attention models imply that the valuation weights should approach one as the stakes increase. In
settings such as those of Chetty et al. (2009), where consumers underreact to sales taxes on average, the
average underreaction must thus decrease as the stakes increase (e.g., as the sales tax rate increases). A
more discerning empirical test, however, is that the higher is the valuation weight at moderate stakes,
the smaller is the degree by which it increases when stakes increase. In particular, the valuation
weights should decrease for consumers who overreact and increase for consumers who underreact.
       We test these predictions in the context of a prominent and policy-relevant domain of behavior:
consumer response to sales taxes not included in posted prices. Because the strongest tests of costly
attention models concern individual differences in how the sign and magnitude of misreaction is im-
pacted by stakes, we develop a new experimental design in which the size of the tax rate is varied
exogenously within consumers over time. Existing empirical work does not feature within-consumer
variation in stake size, and thus cannot be used to test these predictions.
       Our experiment features 1,534 demographically diverse consumers from the forty-five U.S. states
with positive sales taxes. The experiment utilizes an online shopping environment with nine different
non-tax-exempt household products, such as cleaning supplies. Each consumer encounters three of
the nine products in three different type of "stores" at random posted prices. The three different types
of stores feature either 1) no sales taxes, 2) standard sales taxes identical to those in the consumer's
city of residence, or 3) high sales taxes that are triple those in the consumer's city of residence. Each
   2
    This formulation leads to a model that is almost identical to rational inattention models, with one exception: because
we allow priors to be heterogeneous, we allow for systematically biased perceptions of the true value. This heterogeneity
is necessary to capture individual differences in the tendency to either under- or overreact to the sales tax, which we
show are very significant in our data. This clarification is meant only for readers who define rational inattention as
having systematically unbiased beliefs.


                                                            2
consumer thus encounters 3 × 3 product by store pairs, with each associated to a set of random prices.
Decisions in the experiment are incentive compatible: study participants receive a $16 budget to
potentially buy one of the randomly chosen products in one of the randomly purchased stores, and
purchased products are shipped to their homes.
      We begin our empirical analysis with a very simple test in Section 4: we estimate average under-
reaction to taxes of varying size, exploiting both the exogenous variation in prices and the exogenous
variation in tax rates. We find striking evidence for the prediction that misreaction depends on stakes.
The average valuation weight is 0.23 for the smallest price at standard tax rates--meaning that at
these stakes consumers are only 23 percent as responsive to taxes as fully attentive consumers would
be. However, the average valuation weight is 0.79 for the largest price at triple tax rates--meaning
that at these stakes consumers are 79 percent as responsive to taxes as fully attentive consumers
would be. The average increases monotonically in the absolute size of the tax, and in a manner that
is invariant to whether the absolute size of the tax is high because the tax rate is high or because
the price is high. Direct tests of consumers' knowledge and computational ability suggest that our
findings are more consistent with consumers knowing the tax rate and exerting effort to compute the
tax-inclusive price, rather than engaging in information acquisition about the tax rate.
      In Section 5 we move to the more novel and demanding predictions about individual differences
in how the sign and magnitude of mistakes vary with stakes. As we discuss in that section, a key
challenge for tests of individual differences is that it is not possible to compute estimates of valuation
weights at the individual level with a reasonable degree of precision, since individual-level valuations
of the products can only be measured with substantial noise. These challenges are not unique to our
setting, and would pose problems for most within-subject experiments seeking to quantify individual
differences.3 To overcome this challenge and generate simple reduced-form tests of our individual-level
predictions, we leverage the multiple decisions feature of our design to form "leave-out instruments"
for consumers' attention. We use one product to divide consumers by whether their willingness to
buy dropped significantly or not in response to the standard tax rate, and we then estimate those two
groups' valuation weights using decisions about the other two products.
      These instruments are powerful, which is consistent with significant individual differences. Con-
sumers in the high valuation weight group have an average valuation weight of 1.04 (95% CI 0.83-1.26)
for standard taxes, while consumers in the low valuation weight group have an average valuation weight
of 0.25 (95% CI 0.08-0.42) for standard taxes. Consistent with the prediction that individual differ-
ences are persistent across stakes, we find that in the triple tax store, consumers classified as having
high valuation weights in the standard tax store have an average valuation weight of 1.20 (95% CI
1.10-1.31), while consumers classified as having low valuation weights in the standard tax store have
an average valuation weight of 0.64 (95% CI 0.57-0.72).
      We then establish two key empirical results that are consistent with the prediction that valuation
weights should get closer to one as stakes increase. First, when the tax rates are tripled, consumers in
the low valuation weight group exhibit a significantly larger increase in their valuation weights than
consumers in the high valuation weight group (0.39 vs. 0.16; 95% CI for difference 0.03-0.43). Second,
  3
      This includes many experiments in which authors choose to report individual-level estimates nonetheless.


                                                           3
when we construct analogous instruments that divide consumers into groups based on how much they
adjust their valuation weight as stakes increase, we find that consumers in the low adjustment group
have significantly higher valuation weights in both the standard tax regime (0.85 vs. 0.34; 95% CI
for difference 0.28-0.75) and in the triple tax regime (0.86 vs. 0.76; 95% CI for difference -0.01-0.20).
This second result is consistent with the prediction that the smallest valuation weight changes should
occur for consumers with the highest prior perceptions, which translate to high valuation weights in
both the standard and high stakes environments.
       Having established significant and persistent individual differences in valuation weights, as well as
heterogeneous attention responses to higher stakes that are consistent with costly attention models,
we ask two key questions in Section 6. First, are the individual differences large enough that some
consumers overreact to standard taxes? And if so, can we show that some consumers decrease their
valuation weights when the stakes increase?
       To answer these questions, we develop new econometric techniques for bounding individual differ-
ences. First, we develop a new approach that produces a lower bound on the variance of the valuation
weights. The approach is in the spirit of instrumental variable corrections that leverage double obser-
vations of mis-measured right-hand-side variables in regressions (e.g., Hausman, 2001; Gillen et al.,
forthcoming). Second, we develop a concentration inequality approach that uses our point estimates
of means and our estimates of variance bounds to form non-parametric bounds on several properties
of the distribution of valuation weights.
       We find that at standard taxes, the maximum of the valuation weights must be at least 2.21 (5%
confidence bound of 1.55). This implies that at least some consumers overreact to taxes significantly.
To our knowledge, our finding of overreaction by some consumers is new to the literature, and runs
counter to researchers' priors. Consistent with the presence of overreaction in costly attention models,
we also estimate that some consumers reduce their valuation weight by at least 0.94 (5% confidence
bound of 0.16) when shopping in the triple tax stores instead of the standard tax store.
       Our paper contributes to several literatures. First, our paper contributes to a recent literature that
experimentally tests models of costly attention.4 With the exception of Bartos et al. (2016), these
papers utilize abstract information acquisition and problem solving tasks to provide comprehensive
tests of core assumptions of the models. Our paper complements this literature by focusing on a
concrete empirical setting, and asking whether the "mistakes" identified by reduced-form empirical
work in that domain fit the patterns of costly attention models. In that sense, our paper is most
similar in spirit to Bartos et al. (2016), who conduct experiments testing whether discrimination in
the job market and rental housing market conforms to patterns predicted by a costly attention model.5
       We conduct our tests through a simplified representation of costly attention models that is in
the spirit of several recent advances in the literature. Matejka and McKay (2015) show that rational
inattention with Shannon entropy leads to choices that follow the multinomial logit model. Caplin et al.
(2018) produce a reduced-form representation of rational inattention by drawing a link between the
   4
    See, e.g., Gabaix et al. (2006); Bartos et al. (2016); Martin (2016); Dean and Neligh (2018); Ambuehl et al. (2018);
Caplin et al. (2018); Carvahlo and Silverman (2019).
  5
    See also Hoopes et al. (2015) and Benzarti (forthcoming) for quasi-experimental evidence of tax complexity costs.



                                                           4
Psychometric Weber curve and the theory of competitive supply, and show how basic microeconomic
tools can be used to quantify attention costs. We complement these papers by showing how theories
of costly attention can be linked to the reduced-form models used by empirical economists to study
opaque prices.
        By focusing on the concrete setting of opaque sales taxes, and opaque prices more broadly, our
paper also deepens the empirical work in those settings. To our knowledge, empirical work in these
settings has not tested predictions about individual differences in attentional responses to stakes.
Gabaix (2019) provides suggestive evidence from cross-study comparisons that average underreaction
to opaque prices decreases with stakes. This paper continues this line of argument by providing
rigorous experimental evidence of this phenomenon, including a series of more nuanced tests of costly
attention models that move beyond comparative statistics on average underreaction and toward more
demanding predictions about attentional responses to stakes at the individual level.
        While focusing mostly on normative implications of tax salience and using an experimental design
importantly different from ours in key ways, Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018, henceforth TRJ) are
closest to our work in that they also find that average underreaction decreases when tax rates are
saliently increased. However, TRJ cannot quantify how average underreaction varies by posted price,
and thus cannot rule out that their results are driven by other possibilities such as consumers over-
reacting to a surprising change that violates their shopping "norms" (Bordalo et al., 2019). More
importantly, the lack of within-consumer variation in tax rates in the TRJ data makes testing core
predictions about individual differences in how attention responds to stakes infeasible. Overall, we
test five key predictions in this paper, as summarized in Section 2.6; however, the experimental design
employed by TRJ allows only a weak test of the first prediction, and is infeasible for testing the other
four predictions, which are more discerning and novel.6 Section 7.2 summarizes six key differences
between this paper and TRJ.
        Finally, our paper contributes econometric techniques for studying individual differences in the
presence of measurement error. While there is a large literature on techniques for addressing mea-
surement error in regression analysis (e.g., Hausman, 2001; Gillen et al., forthcoming), we introduce
techniques for inference about the variance of a noisily measured variable. We then develop concen-
tration inequality approaches to translate bounds on the variance to bounds on several properties
of the distribution. Extensions of our approach could be used to provide formal statistical evidence
for other questions about individual differences, such as whether some individuals are risk-loving or
future-biased.


2        Theoretical framework for hypothesis development
In this section, we provide several formal examples of costly attention models based on two prominent
modeling approaches in the literature, which we use to motivate our hypotheses. The several variations
    Moreover, while TRJ use observable covariates to estimate a lower bound on heterogeneity in misreaction at a
    6

given tax rate, the results in our paper show that their methodology produces a lower bound that is about an order of
magnitude too small, and cannot be used to establish that some consumers overreact.



                                                         5
we provide are not meant to be exhaustive of the full set of costly attention models. Our goal is to
show that our hypotheses can be derived from tractable and generally applicable models, and to give
some indication of the robustness of our predictions by showing that they are not tied to a single
modeling framework.

2.1    Setup
Consumers have unit demand for a good x and spend their remaining money on an untaxed composite
good y (the numeraire). We assume quasilinear preferences: the utility of purchasing good x is given
by vx - p, where x  {0, 1}, v is the utility from the product, and p is its total price.
    The total price consists of a salient component ps and an opaque component po , with p = ps + po .
In our empirical application, ps represents the displayed price of the product while po represents the
sales tax.
    Consumers costlessly incorporate ps into their decision, but may have trouble properly processing
po . We endow po with the structure po = qo , where  is a parameter that is known to the consumers
and represents the "stakes" involved, while qo is the part that may be mis-processed. For example,
a salient announcement that sales taxes will be tripled is likely to be fully noted by consumers, and
corresponds to an increase in  . As another example, consider po = ps qo , where qo corresponds to the
sales tax rate and po is the tax owed on an item sold for a posted price of ps .
    As a simple and illustrative baseline, which we generalize in the appendix, we assume that when
consumers do not exert mental effort their baseline representation of qo is given by prior beliefs that
place probability r on its true value t and probability 1 - r on some other value t^. This generates a
heuristic, "rule-of-thumb" estimate of the opaque price p
                                                        ^o = rt +  (1 - r)t ^.
    Consumers must pay cognitive costs to better take the opaque price into account. Their choice of
whether or not to pay this cost depends on their prior. This is in contrast to "ex-post" attentional rules
such as those in Chetty et al. (2007), according to which the consumer knows the ex-post benefit of
paying attention before exerting any cognitive effort.7 For example, consumers who are very confident
in their assessment will not bother to exert mental costs. We detail the link between mental effort
and improvements to the prior perception in the subsections that follow.
    As an example of the prior perceptions that could be captured by our formalism, consider indi-
viduals who have a sense of how much tax they usually pay on average over all items they buy, both
those subject to a tax and those that are not. A prior perception based on this loose recollection
could be modeled by setting t
                            ^ = 0, with r corresponding to the frequency of purchase occasions of
taxable products. Cognitive costs could be expended to either improve recollection (Ratcliff, 1978)
or to perform the computation directly without relying on memory samples. Alternatively, the model
with t^ = 0 could correspond to individuals not being sure if the good is subject to the standard tax
or not.
    As another example, t
                        ^ > t could capture individuals who without thinking would guess the sales
tax to be somewhat lower than 10% of the posted price. Costly thinking could involve a series of steps
   7
     Unlike Chetty et al. (2007), we also allow arbitrary heterogeneity in prior beliefs, including overestimation. As we
will show, our data strongly reject a model in which consumers either pay full attention to the tax or ignore it completely.


                                                             6
to improve the approximation. For example, to compute a 7% tax, first compute 5% of the sales price
as half of the 10% estimate, and then find a point that is approximately between the 5% and 10%
estimates.
       There are several ways to interpret our model. One is that consumers literally do not know
po , and must search for information about it. Another, as in some of the examples above, is that
consumers know what the value of po is, but have trouble integrating it into their decision-making.
Our experimental data will allow us to differentiate between incorrect beliefs and computation costs
as mechanisms for imperfect processing of po , providing more support for the latter.
       We view the static costly attention models we work with to be "as if" models of this effortful
thinking. Processed-based models, such as sequential sampling (e.g., Fudenberg et al., 2018; Busemeyer
et al. 2019), could provide more complete accounts of how the allocation of costly attention to a
decision improves accuracy.8

2.2      Simple example with binary attention strategies
We begin with a simple example of a costly attention model, and show how it motivates the empirical
tests we perform using our experiment. After using this example to draw out the main intuitions,
we present two richer and more commonly used models of attention choice--the Shannon model used
in rational inattention models (Sims, 2003; Matejka and McKay, 2015; Caplin et al., forthcoming)
and Gabaix's (2014) attention weight adjustment model--and show that they deliver similar sets of
testable implications. The simple model in this section is a special case of Gabaix (2014).
       In this simple example, we suppose that computing the opaque price correctly is a binary decision:
consumers can rely on their initial perceptions or they can pay a cost  to fully learn whether qo = t
or qo = t
        ^. If the consumer does not pay the cognitive cost, then he buys if and only if v - ps  p^o =
rt + (1 - r) t ^. If v - ps >  max(t, t
                                      ^) then the consumer definitely buys, since there is no possibility
that the total price exceeds the product value v . And if v - ps <  min(t, t ^) then the consumer does
not buy since there is no possibility that the total price is smaller than the product value v . Hence,
we focus on the interesting case in which  min(t, t^) < v - ps <  max(t, t ^).
       Suppose, first, that t
                            ^ < t. If v - ps < p
                                               ^o then the consumer does not buy the product if he does not
pay an attention cost. If the consumer does pay an attention cost, then he learns that po = t > p
                                                                                                ^o ,
and thus does not buy the product. Thus, if v - ps < p
                                                     ^o then the consumer does not buy the product.
       If v - ps  p
                  ^o then the consumer buys if he does not pay an attention cost. The value of figuring
out po is the value of averting a purchase if the opaque price is high: r(t + ps - v ). Thus, the consumer
pays the attention cost if  < r(t + ps - v ), or equivalently v - ps < t - /r. Upon paying the
attention cost, the consumer buys only if v - ps > t, which cannot occur since the consumer only
pays the attention cost when v - ps < t - /r. Consequently, the consumer only buys in this case if
he does not pay the attention cost.
       Summing up, the consumer buys if and only if both v - ps  p
                                                                 ^o and v - ps  t - /r hold. This
   8
     Our mathematical framework could also be applied to cases in which the cost of computing the post-tax price is
affective because, e.g., it is unpleasant to think about paying taxes. Feldman and Ruffle (2015) present results that
could be consistent with affective costs.


                                                         7
behavior is equivalent to the behavior of a consumer who perceives po to be p
                                                                            ~o = po , and thus buys
only if v - ps  t, where

                                       1
                                   =          po , t - /r)
                                         max (^
                                       t
                                                                  ^
                                                                  t
                                     = max 1 -      , r + (1 - r)   <1                                 (1)
                                                tr                t

      Conversely, if t
                     ^ > t, analogous reasoning implies that this behavior is equivalent to the behavior
of a consumer who perceives po to be p
                                     ~o = po , for

                                                                    ^
                                                                    t
                                    = min 1 +         , r + (1 - r)   > 1.                             (2)
                                                   tr               t

      Notably, although the attention strategy depends on the transparent price ps , we can still represent
the consumer's behavior as if he weights po by some weight  that is independent of the price ps .
We call  the revealed valuation weight, as it is easily estimable from data. Concretely, consider a
population of consumers who derive different utilities v from the product, but have the same valuation
weight . Let p be the decrease in the salient price ps that generates the same change in demand as
the removal of the opaque price po . Then by definition, ps + po - p = ps , and thus  = p/po . We
refer to  > 1 as overreaction and  < 1 as underreaction.
      Importantly, the underlying model of costly attention puts structure on the relative degree of
misreaction, and on its distribution in the population. First, any individual differences in --generated
by individual differences in priors (t
                                     ^ and r) and in the cost of attention --must be persistent across
stakes  . In particular,  is increasing in t
                                           ^, and |1 - | is decreasing in r and increasing in .
    Second,  is increasing in  when t   ^ < t, and is decreasing in  when t  ^ > t, with lim  = 1.
That is, as stakes increase, the relative degree of misreaction decreases, and becomes arbitrarily small
for sufficiently large stakes. Although intuitive, this comparative static holds only for the relative
degree of misreaction |1 - |. The absolute degree of misreaction, |po - po |, is weakly increasing in
 .9
      The fact that |1 - |  0 as    has several consequences. First, it implies that if E [] < 1 in
the population, then increasing stakes should increase the average valuation weight. Second, it implies
that if some individuals tend to overreact, then they should do so less when the stakes increase; that
is,  falls with  for individuals who overreact. More generally, this implies that the extent to which 
increases with stakes  is decreasing with the baseline level of . Finally, if some individuals overreact,
the individuals whose  fall the most as  increases from 1 to 2 > 1 should on average have the
highest  at both 1 to 2 .
      Although mathematically straightforward, this last prediction is particularly demanding. In essence,
  9
      For t
          ^ < t, for example,

                                                                ^ = min(/r,  (1 - r)(t - t
                                                                                         ^)).
                       po - po = t - max t -     , tr + (1 - r) t
                                               r




                                                       8
it is saying that if the distribution of  at two stakes levels 1 and 2 > 1 is given by the random
variables X1 and X2 , then E [X1 |X1 - X2 = ] and E [X2 |X1 - X2 = ] are both increasing in . This
implies a special structure on the joint distribution of X1 and X2 , as typically X1 - X2 is "big" when
X1 is "big" and X2 is "small" rather than "big." As we discuss more in Section 2.6.1, heterogeneity in
prior perceptions across stakes would cut strongly against this prediction.

2.3    Shannon model with heterogeneous priors
In contrast to our simple example above, the Shannon model allows for a range of cognitive effort. In
our setting, the Shannon model posits that consumers pay some cost to adjust their initial weight r
closer to the truth. Higher attention costs move perceptions closer to the truth in expectation, but
this link is stochastic.
   Formally, the Shannon model is as follows in our setting:

   1. Consumers choose a joint distribution  over signals and qo . Without loss of generality, we
      associate each signal with a posterior belief  of the probability that qo = t. The revision
       - r can be thought of as the extent to which the consumer adjusts his estimate closer to
      t after thinking more. The distribution  must satisfy the Bayesian consistency requirement
                 r (|t)
      =                   ^) .
           r (|t)+(1-r) (|t

   2. The cost of the information structure  is c( ) =  (H (r) - E [H ()]), where H (x) = -x log x -
      (1 - x) log(1 - x) is the entropy of a probability distribution that places probability x on qo = t
      and probability 1 - x on qo = t ^.

   3. Consumers choose to buy at a posterior  iff v - ps -  (t +(1 - )t
                                                                      ^) > 0. We will use b()  {0, 1}
      to note whether it is optimal for a consumer to buy given .

   4. Consumers thus choose  to maximize E [(v - ps - qo )b()] - c( ).

As with the binary attention model, we show that the Shannon model has a simple reduced-form
representation. We derive this result using the necessary and sufficient conditions of the posterior-
based approach provided in Caplin et al. (forthcoming).

                                         ^) and stakes  in the Shannon model, there exists a
Proposition 1. For each triplet  = (, r, t
distribution F, such that the behavior of all consumers with parameters  can be represented by a
revealed valuation weight model in which consumers choose to buy if and only if v  ps + po , where
  F, . The weights satisfy:
                      d
   1. lim F, -
              1. That is, relative misreaction converges (in distribution) to zero as the stakes
become large.
   2. The mean valuation weight     ¯, = dF, () is increasing in t
                                                                 ^ , with ¯, = 1 when t
                                                                                      ^ = t.
The relative average misreaction, |1 - ¯, |, is decreasing in r.

   Proposition 1 shows that behavior in the Shannon model can be represented using a reduced-form
similar to the one we derived in the binary attention strategy example. This reduced-form follows

                                                   9
the same comparative statics. The main difference is that because the consequences from exerting
mental effort are stochastic in the Shannon model, a consumer's valuation weight is represented by
=  ¯ +  , where  is a mean-zero error term that varies from decision to decision, and ¯ is the stable
component across decisions. Our experiment, which focuses on stable individual differences, will focus
on characterizing the distribution of ¯, but will not be informative about the idiosyncratic component
 . When we study individual differences in consumers' valuation weights in the empirical analysis in
Sections 5 and 6, what we mean with respect to the Shannon model is differences in  ¯, not ¯ +  (a
slight abuse of terminology).
       Intuitively, the representation continues to hold because like the reduced-form revealed valuation
weight model, the Shannon model also predicts that the probability of choosing to buy the item should
depend only on the transparent surplus v - ps , and not on v and ps separately. Although this property
holds for many costly attention models, it does not hold for all models that generate misreaction. For
example, salience and focusing models such as those of Bordalo et al. (2013) and Koszegi and Szeidl
(2013) do not always have this property.
       Proposition 1 shows that when stakes are large, the stable components ¯ converge to 1 and the
stochasticity vanishes (i.e.,  converges to 0 in distribution). The last part of Proposition 1 also shows
that there will be stable individual differences in  that are shaped by consumers' initial perceptions
of qo . For example, consumers who initially overestimate qo have  > 1, while consumers who initially
underestimate qo have  < 1. Consequently, in the presence of both over- and under-estimation, the
Shannon model predicts that a large increase in stakes lowers  for some consumers and increases 
for other consumers, in line with our binary attention example.

2.4      The Gabaix (2014) model
A second model that allows for a continuous range of cognitive effort is the Gabaix (2014) model.
We utilize the binary action extension of the model.10 In this model, the consumer chooses a weight
m  [0, 1] to form an estimate q  ^o (m) = mqo + (1 - m)¯ qo , where q                ^ is the default
                                                                    ¯o = rt + (1 - r)t
perception. The cost of choosing m > 0 is given by m , for   0.
       The consumer approximates the benefits of choosing m > 0 as follows. First, the consumer com-
putes the benefits of choosing the full attention strategy m = 1, which we denote by B . As we have
shown in Section 2.2, the benefit of acquiring information is given by B = min ((1 - r)(v - ps - t), r(ps + t - v )).
Consumers then approximate the benefit of choosing m  [0, 1) by the quadratic approximation
B - (1 - m)2 B .
       The special case  = 0 corresponds to our binary attention example in Section 2.2. However, for
 > 0 this model allows for partial attention, like the Shannon model. For example, when  = 1, the
consumer chooses m = max(1 - /(2B ), 0). When  = 2 the consumer chooses m =                            +B .
                                                                                                       B


                                         ^) and stakes  in the Gabaix (2014) model, there exists
Proposition 2. For each triplet  = (, r, t
   This model is developed in Appendix XV.F of Gabaix (2014). We thank Xavier Gabaix for kindly distilling this
  10

model for us in personal communication, and writing out the special case that is applicable to our economic environment.
Our formulation follows the sketch provided to us by Xavier Gabaix.



                                                          10
a ,  R such that consumers with parameters  can be represented by a revealed valuation weight
model in which consumers choose to buy if and only if v  ps + , po The valuation weights satisfy:
   1. |1 - , | is decreasing in  and converges to zero as   . That is, relative misreaction is
decreasing in stakes and converges to zero.
                                              ^ , with , = 1 when t
   2. The valuation weight , is increasing in t                   ^ = t. Moreover, |1 - , | is
decreasing in r.

   Like Proposition 1, Proposition 2 shows that the Gabaix (2014) model has a simple revealed
valuation weight representation that features all of the properties of the binary attention example. As
with the binary attention example, it is possible to obtain closed-form solutions for  in terms of the
model primitives when closed form solutions exist for the choice m , as in the simple examples for
 = 1, 2 that we summarized above.
   Unlike the Shannon model, the revealed valuation weights in this model are deterministic rather
than stochastic. Whether within-person stochasticity of attention is an empirically large phenomenon
remains an open question; our experiment will focus only on stable individual differences.

2.5    Extensions
While we have restricted our analysis to binary priors to simplify exposition and amplify intuition,
the results hold more generally. In the appendix we consider priors given by t^ + , where E [] = 0
and t
    ^ varies. When t^ is equal to the true value t, consumers behave as if  = 1. However, t ^< t
generates underreaction and t^ > t generates overreaction. As before, increasing stakes decreases
relative misreaction.

2.6    Empirical tests of costly attention with heterogeneous rule-of-thumb use
Our theoretical results motivate five empirical tests, following the intuition provided in the special case
described in Section 2.2. For concreteness, we focus on the case in which E [] < 1, as our empirical
application studies sales taxes, for which previous work has established underreaction. Consistent
with our experiment, we consider a "standard stakes regime" ("standard" value of  ) and a "high
stakes regime" (higher value of  ). All of the empirical tests are grounded in the core idea that
individual differences persist across stakes, and that the revealed valuation weights must approach 1
as stakes increase. The tests below correspond to different cuts of the data that can provide evidence
for this idea.

Prediction 1. The average revealed valuation weight, E [], is higher in the high stakes regime.

Prediction 2. There are stable individual differences that are persistent across stakes. Consumers
with higher values of  in the standard stakes regime will also have higher values of  in the high stakes
regime.

Prediction 3. Consumers with the highest values of  in the standard stakes regime will increase their
 by the smallest amount when put in the high stakes regime.


                                                    11
Prediction 4. Consumers whose  increases the least in response to the high stakes regime have the
highest values of  in both the standard and high stakes regimes.

Prediction 5. If some consumers have  > 1 in the standard stakes regime then some consumers will
adjust their  downward when put in the high stakes regime.

   Heterogeneity in attention costs complicates the derivation of predictions 3 and 4 from our theo-
retical results. In Appendix C we show that Predictions 3 and 4 are mostly robust in the presence of
heterogeneous attention costs.
   Predictions 3 and 4 may fail when, e.g., all consumers have  < 1 and consumers either have very
high attention costs that make their misreaction 1 -  inelastic to variation in stakes or they have
moderate attention costs that make their misreaction moderately elastic. In this case, the consumers
with moderate attention costs will both have higher  and increase their  the most--in other words, the
predictions break down because the elasticity of misreaction is positively correlated with . However,
when some consumers significantly overreact, as we will show empirically, predictions 3 and 4 are
very likely to continue to hold, because now consumers with the highest  will adjust downward. In
Appendix C , we show formally that when there is sufficiently high variation in , consistent with our
empirical estimates, predictions 3 and 4 continue to hold even when there are individual differences
in the elasticity of misreaction that are correlated with .

2.6.1   Using the tests to differentiate from other mechanisms of underreaction

While the predictions above are intuitive once one assumes that behavior accords to behavior from
a costly attention model, they do not (collectively) hold for any other mechanism that generates
misreaction to opaque prices. Thus, the predictions collectively serve to draw a sharp distinction
between attention costs and other plausible mechanisms such as complete unawareness of the opaque
price (e.g., Gabaix and Laibson, 2006), incorrect beliefs generated by systematic mislearning (e.g.,
Hanna et al., 2014) or misleading marketing (e.g., Anagol et al., 2017), forgetting (e.g., Bordalo et al.,
2019), or a systemic lack of financial literacy that prevents consumers from reaching the right answer
(e.g., Hastings et al., 2013).
   For example, if consumers hold incorrect beliefs, or lack the financial literacy to integrate the
opaque price into their final estimate, then their mistakes should be unresponsive to stakes. Elicit-
ing beliefs or financial literacy is a complementary test of this possibility, and one that we conduct.
However, these are one-sided tests, as evidence of incorrect beliefs or financial illiteracy among some
consumers does not rule out costly attention as an important mechanism. Moreover, because "behav-
ioral" consumers may not necessarily act on the answers they give to abstract beliefs questions (e.g.,
Bernheim and Taubinsky, 2018), we consider our predictions about behavior a more satisfactory test.
   The commonly used attention models in which attention is exogenous to stakes but responds to non-
pecuniary stimuli, such as those summarized in DellaVigna (2009), are ambiguous about Prediction
2, and are not consistent with the other four predictions. These models are often articulated as
a null hypothesis by behavioral economists, and some meta-analyses are consistent with the idea
that heuristic use is not endogenous to stakes (Camerer and Hogarth, 1999). Beyond a qualitative

                                                   12
assessment of these simpler attention models, our tests also serve as a critical examination of the extent
to which exogenous attention might be a reasonable approximation. For example, even if consumers
do exert more mental to consider sales taxes for big purchases like cars, the endogeneity of mental
effort to taxes may be negligible for most goods that consumers purchase. Thus our measures of the
attention elasticities are a key quantitative input for enriching the modeling of attention.11
       Attention models in which consumers either pay full attention to the opaque price or ignore it
completely (e.g., Gabaix and Laibson, 2006; Chetty et al., 2007), as well as costly attention models
with homogeneous prior perceptions, could not be simultaneously consistent with Prediction 1 and the
possibility of overreaction in Prediction 5. In such models, all consumers either systematically under-
react or overreact, and all consumers either have a systematic tendency to increase their sensitivity as
stakes increase or to decrease their sensitivity as stakes increase. Our tests thus also serve to identify
an important, but rarely discussed hypothesis about costly attention processes--that consumers are
highly heterogeneous in the rules of thumb they use when they exert little mental effort.
       Hypotheses 2 and 4 are particularly demanding predictions when rules of thumb are heterogeneous,
as another plausible hypothesis is that some rules of thumb like particular forms of rounding heuristics
would not mechanically generate a strong correlation between misreaction at low and high stakes. For
example, a consumer might round up a 7% tax to 10% generating overreaction at low stakes but round
down triple that tax to 20%, generating underreaction at high stakes. Strong heterogeneity in prior
perceptions across stakes would in fact predict the opposite of Prediction 4. because of a form of mean
reversion in effectively random errors across stakes. Hypotheses 2 and 4 rely on consumers having
more stable prior perceptions, like leaning toward ignoring the tax, or like treating a 7% tax as 10%
and triple that tax as 30%.
       Finally, the predictions differentiate costly attention models from two starkly different theories
about the interaction between incentives, mental effort, and decision quality. First, Kahneman (2003)
and others argue that even if mental effort increases with incentives, this does not have to translate
to better decisions.12 Second, Ariely et al. (2009) argue for and test the hypothesis--building on a
line of reasoning dating to Kahneman (1973)--that mental effort is not fully controlled because it is
influenced by affective states of arousal, and thus higher incentives may lead mental effort to become
misdirected, which would decrease decision quality. For example, a consumer considering a big-ticket
  11
     A related class of models in which the salience weight on an attribute depends on choice sets (Bordalo et al., 2013;
Koszegi and Szeidl, 2013; Bushong et al., 2015), but not on mental effort, could in principle play some role in our setting
as well, although these models do not give special status to the "opaqueness" of an attribute. Differential reaction to
po versus ps in these models would only result from the fact that these two price are of different magnitudes. Under
the assumption that differences in reaction to po and ps depend only on differences in magnitude, these models are for
the most part either ambiguous on or inconsistent with our predictions. The homogeneity of degree zero assumption
in Bordalo et al. (2013) implies that simply scaling up the importance of the attribute cannot change its salience. The
Koszegi and Szeidl (2013) model would predict that all consumers are less sensitive to po than to ps when po is of smaller
magnitude, and that scaling up po would decrease the relative underreaction to po for all consumers. This is inconsistent
with the heterogeneous response to stakes in Prediction 5. Moreover, in the context of sales taxes, the Koszegi and
Szeidl (2013) model would predict that changes in relative underreaction depend on whether the amount of tax owed is
increased through an increase in sales tax rates or through an increase in posted prices, since the latter also increases
the salience of posted prices--this is inconsistent with our findings. The Bushong et al. (2015) model is inconsistent
with the predictions and our findings for essentially the same reasons that the Koszegi and Szeidl (2013) model is, since
in our setting the model operates just like the Koszegi and Szeidl (2013) model except with the opposite sign.
  12
     See, e.g., Enke and Zimmermann (2019) for evidence in line with this conjecture.


                                                            13
purchase may become distracted by the pressure and gravity of the decision, and consequently omit
considering sales taxes. Plainly, these theories of mental effort would generate either no response to
stakes or the opposite response to what is conjectured in the predictions above.


3         Experimental design and sample
Each consumer was randomly assigned three of nine household products utilized in the study and made
purchase decisions for these three products in three different stores (nine total decision screens). Each
store corresponded to a different sales tax rate. In store A, consumers made shopping decisions with
a zero sales tax rate (no-tax store). In store B, consumers made shopping decisions with a standard
tax rate identical to their city of residence (standard tax environment). In store C, consumers made
shopping decisions with a sales tax rate equal to triple their standard tax rate (triple tax environment).
The order of these nine sets of shopping decisions was randomized within subject.

3.1        Recruitment
The experiment was conducted in September 2016 through ClearVoice Research, a market research
firm that maintains a large and demographically diverse panel of participants over the age of 18.
ClearVoice often contracts with industry partners to ship products to consumers to elicit product
ratings, but is additionally available to researchers for academic use.13 Because ClearVoice maintains
an infrastructure for easily shipping products to consumers, it is a particularly convenient platform for
our incentive-compatible design. Moreover, ClearVoice provides samples that approximate the U.S.
population on basic demographic characteristics.
         We asked ClearVoice to only recruit panel members from states with a positive sales tax. This ex-
cluded panel members from Alaska, Montana, Delaware, New Hampshire, and Oregon. The remaining
forty-five states are all represented in our final sample. Prior to learning the details of the experiment,
consumers were asked to report their state, county, and city of residence.14 To correctly determine the
money spent in the experiment, this information was matched to a data set of tax rates in all cities
in the U.S.15

3.2        Shopping decisions and environment
Figure 1 provides an example of decisions screens participants would see for each purchase decision.
Consumers first encountered a screen informing them of which store they were entering and for which
product they were shopping. Consumers then clicked through to the next screen, which contained a
product description and a picture, identical to how the product is presented on Amazon.com. On this
     For other economic research using ClearVoice Research, see Benjamin et al. (2014), Taubinsky and Rees-Jones
    13

(2018), and Rees-Jones and Taubinsky (forthcoming).
  14
     If participants selected Alaska, Montana, Delaware, New Hampshire, or Oregon, the survey ended and participants
were told they were ineligible. We drop nine participants who completed the survey and matched to a city with a zero
sales tax rate.
  15
     Local tax rate data is drawn from the September 2016 update of the "zip2tax" tax calculator.




                                                        14
same screen consumers also saw a price list containing ten prices. These prices were chosen such that
the minimum for all products was $4.00, and then increased by a multiplicative factor of 15% up to
$14.07.16 At each price, consumers were asked whether or not they would be willing to purchased the
product. It was explained that the price shown excluded any applicable sales taxes.
    At any point, participants were able to click the "back" button to see the store in which they
were shopping, and an "instructions" button to view the instructions. If a study participant selected
yes (or no) for all available prices, he was directed to an additional screen where he was asked to
report the highest (lowest) price at which he would be willing to buy the product--the statement on
this last screen was not incentivized. Additionally, if a participant's within-store decisions violated
monotonicity, he was notified of that, and given the the option to revise.17
    The three different stores were described to consumers as follows:

      When you purchase an item in Store A, you will pay no sales tax in addition to the price.
      Store A is like one of your local stores, with the taxes already included in the prices that
      you see on the tags of the items. When you purchase an item in Store B, you will have to
      pay an additional sales tax, just like you typically do at the register at your local stores
      (on non-tax-exempt items). The sales tax rate in Store B is the standard sales tax rate
      that applies in your city of residence, [participant's city], [participant's state]. When you
      purchase an item in Store C, the sales tax that you have to pay in addition to the price
      is much higher than what you would have to pay at your local stores. The sales tax
      rate in Store C is triple the standard sales tax rate that applies in your city of residence,
      [participant's city], [participant's state].

The nine household products were selected from the products previously used in Taubinsky and Rees-
Jones (2018). None of the items were tax exempt in any of the 45 states in which our participants
reside. Appendix M contains screenshots of the instructions, as well as a list of the nine products,
their Amazon.com prices, and their Amazon.com product descriptions.
    Decisions in the experiment were incentive compatible. All study participants who passed the nec-
essary comprehension questions (described below) had a one-third chance of being selected to receive
a $16 budget.18 Consumers who were selected to receive the $16 budget had one tax environment and
one product randomly chosen. Outcomes were determined by randomly selecting one of the prices on
the price list. If consumers indicated that they did not want to purchase at that randomly chosen price,
then they would keep their $16 budget and receive the product. If consumers indicated they would
like to purchase at the randomly generated price, then the product was sold to the consumer at that
  16
     For store C only nine prices were included, and the maximum posted price was $12.24. This was to ensure all
consumers would stay within the $16.00 budget, even after sales taxes were added.
  17
     Specifically, the tex was: "Your answers on the previous page are inconsistent. If you indicate that you are not
willing to buy the product at a lower price, you cannot indicate that you are willing to buy the product at a higher
price. For example, it's inconsistent for a survey-respondent to say that he or she is willing to buy the product for $5.29
at a particular store, but is not willing to buy the product for $4.60 at that same store. Click the "back" button to
adjust your answers."
  18
     Participants were informed of this incentive structure prior to making any decisions, but they did not know if they
received the budget until they completed the experiment. If they did not receive the budget, they simply received a
compensation of $3.00 and no products from the study.


                                                            15
salient price ps --meaning that the consumer kept 16 - ps (1 +  ) dollars, where  is the experimentally
induced tax rate. The product was then shipped to the person by ClearVoice.
       Participants received a full explanation of the payout scheme, including that each question, product,
and price was equally likely to be chosen. Additionally, we explicitly informed participants that "it is
in your best interest to answer each question honestly." Appendix M.1 contains a screenshot of the
instructions shown to participants.

3.3       Ensuring comprehension
To ensure that study participants understood the environment and experimental tax rate, we had them
answer six multiple choice questions after showing them the instructions. Three of these questions
concerned the payout, asking participants to identify their shopping budget, how many decisions will
be randomly chosen to implement, and the prices at which they would be asked about purchasing the
product.19 The final three questions asked participants to identify the sales tax rate they would face
for an item purchased in store A, store B, and store C--with the possible answers being "no sales tax,"
"standard sales tax in city of residence," and "triple the sales tax in city of residence." If participants
answered a question incorrectly or left it blank, they were prompted to select the correct answer before
they could begin. When answering these questions, participants could access the instructions which
described the tax environments, provided a visual of the price list, and explained the payout structure.
       After making the purchase decisions, participants were again asked to state the meanings of the
store labels, i.e., to identify the sales tax rate they faced in store A, store B, and store C. Participants
were given one attempt to select the correct answer, and were informed that they needed to answer
all three correctly to be eligible for the $16 budget and the consequences of their shopping decisions.
Participants were not given access to study instructions in this second round. 86% of participants
correctly answered all three questions at the end of the experiment. In our main results we exclude
those who fail to correctly state the meaning of the store labels, so as not to confound comprehension
of study rules with actual attention costs.20

3.4       Additional questions
After completing the purchase decisions and additional comprehension checks, participants received a
short set of questions eliciting demographic information including household income, marital status,
and political beliefs. Appendix M.2.4 contains a list of these questions.
       Participants were also asked to identify the sales tax rate in their city of residence. We additionally
asked them to identify how much sales tax they would owe on an $8.00 item. The first question allows
us to test if participants have incorrect beliefs about their sales tax rate, and the second question
allows us to test if participants are able to perform the computations necessary to determine the tax
on a particular posted price.
  19
     Subjects had to identify each answer from a list of three choices. The correct answers are $16, one purchase decision,
and "the prices vary" respectively. Appendix M.2.2 contains a list of these questions.
  20
     This exclusion was pre-registered on the AEA RCT registry. AEARCTR-0001597



                                                            16
3.5   Sample
1,846 consumers completed the experiment. For our primary analyses, we exclude 256 respondents who
incorrectly answered one or more of the comprehension questions and an additional 47 respondents who
had monotonicity violations within a price list. Our main results in Section 4 do not require excluding
participants with these monotonicity violations, but our analyses in Sections 5 and 6 require monotonic
preferences to identify a willingness to pay for each product. In Appendix I we replicate our analysis
including those who failed our comprehension checks. We exclude nine additional participants with
missing or zero sales tax rates in their city of residence. Our final sample includes 1,534 respondents.
    Experimental recruitment was targeted to generate a final sample approximating the income, age,
and gender distribution of the U.S. adult population. Our sample has a median income of $49,000,
an average income of $60,838, and an interquartile range of $32,000-$59,000. Our sample also has a
median and mean age of 46 and an interquartile range of 32-59; all participants in the final sample
are over the age of 18, and all but 56 participants are over the age of 21. 50% of our sample is female.
8.2% of participants are high school graduates and 35.3% are college graduates. 55.1% of participants
are married or in a domestic partnership, and 80.8% live with at least one other individual. The mean
sales tax rate charged in participants' city of residence is 7.24% (median 7.00%), with a standard
deviation of 1.26%.
    The distribution of these basic demographics is broadly similar to the U.S. population, although
selection on other unmeasured characteristics cannot be ruled out.


4     The average impact of stakes on inattention
4.1   Descriptive summary of behavior
Figure 2 provides a summary of consumer behavior in our study. We begin with panel (a), where we
summarize average demand in each tax environment. To construct average demand, we begin with
product-specific demand curves Djk (p) where j indexes products and k indexes the store type--A,
B, or C. We then construct average demand curves Davg,k (p) :=      1
                                                                    9   j   Djk (p). Panel (a) shows that
consumers do react to sales taxes, as their willingness to buy at a given posted price is decreasing in
the size of the sales tax.
    However, panels (b) and (c) show that consumers on average under-react to taxes. In these panels,
we construct the demand curves that would be expected if consumers reacted to the taxes fully. Since
we only observe purchase decisions at finitely many prices, we construct the counterfactual demand
through linear interpolation, as described in Appendix E. Panel (b) reports the results for the standard
tax environment, and panel (c) for the triple tax environment.
    Comparing counterfactual to observed demand in the same store, we see evidence of under-reaction.
The under-reaction is particularly sizeable at low posted prices.




                                                  17
4.2   Estimating average revealed valuation weights
Recall that the definition of the revealed valuation weight ijk for consumer i considering product j
in store k  {A, B, C } is that the consumer is ijk as responsive to a change in the tax as he is to
a change in the salient posted price. That is, the consumer behaves as if his perceived price of the
product, given a salient posted price p, is p + ijk pik = p(1 + ijk ik ). Note that the size of the opaque
price po is given by po = p · ik here. The consumer thus chooses to buy if his product valuation vij
is such that ln vij  ln p + ln(1 + ijk ik ). To ease empirical estimation, we simplify this condition to
be linear in logs by noting that ln(1 + ijk ik )  ijk ln(1 + ik ) up to negligible higher order terms.
Under this approximation, the consumer buys if

                                      ln vij  ln p + ijk ln(1 + ik )                                  (3)

We then utilize condition (3) to estimate the average revealed valuation weights by estimating the
following heteroskedastic probit model:


                              j + ln(p) + ¯B ln(1 + ik ) · I (k = B ) + ¯C ln(1 + ik ) · I (k = C )
      1 - P r(buyijk |p) =                                                                            (4)
                                                               j

where  is the standard normal CDF. By allowing both j and j to vary by product, we allow the
demand curves for the different products to differ both in the price sensitivity and in the aggregate
valuation for the products. We also allow for separate coefficients on the single tax and triple tax
terms by separately measuring  B and  C .
   Because we estimate a nonlinear probability model, the estimated coefficients ¯B and ¯C approxi-
mate the respective means E [ijk |k = B ] and E [ijk |k = C ] with some error when the distribution of
 is heterogeneous within each store. In Appendix F we verify that this approximation error is negli-
gible, and that it works against the results that follow about how the valuation weights are increasing
in the posted price and the tax rate.

4.3   Average revealed valuation weights increase as stakes increase
In our experiment, we observe consumer choice both across different salient posted prices p (within
store) and across different tax rates  (across stores). Both lead to an increase in the size of the tax,
which is given by po = p . In the language of our theoretical framework, we consider both increases
in salient posted prices and increases in tax rates to be salient changes in stakes  , and our models
predict that the revealed valuation weights should increase in  .
   Figure 3 plots E [|p  p ] against a price cutoff p , such that all prices less than or equal to the
cutoff value are included in calculating that average valuation weight. We estimate E [] at different
posted prices using the empirical model in equation (4), dropping observations with p above the cutoff.
The leftmost point of each series includes just the posted prices less than or equal to $4.60; i.e., $4.00
or $4.60. The rightmost point on each series corresponds to including all the posted prices. The point



                                                   18
estimates and confidence intervals corresponding to figure 3 are reported in Appendix G.
   The figure establishes three important facts. First, on average consumers underreact to the size
of the tax, both at standard-sized taxes and at tripled taxes. When pooling over all of the prices,
the average valuation weight  in the standard tax store is 0.48 (95% CI 0.32-0.63), and the average
valuation weight  in the triple tax store is 0.79 (95% CI 0.72-0.86).
   Second, the average valuation weight is increasing in the tax rate  . As is immediately evident
from figure 3, the average valuation weight is significantly higher in the triple tax condition than in
the standard tax at each cutoff. At the $4.60 cutoff, the difference in E [] between the triple tax and
single tax environments is 0.18 (95% CI 0.09-0.27). This difference peaks at 0.38 (95% CI 0.26-0.51)
at a price cutoff of $8.05. When pooling over all prices, this difference is 0.31 (95% CI 0.20-0.42).
These results are consistent with Prediction 1.
   Third, the average valuation weights are increasing in the salient posted price p. In the standard
tax environment, E [] more than doubles as we move from a cutoff of $4.60 to pooling all prices: it
increases from 0.23 to 0.48 (95% CI for difference 0.14-0.37). Similarly, in the triple tax environment,
E [] approximately doubles as well, increasing from 0.40 to 0.79 (95% CI for difference 0.32-0.45) when
moving from a price cutoff of $4.60 to pooling over all prices. These results provide further evidence
consistent with Prediction 1.
   One potential concern in examining how the valuation weights vary by price is that the set of
consumers on the margin at each price are mechanically different: the higher is the price, the higher is
the product valuation of these marginal consumers. If valuation for the product is somehow correlated
with attention, this would confound our results about how average valuation weights covary with price.
Although there is no clear reason for this to be the case, in principle this could occur. The tax rate
assignment is exogenous to these differences and is not subject to the same concern.
   On the other hand, a concern with examining how valuation weights change in response to an
increase in tax rates is that consumers see the triple tax store as a highly unusual environment,
which affects their purchase decision beyond the pecuniary channel. Consumers might be significantly
more responsive to higher tax rates simply because the increase triggers tax aversion, or because
the surprising and unusual environment simply draws more attention to itself (Bordalo et al., 2019).
Additionally, consumers might react very strongly to a tripling of tax rates because tax rates are varied
within-subject in our design (whereas prices are not).
   Although our results on individual differences in reaction to the tripling of the tax rate generate a
number of additional tests of costly attention that are not easily explained by the confounding forces
described above, we present one more test of aggregate behavior here. We address both concerns by
examining how average valuation weights depend on the total size of the tax, and whether it seems to
matter whether increases in the tax come from increases in prices or increases in taxes. If our results
are consistent across these two different ways of increasing tax owed, then that lends more credibility
to our hypothesis of consumers exerting more mental effort in response to higher stakes. For example,
if behavior responds to a tripling of the tax rate because it triggers tax aversion, or because it draws
attention to an unusual environment, then we would expect to see that a tripling of the tax rate
generates much larger changes in behavior than does an increase in price.


                                                   19
       To do this, we divide the ten different prices in each store into five pairs of prices, for a total of
5 × 2 = 10 pairs. For each pair, we estimate the average valuation weight using an extension of model
(4) with a separate ¯ parameter for each pair.21 We plot this against the average tax owed in each pair:
for two adjacent prices pl and pl+1 , we compute the average tax owed in stores B and C, respectively,
          pl +pl+1                          pl +pl+1
as E          2    ik |k   = B and E            2    ik |k   =C .
       Figure 4 presents the results (see Appendix G for exact point estimates and confidence intervals).22
We see no trend break between the two series. If anything, the deviation in the leftmost point in the
store C series has the opposite sign predicted by concerns of tax aversion or unusual environments
triggering a spike in attention. Figure 4 thus provides additional evidence for a costly attention model
in which attention is a function of the salient stakes, regardless of where those increases come from.

4.4       Robustness
4.4.1       Order effects

A potential concern with our within-subject experimental design is that purchase decisions could be
influenced by the order in which the nine purchase decisions are presented to consumers. For example,
individuals might be more likely to buy in store A when store A preceded by store B rather than
comes after store B, since in the former scenario store A seems like a particularly good deal.
       In Appendix J we test for four potential order effects. First, we examine whether the tax environ-
ment (i.e., no tax, standard tax, or triple tax) first shown to consumers impacts their buy probability.
Second, we test whether the tax environment first shown to a consumer for product j impacts the like-
lihood of purchasing product j . Third, we test whether the tax environment last shown to a consumer
for product j impacts the likelihood of purchasing product j . Finally, we test whether the specific
store ordering for product j impacts the buy probability for product j .
       We test the impact of the potential order effects by adding indicators for the orderings to the
regression specified in equation (4). We run four regressions, detailed in Appendix J, corresponding
to four different order effects concerns outlined above. The resulting coefficients and standard errors
provide strong evidence that the order in which consumers see the tax environments does not affect
their decisions.
       As another test of whether attention is altered by the within-subject nature of our design, in
Table G.2 we report estimate of average  using the first n = 1, 2, . . . 9 decisions that consumers
maks. Although the results are noisy for the standard tax condition for low values of n, the triple tax
condition is provides us with greater statistical power, and shows that there is little variation in the
  21
       Specifically, we partition the prices into pairs Pn , n = 1, . . . , 5 and estimate


                            j +     5
                                          n ln(p) + ¯B,n n ln(1 + ik ) · I (k = B ) + ¯C,n n ln(1 + ik ) · I (k = C ) I (p  Pn )
                                    n=1
1 - P r(buyijk |p) = 
                                                                             j

   with 1 normalized to 1.
  22
     In the spirit of equation (26) of Gabaix (2019) (the quadratic cost attention function), we estimate a quadratic fit
through the point estimates in Figure 4. We find E [] is best approximated as E [|t] = min(0.87t - 0.21t2 , 1), where t
is the average tax owed. We find no evidence that the tax rate  affects E [], other than through t.



                                                                  20
estimates of average  when we use only initial decisions or all decisions. Collectively, we thus find no
evidence that the within-subject nature of our design introduces any kind of bias.

4.4.2      Robustness to our exclusion restrictions

Recall that we excluded 16% of our respondents because they were not able to correctly answer the
comprehension questions about the tax rates charged in stores A, B and C. Because misunderstanding
study instructions is unlikely to be an externally valid mechanism for misreacting to sales taxes, we
exclude them from our primary analysis. At the same time, because these consumers may have the
highest attention cost, we can view estimates that include these consumers as an upper bound on
misreaction. As shown in Appendix I, re-inclusion of these participants increases the estimate of
average underreaction, but does not change any of the comparative statics.

4.5      Correlates of misreaction
4.5.1      Incorrect beliefs

Do participants know their true sales tax rate, and if not, are incorrect beliefs a mechanism driving the
results? To understand the role of incorrect beliefs, we asked participants to report their sales tax rate
in their current city of residence. Consistent with Chetty et al. (2009) and Taubinsky and Rees-Jones
(2018), we find that participants generally have correct beliefs: 50.8% of our sample know their tax
rate exactly, 70.3% within 0.5 percentage points, and 82.0% within one percentage point.23 We also do
not find any evidence of systematic underestimation of tax rates. The mean of participants' estimates
of their sales tax rates is 7.43%, which is negligibly higher than the actual mean of 7.24%.
       We refer to the 70.3% who know their tax within 0.5 percentage points as the "nearly-accurate
beliefs" sample. Figure E.1 in Appendix H repeats figure 3 using the nearly-accurate beliefs subsample
defined above. We again find strong evidence for Prediction 1. The average revealed valuation weights
increase monotonically in the absolute size of the tax. The estimates are also of similar magnitude
to the full sample results. Using all prices we estimate an average revealed valuation weight of 0.55
(95% CI 0.38-0.73) for the standard tax environment in the restricted sample compared to the 0.48
(95% CI 0.32-0.63) in the main sample. Similarly, we estimate an average revealed valuation weight of
0.87 (95% CI 0.78-0.95) for the triple tax environment in the restricted sample, which is only slightly
higher than the estimate in the main sample (0.79, 95% CI 0.72-0.86).

4.5.2      Computational ability

Another potential mechanism driving the results is the inability of participants to compute the sales
tax they would need to pay for an item. We test for this mechanism by asking participants to report
how much sales tax they would owe for an $8.00 item purchased in their city of residence. 44.1% of
  23
    We asked participants to enter their answer as a percent rather than a decimal, and gave them the following example:
"For example, if you think that the tax rate is 1 percent, please enter 1, rather than 0.01." 159 participants still entered
a number less than 0.15. We attribute these low estimates to misunderstanding the instructions, and multiply these
estimates by 100 when analyzing their beliefs.



                                                            21
participants are able to calculate their tax burden within $0.01, and 62.9% are able to compute their
tax burden within $0.05.24
    Figure E.2 in Appendix H repeats figure 3, restricting to the 62.9% of participants who are able
to compute their true tax burden within $0.05. We again find strong evidence for Prediction 1. The
estimates are also of similar magnitude to the full sample results. Using all prices we estimate an
average revealed valuation weight of 0.52 (95% CI 0.36-0.68) for the standard tax environment in the
restricted sample compared to the 0.48 (95% CI 0.32-0.63) in the main sample. Similarly, we estimate
an average revealed valuation weight of 0.82 (95% CI 0.75-0.89) for the triple tax environment in the
restricted sample, which is only slightly higher than the estimate in the main sample (0.79, 95% CI
0.72-0.86).
    The fact that complete inability to compute taxes does not seem to be driving our results is
consistent with a key premise of our theoretical framework: that consumers are capable of correctly
incorporating taxes into their decision. The fact that incorrect beliefs about the tax rates do not seem
to be a major factor is consistent with the interpretation of our theoretical framework as capturing
an internal process of forming tax rate perceptions. That is, consumers are not literally using costly
mental effort to acquire information about the tax rates; rather, they are using mental effort to go
through the computation of figuring out the post-tax price.

4.5.3    Other correlates

Appendix K shows that we do not find variation in the average underreaction by income, education, or
political party affiliation, although these correlations are not well-powered. The appendix also shows
that we are underpowered for detecting meaningful differences in how average underreaction covaries
with differences in local tax rates. This is not surprising, as the standard deviation of the tax rates
applied to consumers' city of residence is only 1.26 percentage points--variation that is over an order
of magnitude smaller than our exogenously induced experimental variation in tax rates. Although
this correlation may be interesting to explore in better-powered designs, we note that it is likely a
confounded test of costly attention models because local tax variation is likely related to a number of
differences in geography, including consumers' views and preferences about tax rates.


5    Reduced-form results on individual differences in attentional re-
     sponses to stakes
In Section 4 we showed that the average revealed valuation weights in the population are increasing
in stakes, supporting Prediction 1 of costly attention models. In this section, we begin to examine
predictions about individual differences using simple reduced-form tests. Our approach is to create
  24
     We did not explicitly remind participants to exclude the $8.00 they would have to pay for the item from their
answer. In our sample, there are 258 participants who entered an answer between 8 and 12. We attribute these high
estimates to misunderstanding the instructions, and subtract 8 from these estimates in the analysis. We also observe 69
participants who entered an answer over 20. We attribute this to confusion as to whether answers should be entered as
dollars (as we specified) or as cents. We divide these estimates by 100.



                                                          22
individual-level proxies for consumers' revealed valuation weights , use these proxies to divide con-
sumers into high and low valuation weight groups, and then use these groups to test comparative
static predictions about individual differences in . We use this methodology to provide evidence for
Predictions 2-4.

5.1      Testing predictions 2 and 3
5.1.1      Approach

A key feature of our design is that consumers make purchase decisions for the same product in different
tax environments. We can thus construct individual-level estimates     ^ijk for ijk for each consumer
i, product j , and store k combination via a two step process. First, we approximate the maximum
pre-tax price pijk at which consumer i is willing to buy product j in store k  {A, B, C }. Since we
only observe purchase decisions at ten pre-tax prices, we approximate willingness to pay using the
midpoint of each price interval. Formally, ln pijk = 0.5 ln pijk + ln pijk , where pijk is the highest
                                                             0         1            0

                                                         ijk is the lowest price at which consumer i
price at which consumer i buys product j in store k and p1
declines to purchase product j in store k .
       For consumers who were willing to buy at all prices (or no prices), recall that we utilized a non-
incentivized question that solicited the maximum price at which they would be willing to buy the
product. Given the free-response and unincentivized nature of this question, some of these responses
are very high. To reduce the impact of outliers, we therefore compute the median self-reported
maximum pre-tax price by product and store among those censored, and assign this value to p ijk .
                                                                      ^
Using the buying condition in equation (3), we construct the estimate ijk for k  {B, C } as

                                                    ln(p            
                                                        ijA ) - ln(pijk )
                                           ^ijk =
                                                                                                               (5)
                                                        ln(1 + ik )

       However, we cannot directly use the ^ijk estimate to compute properties of the actual distribution
of  without making the unrealistically strong assumption that all within-person differences in choices
between stores load on the ijk parameter. A mechanical reason these assumptions are too strong is
that the set of prices in the experiment is finite and thus valuation weights at the individual level are not
point-identified.25 A perhaps more important reason is that changes in consumers' willingness to buy
at certain prices may not only reflect their responses to the tax regime, but also changing perceptions
of the product value or simply "experimental noise" such as consumers accidentally clicking on the
wrong response. Consequently, differences in individual-level estimates do not imply actual individual
differences; i.e., all of these considerations would generate differences in individual-level estimates even
if consumers were perfectly homogeneous in their priors and attention strategies.
       As a concrete example of patterns of behavior that are likely "measurement error" in ^ijk , 33.8%
of consumers are willing to buy at a higher pre-tax price for at least one product in the standard tax
environment than in the no tax environment, 24.6% are willing to buy at a higher pre-tax price for
  25
    Using a Becker-DeGroot-Marshak (BDM) mechanism would not resolve this problem. Taubinsky and Rees-Jones
(2018) find that almost half of participants round their maximum willingness to pay to round numbers. This rounding
implies that BDM data is also coarse in the same fashion that a discrete list of prices is coarse.


                                                         23
at least one product in the triple tax environment than in the no tax environment, and 19.6% are
willing to buy at a higher pre-tax price for at least one product in the triple tax environment than
in the single tax environment. Attributing such patterns of behavior to consumers' valuation weights
 would imply substantially negative  for some consumers--i.e., that some consumers perceive the
taxes to be subsidies. Instead, these patterns likely reflect other factors like changing perceptions of
product value or "noise."
    Our finding of likely "measurement error" in individual-level point estimates is not unusual--as
summarized by Gillen et al. (forthcoming), it is prevalent in just about all experimental analysis of
individual differences. Our finding is also in line with a long intellectual history of measuring and
modeling noise in individual's decisions, starting from Block and Marschak (1960), continuing with
Quantal Response Equilibrium (McKelvey and Palfrey, 1995), and recently gaining prominence in
explicit modeling of mistakes (e.g., Woodford, 2012; Khaw et al., 2017; Natenzon, 2019).26
   We instead use the  ^ijk estimates to create proxies for high versus low valuation weight consumers.
We use one product to divide consumers into two groups. The low group consists of those with low
values of ^ijk and the high group consists of those with high values of ^ijk . We then use our empirical
model in (4) on the other two products to estimate average valuation weights for the low and high
groups. Figure 5 illustrates the idea of this procedure. Using this system of dividing consumers into
high and low valuation weight groups according to store B behavior, we test Predictions 2 and 3 by
examining the valuation weights of the consumers in those groups in both stores B and C.
   Concretely, the procedure is as follows. We index each of the three products for each person by
j  {1, 2, 3}. First, we start with j = 1 and we split the sample into two groups: those with ^i1B in the
top 25% of the population and those with   ^i1B in the bottom 75% of the population. In Section 5.3.2 we
summarize results using alternative proxy constructions. We define x75        ^
                                                                    i1 = I F (i1B ) > 0.75 to be an
indicator for the high group. We then use decisions in the other two products to estimate the average
valuation weights E [ijk |k = K, x75
                                  i1 , j = 1] using equation (4), where K  {B, C }. We repeat the
procedure twice using products 2 and 3 to generate x75
                                                    i2 and xi3 , and estimate E [ijk |k = K, xi2 , j = 2]
                                                            75                                75

and E [ijk |k = K, x75
                    i3 , j = 3]. Finally, we average the estimates from each of these three iterations to
get an an overall average estimate of ijk for those in the high and low groups:

                        1
E [ijk |k = K, x75
                i ]=            (E [ijk |k = K, x75                          75                          75
                                                 i1 , j = 1]+E [ijk |k = K, xi2 , j = 2]+E [ijk |k = K, xi3 , j = 3])
                        3
                            j


We compute confidence intervals using percentile bootstrap, clustering by subject.
   The key statistical assumption that ensures consistency of our estimates is that the errors in ^ijk
and ^ij k are orthogonal conditional on the true underlying value:

Assumption.        ^ijk  
                         ^ij k     |ijk when j = j , for k, k  {B, C }

    This assumption is weaker than the assumption that the measurement errors are mean zero
  26
     While the change in perceptions of product value may have deep cognitive foundations that can be modeled, this
behavioral tendency is orthogonal to the estimation of the revealed valuation weights , and neither confounds our
analysis nor reinforces it.


                                                         24
(strongly classical measurement error), or that they are orthogonal to the true underlying ijk (weakly
classical measurement error.) These stronger assumptions are hard to justify when the underlying
model of choice is a nonlinear probability model and the price observations are interval-valued, and
when some of the identification comes from unincentivized self-reports. Moreover, stronger assump-
tions about the nature of measurement error are not required for our procedure. In fact, the procedure
does not even require that consumers' unincentivized reports about maximum buying prices approxi-
mate the truth in a meaningful way, since we use the self-reported data only to construct proxies and
perform our actual estimation of E [ijk ] using only incentivized decisions.

5.1.2    Results

Table 1 presents the E [ijk ] estimates using the instruments defined in Section 5.1. Rows (1) and
(2) present estimates of E [ijk ] for the high and low valuation weight groups respectively, and row
(3) presents estimates of the difference. Row (4) presents estimates using the full sample. Columns
(1) and (2) correspond to the different tax environments, and column (3) to differences between the
environments.
   Consumers in the high valuation weight group have an average revealed valuation weight of 1.04
(95% CI 0.83-1.26) for standard taxes, while consumers in the low valuation weight group have an
average revealed valuation weight of 0.25 (95% CI 0.08-0.42) for standard taxes. Consistent with
Prediction 2, these individual differences are persistent across stakes. In the triple tax store, consumers
classified as having high valuation weights in the standard tax store have an average valuation weight
of 1.20 (95% CI 1.10-1.31), while consumers classified as having low valuation weights in the standard
tax store have an average valuation weight of 0.64 (95% CI 0.57- 0.72). The predictive power of
the instruments implies strong individual differences in the standard tax environment, and hence
heterogeneous revealed valuation weights.
   We next examine individual differences in adjustment. Consistent with Prediction 3, the low
valuation weight group exhibits a significantly larger increase in the valuation weights than the high
valuation weight group when tax rates are tripled (0.39 vs. 0.16; 95% CI for difference 0.03-0.43).
   On average, the high valuation group does adjust moderately upward by 0.16 (95% CI -0.02-0.33),
but this is not inconsistent with theory. As we will show, some individuals overreact significantly,
and thus the high valuation group likely consists of individuals both with  < 1 and with  > 1.
And because underreacting individuals may adjust upward by slightly more than the overreacting
individuals adjust downward, the average response to stakes in this group is not guaranteed to be null
(or negative).

5.2     Testing prediction 4
5.2.1    Approach

We also use the procedure in Section 5.1 to analyze heterogeneity in how the valuation weights respond
to stakes. This provides a test of Prediction 4. Specifically, we divide consumers according to how



                                                    25
much they adjust their valuation weight when the tax rate increases, rather than by how attentive
they are to the tax.
   Formally, we define ij = ijC - ijB as the degree of adjustment in the revealed valuation
weight when moving from the standard tax environment to the triple tax environment. We then
classify consumers into high and low adjustment groups using ^ ij := ^ijC - ^ijB . We define d25 =
                                                                                                    ij
I F (^ ij )  0.25 to be an indicator of being in a low adjustment group, where d25 = 0 indicates low
                                                                                ij
adjustment and d25
                ij = 1 indicates higher adjustment. We then estimate E [ij |dij , j = j ] for each
                                                                             25

j  {1, 2, 3} and for each store k  {B, C }. We then average to estimate E [ij |d25
                                                                                i ] separately for
the high and low adjustment groups.

5.2.2    Results

Table 2 reports the results. We find that there are significant individual differences: consumers in the
low adjustment group increase their valuation weights by an average of 0.01 (95% CI -0.15-0.17), and
consumers in the high adjustment group increase their valuation weights by an average of 0.43 (95%
CI 0.30-0.55). The results imply substantial underlying heterogeneity in ij .
   Consistent with Prediction 4, we find that consumers in the low adjustment group have higher
valuation weights in both the standard tax regime (0.85 vs. 0.34; 95% CI for difference 0.28-0.75) and
in the triple tax regime (0.86 vs. 0.76; 95% CI for difference -0.01-0.20). The result for the triple tax
regime is significant at the 10% level (p-value = 0.067).
   As we discussed in Section 2.2, Prediction 4 is a particularly demanding test. If, for example, the
distribution of ijB and ijC took the form ijC = a0 + ijB + ij for some constant a0 and some
random variable    ij   independent of ijB , then E [ijC |ijC - ijB = ] would be increasing in , not
decreasing. Intuitively, small values of  would imply a small indiosyncratic component, and thus a
smaller value of ijC . In general, any stochasticity in ijC - ijB that is independent of the value of
ijB would push against our empirical result. Our result is thus consistent with the special structure
that costly attention models impose on revealed valuation weights.

5.3     Robustness
5.3.1    Robustness to alternative sample inclusion criteria

In Appendix H, we replicate tables 1 and 2 on the subsample of participants with nearly accurate
beliefs about their sales tax rate and with strong computational ability. These results also conform
with Predictions 2-4.
   In Appendix I we confirm that the results hold for the full sample of participants, including those
failing comprehension checks.

5.3.2    Alternative constructions of proxies

In Appendix L, we verify our results still support these theoretical predictions when using alternative
constructions of the proxies (tables I.1, I.2, I.3, I.4).


                                                      26
6      Overreaction and heterogeneous attentional responses to stakes
While the evidence in Section 5 is consistent with at least moderate individual differences, it leaves
open three key questions. First, are the individual differences large enough that some consumers
overreact to standard taxes? Second, if we detect overreaction, can we show that some consumers
decrease their valuation weights when the stakes are increased? Third, how big is the variance of the
valuation weights, which Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018) and Farhi and Gabaix (forthcoming) show
is a key input in efficiency cost calculations? In this section we develop econometric techniques for
computing lower bounds on individual heterogeneity, which enable us to answer the three questions
above.

6.1      Intuition for our approach
A key moment that we have not exploited in the analysis in the previous section is how well correlated
the binary instruments are with each other. In the subsections that follow, we will show how this
moment, combined with the results in Section 5, helps generate a lower bound on the variance of
. The lower bound on the variance of  then provides a lower bound on the extent to which some
individuals must overreact, in a manner that we describe in more detail in Section 6.2 below.
    To obtain intuition about the importance of the correlation between the instruments, consider
a linear regression of a variable Y on a binary proxy X . The    regression coefficient is given by
                                                                  V ar[Y ]
 = Cov [Y, X ]/V ar[X ], which can be rewritten as Corr[Y, X ] ·           . The coefficient  here is
                                                                             V ar[X ]
essentially equivalent to our reduced-form results above about how the average  varies with our bi-
nary instruments. Now holding  and V ar[X ] constant, note that the smaller is Corr[Y, X ], the
larger must be V ar[Y ]. Intuitively, the regression coefficient  can be increased either by scaling up
the dependent variable Y , which increases its dispersion, or it can be increased by increasing the cor-
relation between Y and X . Consequently, learning about the regression coefficient and the correlation
is informative of the dispersion in Y .
    If we regard Y as  and X as our binary instruments from Section 5, then one indication of the
correlation between Y and X is the correlation between our binary instruments. If our instruments
are not well correlated with each other, then they also cannot be well correlated with Y .
    We now compute the average correlation of the binary instruments utilized in the last section:
                   ij , xij . The resulting estimate of 0.18 (s.e. 0.02) implies these instruments are
1
3     j =j   Corr x75    75

weakly correlated with each other. We similarly compute the average correlation for the adjustment
instruments,     1
                 3   j =j         ij , dij . We estimate an average correlation of 0.14 (s.e. 0.02), indicating
                            Corr d25    25

that the adjustment instruments are also weakly correlated with each other. The fact that these
instruments predict large differences in the average  as shown in Section 5, but are not well correlated
with each other implies large underlying dispersion in , as we show below.

6.2      Methods for quantifying individual differences
We begin with a general result, and then adapt it to our setting.


                                                         27
                                       ¯ ], and let X1 and X2 be binary variables that are indepen-
Proposition 3. Let Y have support [Y , Y
dently and identically distributed conditional on each realization of Y . Then

                                                 Cov [Y, X1 ] · Cov [Y, X2 ]
                                     V ar[Y ]                                                                   (6)
                                                       Cov [X1 , X2 ]

and

                                      ¯ - E [Y ])(E [Y ] - Y )  V ar[Y ].
                                     (Y                                                                         (7)

Both bounds are tight, and are obtained when Y is Bernoulli.

      Result (6) formalizes the intuition in 6.1: the less well-correlated the proxies are with each other,
the higher must be variance, given an estimate of the covariance between Y and Xi . We prove this
result through an application of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
      The result in line (7) is the Bhatia and Davis (2000) inequality. The intuition for this result is that
the variance of a random variable Y with a given mean E [Y ] and bounded support cannot be higher
than the variance of a Bernoulli random variable with mean E [Y ] and all mass on the two endpoints
of the support.
   Proposition 3 enables us to use the types of binary instruments utilized in Section 5 to compute
bounds on the variance and support of ij . Define xq           ^
                                                   ijk = I F ij > 0.01q       as an indicator for ^ijk
being in the q th percentile or higher in store k . This is analogous to Section 5, where we set q = 75
for store k = B .

Corollary 1. Assume the distribution of ijk is supported on [0, ¯], where ijk is the revealed valuation
weight for product j of individual i in store k . Then given instruments xq         q
                                                                          ij k and xij             k   computed for
products j and j (with no two of j , j , and j equal), the variance of ijk in store K is

                                          Cov [ijk , xq                           q
                                                      ij k |k = K ] · Cov [ijk , xij k |k = K ]
                     V ar[ijk |k = K ]                                                                          (8)
                                                            Cov [xq       q
                                                                  ij k , xij k ]

and


                                           Cov [ijk , xq                           q
                                                       ij k |k = K ] · Cov [ijk , xij k |k = K ]
                    ¯  E [ijk |k = K ] +
                                                                                                                (9)
                                              E [ij k |k = K ] · Cov [xq       q
                                                                       ij k , xij k |k = K ]

The assumption that ijk  0 is natural, as it is equivalent to assuming that no consumers perceive
the tax to be a subsidy. As in Section 5, we continue to examine how an instrument xij k computed
from product j covaries with the average valuation weights for some other product j = j . We never
examine how an instrument computed for product j covaries with the average valuation weights for
that same product j --doing so would bias our results because of correlated measurement error.
      We can also use Proposition 3 to derive bounds on adjustment ij = ijC - ijB . We define
dq
 ij   =I F   ^ ij < 0.01q as a binary indicator for ^ ij being in q th decile or lower. This is analogous
to Section 5, where we used q = 25.

                                                       28
Corollary 2. Assume the distribution of ij is supported on [, 1], where ij = ijC - ijB . Then
given instruments dq       q
                   ij and dij computed for products j and j (with no two of j , j and j equal):

                                            Cov [ij , dq                q
                                                       ij ] · Cov [i , dij ]
                               V ar[ij ]                                                            (10)
                                                    Cov [dq     q
                                                          ij , dij ]

and


                                             Cov [ij , dq                 q
                                                        ij ] · Cov [ij , dij ]
                                E [ij ] +                                                           (11)
                                              (E [ij ] - 1) · Cov [dq     q
                                                                    ij , dij ]

The assumption that i  1 is equivalent to assuming that when stakes increase, no consumers switch
from being systematic under-reactors to systematic over-reactors (or that no overreacting consumers
substantially increase their overreaction). This is consistent with the core of any costly attention
model that could microfound consumer behavior in our experiment.
   While these results generate bounds on the supremum of the support, they do not quantify how
many consumers overreact. We next derive a bound for the fraction of over-reactors, P r(ij > 1),
and for the fraction of consumers who adjust their valuation weight downwards, P r(ij < 0). These
results follow from a more general result proven in Appendix B.4, which can be seen as a converse of
sorts to Chebyshev's inequality.

Proposition 4. Assume i has support [0, ¯], where ¯ > 1 is the supremum of the support and can
vary by store. Additionally, assume that the distribution of i is supported on [, 1].Then

                                               V ar[i ] + E [i ]2 - E [i ]
                                P r(i > 1)               ¯ - 1) ¯                                   (12)
                                                        (
and

                                              V ar[i ] + E [i ]2 - E [i ]
                               P r(i < 0)                                                           (13)
                                                     ()( - 1)
Both bounds are tight.

   The intuition for this result is that the distribution that minimizes P r(i > 1) subject to a variance
constraint and supremum constraint is one that puts all mass on i  {0, 1,      ¯}.


6.3   Bounds on the variance and the support
Estimation: In our empirical implementation of the bounds, we construct instruments xq
                                                                                     ijk using
different values of q . This allows us to construct multiple estimates of each bound, and since the true
value must be higher than all these bounds, we take the maximum over them.
   Formally, an immediate extension of (8) is that

                                        Cov [ijk , xq                           q
                                                    ij k |k = K ] · Cov [ijk , xij k |k = K ]
             V ar[ijk |k = K ]  max                                                             .   (14)
                                   q                     Cov [xq       q
                                                               ij k , xij k ]


                                                   29
An analogous extension follows for  in (11). In the empirical implementation, we take the maximum
over q  {10, 15, ..., 90}. To estimate Cov [ijk , xq
                                                   ijk ], for each q , we use the expansion


             Cov [ijk , xq           q                 q                   q                   q
                         ijk ] = E [xij k ] · (1 - E [xij k ]) · (E [ijk |xijk = 1] - E [ijk |xij k = 0])


with the conditional means E [ij |xq
                                   ij = 0] estimated as in Section 5.
    We analogously generate the bounds for V ar[ij ] and  by taking the maximum over q 
{10, 15, ..., 90}.
    We calculate bootstrapped percentile-based confidence intervals from 1000 replications, clustered
at the subject level, and report the 5% confidence bound.27
    Results: Table 3 presents our estimates. We estimate a lower bound of 0.83 (5% confidence
bound of 0.52) for V ar[ijB ] and of 0.71 (5% confidence bound of 0.59) for V ar[ijC ]. We estimate a
lower bound for V ar[ij ] of 0.86 (5% confidence bound of 0.31). These results provide evidence for
significant dispersion in revealed valuation weights in both tax environments, as well as for adjustment
when switching tax environments.
    Table 3 also presents the supremum lower bound estimates. We estimate a lower bound of  ¯B to be
2.21 (5% confidence bound of 1.55) and for ¯C to be 1.69 (5% confidence bound of 1.54). Both of these
bounds are significantly above 1, indicating there are over-reactors in the experimental population.
Row (2) presents the estimate as a lower bound on -. We estimate an upper bound on  to be
-0.94 (95% confidence bound of -0.16). This result is consistent with Prediction 5 of our theoretical
results.
    To our knowledge, our finding of overreaction is new to the literature. While Taubinsky and Rees-
Jones (2018) use observable covariates to measure individual differences, their methods are able to
achieve a lower bound on the variance of approximately only 0.1, and therefore cannot be used to
establish overreaction. The methods in this section show that the alternative approach in Taubinsky
and Rees-Jones (2018) generates a lower bound that is almost an order of magnitude off.

6.4    Bounds on the fraction of over-reactors and participants with negative ad-
       justment
By substituting the lower bound for V ar[ijk ] from equation (14) into the lower bound from equation
(12), we derive a bound for the fraction of over-reactors as a function of ¯.
   Figure 6 plots P r(ijk > 1|k = K ) as a function of ¯, both for K = B and for K = C , along
with 5% confidence bounds computed by bootstrap clustered at the subject level. When ¯ = 2.25, we
estimate that at least 20.5% (5% confidence bound of 9.5%) of the population is overreacting in store
B, and at least 19.3% (5% confidence bound of 14.5%) is overreacting in store C. Both these bounds
are decreasing in ¯: for ¯ = 4.25, we bound the fraction of over-reactors at 4.2% (5% confidence bound
of 2.0%) of the population in the standard tax environment and at 3.9% (5% confidence bound of
3.0%) in the triple tax environment.
  27
     Note that since we are calculating lower bounds there is no concept of a 95% confidence bound. In other words, it
does not make sense to provide a statistical upper bound on a lower bound.


                                                         30
         Using equation (13), we derive an analogous bound for the fraction of consumers who adjust their
valuation weight downward in response to higher stakes. Figure 7 plots P r(ij < 0) as a function of
. For  = -0.94, the bound computed in table 3, we estimate that at least 35.5% (5% confidence
bound of 6.1%) of consumers negatively adjust their revealed valuation weights when switching from
the standard tax regime to the triple tax regime. This lower bound is decreasing in the magnitude
of , and at  = -4.25 we estimate a lower bound on the fraction of participants with negative
adjustment to be 4.1% (5% confidence bound of 0.7%).

6.5        Robustness to alternative sample inclusion criteria
In Appendix H, we verify that the results hold on the subsample of participants with nearly accurate
beliefs about their sales tax rate and with strong computational ability. In Appendix I we confirm
that the results hold for the full sample of participants, including those failing comprehension checks.


7         Relation to the literature
7.1        Discussion of our econometric methods and alternative approaches
A key advantage of our approach to documenting heterogeneity is that it makes minimal assumptions
about measurement error at the individual level, and provides non-parametric bounds once the con-
ditional means E [ijk |xq ] are given. This approach enables formal hypothesis tests about the support
of valuation weights (e.g., whether some consumers overreact). Deconvolution methods that build on
Kotlarski's identity (Rao, 1992) cannot be used in on our context for two reasons. First, they rely on
errors that are independent of the variable of interest. Second, adequate inference methods for these
approaches have not been fully developed (Kato et al., 2019). Similarly, shrinkage estimators do not
permit formal statistical inference on the distribution of the latent variable.

7.2        Comparison to existing tax salience literature
Our results that consumers underreact to sales taxes are consistent with numerous other empirical
papers in this literature (reviewed in footnote 1). However, our focus is on the five predictions sum-
marized in Section 2.6, which are not examined in any of these papers. The closest paper to ours is
Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018, TRJ), who provide partial evidence for the first prediction.28
         In Appendix D we discuss in more detail the differences between this paper and TRJ, which we
summarize briefly here. First, the experimental instructions, the descriptions of the tax treatments,
and the shopping decisions are different--there are only several similarities between the two exper-
iments. Second, TRJ do not have an experimental design that varies tax rates within individual
because of their focus on normative implications of tax salience, and thus their data cannot be used to
     Feldman et al. (2018) also conduct an experiment with a structure similar to TRJ, although the results are statis-
    28

tically imprecise and consistent both with the null of full attention as well as the results in this paper. We review this
paper in Appendix D as well.




                                                           31
test predictions 2-5 examined in our paper. Third, TRJ's design affords them significantly less statis-
tical power, and thus they cannot examine how  varies with posted prices. Fourth, the new methods
in this paper show that TRJ's estimated bound for V ar[] at a given tax rate, which is obtained by
studying correlations with observable covariates, is at least an order of magnitude too small. Although
V ar[] at a given tax rate is not a direct focus of this paper, our methodology is a substantial advance
over TRJ even for answering the question first raised in TRJ. Fifth, because of a particular ordering
of decisions in TRJ's experiment, their data introduces a form of correlated measurement error that
prevents the application of our new econometric techniques to their data. Sixth, unlike TRJ we avoid
the problem of selection into tax treatments created by study comprehension.


8         Concluding remarks
In this paper, we provide tests of costly attention models in a concrete and policy-relevant setting. A
better understanding of the mechanisms can better inform both positive and normative analysis.
         Evidence of costly attention implies that shrouding taxes can generate deadweight loss by im-
posing cognitive costs on consumers. Evidence of significant heterogeneity in attention, generating
both under- and overreaction to opaque prices, implies that there may be significant deadweight loss
from misallocation of products to consumers (Taubinsky and Rees-Jones, 2018; Farhi and Gabaix,
forthcoming).29
         Both the heterogeneity and the elasticity with respect to stakes can also have important impli-
cations for how firms design "shrouded prices" in their contracts. For example, Gabaix and Laibson
(2006), Heidhues et al. (2017), and others derive a number of interesting implications about market
structure under the assumption that consumers either perceive shrouded fees correctly or ignore them
completely. Our results on sales taxes suggest that consumer attention to shrouded prices might be
significantly more nuanced than what is assumed in these models. Working out the behavioral IO
implications of the richer models of inattention that our data supports could be an interesting avenue
for further research.
         Of course, the fact that we find evidence for costly attention models does not preclude the possibility
that other mechanisms could be at play. For example, some consumers might simply forget about sales
taxes when shopping at a store.
         There may also be important interactions between costly attention models and other mechanisms.
A key open question is where consumers' highly heterogeneous rules of thumb come from. Theories of
memory and "what comes to mind" can help generate answers (e.g., Mullainathan, 2002; Gennaioli and
Shleifer, 2010; Bordalo et al., 2019). Moreover, while we find that the majority of consumers are capa-
ble of computing post-tax prices, in other domains consumers may reach systematically wrong answers
regardless of effort if they have mis-specified models of the world (Schwartzstein, 2014; Gagnon-Bartsch
    Our empirical results are complementary to the theoretical welfare results that are the focus of TRJ. When combined
    29

with their theoretical formulas, our estimates of means and variances of  imply that the deadweight loss from opaque
taxes is so high that they generate more deadweight loss than equally-sized transparent taxes included in posted-prices,
despited having a smaller effect on behavior.




                                                          32
et al., 2019). When considering other domains of behavior, simple tests of knowledge and computa-
tional skills, such as ours, could help provide a first indication of the extent to which mechanisms
other than costly attention are a key force.
   Despite the possibility of other important sources of mistakes, our study points to attention costs
as a plausible and important source of misreaction to opaque prices. The theoretical and empirical
framework that we have developed could be fruitfully extended to quantify of the importance of costly
attention mechanisms in a variety of other economically important settings.



References
Abaluck, J. and A. Adams (2017): "What Do Consumers Consider Before They Choose? Identifi-
 cation from Asymmetric Demand Responses," Working Paper 23566, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Allcott, H. and D. Taubinsky (2015): "Evaluating Behaviorally-Motivated Policy: Experimental
 Evidence from the Lightbulb Market," American Economic Review, 105, 2501­2538.

Ambuehl, S., A. Ockenfels, and C. Stewart (2018): "Attention and Selection Effects," working
 paper.

Anagol, S., S. Cole, and S. Sarkar (2017): "Understanding the advice of commissions-motivated
 agents: Evidence from the Indian life insurance market," The Review of Economics and Statistics.

Ariely, D., U. Gneezy, G. Loewenstein, and N. Mazar (2009): "Large Stakes and Big Mis-
 takes," Review of Economic Studies, 76, 451­469.

Bartos, V., M. Bauer, J. Chytilová, and F. Matêjka (2016): "Attention Discrimination: The-
 ory and Field Experiments with Monitoring Information Acquisition," American Economic Review,
 106, 1437­75.

Benjamin, D. J., O. Heffetz, M. S. Kimball, and N. Szembrot (2014): "Beyond Happiness and
 Satisfaction: Toward Well-Being Indices Based on Stated Preference," American Economic Review,
 104.

Benzarti, Y. (forthcoming): "How Taxing Is Tax Filing? Leaving Money on the Table Because of
 Hassle Costs." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Bernheim, B. D. and D. Taubinsky (2018): "Behavioral Public Economics," in The Handbook of
 Behavioral Economics, ed. by B. D. Bernheim, S. DellaVigna, and D. Laibson, New York: Elsevier,
 vol. 1.

Bhargava, S., G. Loewenstein, and J. Sydnor (2017): "Choose to Lose: Health Plan Choices
 from a Menu with Dominated Options," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 1319­1372.

Bhatia, R. and C. Davis (2000): "A Better Bound on the Variance," American Mathematical
 Monthly, 107, 353­357.

Block, H. and J. Marschak (1960): "Random Orderings and Stochastic Theories of Response,"
 in Contributions to Probability and Statistics. Essays in Honor of Harold Hotelling, ed. by I. Olkin,
 Stanford University Pres.

                                                 33
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2013): "Salience and Consumer Choice," Journal
 of Political Economy, 121, 803­843.

------ (2019): "Memory, Attention, and Choice," NBER Working Paper No. 23256.

Bushong, B., J. Schwartzstein, and M. Rabin (2015): "A Model of Relative Thinking," Working
 Paper.

Camerer, C. F. and R. M. Hogarth (1999): "The Effects of Financial Incentives in Experiments:
 A Review and Capital-Labor-Production Framework," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 19, 7­42.

Caplin, A. (2016): "Measuring and Modeling Attention," Annual Review of Economics, 8, 379­403.

Caplin, A., D. Csaba, J. Leahy, and O. Nov (2018): "Rational Inattention, Competitive Supply,
 and Psychometrics," Working Paper 25224, working paper.

Caplin, A., M. Dean, and J. Leahy (forthcoming): "Rational Inattention, Optimal Consideration
 Sets, and Stochastic Choice," Review of Economic Studies.

Carvahlo, L. and D. Silverman (2019): "Complexity and Sophistication," working paper.

Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft (2007): "Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,"
 NBER working paper No. 13330.

------ (2009): "Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence," American Economic Review, 99, 1145­
  1177.

Dean, M. and N. Neligh (2018): "Experimental Tests of Rational Inattention," working paper.

DellaVigna, S. (2009): "Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field," Journal of Economic
 Literature, 47, 315­372.

Enke, B. and F. Zimmermann (2019): "Correlation Neglect in Belief Formation," Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies, 86, 313­332.

Farhi, E. and X. Gabaix (forthcoming): "Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents," American
  Economic Review.

Feldman, N. and S. Bradley (forthcoming): "Hidden Baggage: Behavioral Responses to Changes
  in Airline Ticket Tax Disclosure," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Feldman, N., J. Goldin, and T. Homonoff (2018): "Raising the Stakes: Experimental Evidence
  on the Endogeneity of Taxpayer Mistakes," National Tax Journal, 71, 201­230.

Feldman, N. E. and B. J. Ruffle (2015): "The Impact of Including, Adding, and Subtracting a
  Tax on Demand," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7, 95­118.

Fudenberg, D., P. Strack, and T. Strzalecki (2018): "Speed, Accuracy, and the Optimal
 Timing of Choices," American Economic Review, 108, 3651­3684.

Gabaix, X. (2014): "A Sparsity Based Model of Bounded Rationality," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 129, 1661­1710.

------ (2019): "Behavioral Inattention," in Handbook of Behavioral Economics, ed. by D. Bernheim,
  S. DellaVigna, and D. Laibson, Elsevier, vol. 2.

                                               34
Gabaix, X. and D. Laibson (2006): "Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information
 Suppression in Competitive Markets," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121.

Gabaix, X., D. Laibson, G. Moloche, and S. Weinberg (2006): "Costly Information Acqui-
 sition: Experimental Analysis of a Boundedly Rational Model," American Economic Review, 96,
 1043­1068.

Gagnon-Bartsch, T., M. Rabin, and J. Schwartzstein (2019): "Channeled Attention and
 Stable Errors," working paper.

Gennaioli, N. and A. Shleifer (2010): "What Comes to Mind," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 125, 1399­1433.

Gillen, B., E. Snowberg, and L. Yariv (forthcoming): "Experimenting with Measurement Error:
  Techniques with Applications to the Caltech Cohort Study," Journal of Political Economy.

Goldin, J. and T. Homonoff (2013): "Smoke gets in your eyes: cigarette tax salience and regres-
 sivity," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5, 302­336.

Handel, B. R. and J. T. Kolstad (2015): "Health Insurance for "Humans": Information Frictions,
 Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare," American Economic Review, 105, 2449­2500.

Hanna, R., S. Mullainathan, and J. Schwartzstein (2014): "Learning Through Noticing:
 Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1311­1353.

Hastings, J. S., B. C. Madrian, and W. L. Skimmyhorn (2013): "Financial literacy, financial
 education, and economic outcomes," Annual Review of Economics, 5, 347­373.

Hausman, J. (2001): "Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the Right and
 Problemsfrom the Left," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15, 57­67.

Heidhues, P., B. Kszegi, and T. Murooka (2017): "Inferior Products and Profitable Deception,"
 Review of Economic Studies, 84, 323­356.

Hoopes, J., D. H. Reck, and J. Slemrod (2015): "Taxpayer Search for Information: Implications
 for Rational Attention," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7, 177­208.

Hossain, T. and J. Morgan (2006): "...Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue (Non)Equivalence
 in Field Experiments on eBay," Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, 5.

Kahneman, D. (1973): Attention and Effort, Prentice-Hall.

------ (2003): "Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral Economics," American
  Economic Review, 93, 1449­1475.

Kato, K., Y. Sasaki, and T. Ura (2019): "Inference based on Kotlarski's Identity," working paper.

Khaw, M. W., Z. Li, and M. Woodford (2017): "Risk Aversion as a Perceptual Bias," .

Koszegi, B. and A. Szeidl (2013): "A Model of Focusing in Economic Choice," Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 128, 53­104.

Kroft, K., J.-W. P. Laliberte, R. Leal-Vizcaino, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2019): "Salience
 and Taxation with Imperfect Competition," working paper.


                                               35
Lacetera, N., D. G. Pope, and J. R. Sydnor (2012): "Heuristic Thinking and Limited Attention
  in the Car Market," American Economic Review, 102, 2206­36.

Lieder, F. and T. L. Griffiths (2019): "Resource-rational analysis: Understanding human cogni-
  tion as the optimal use of limited computational resources," Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1­85.

Makowiak, B., F. Matêjka, and M. Wiederholt (2018): "Rational Inattention: A Disciplined
 Behavioral Model," Working paper.

Martin, D. (2016): "Rational Inattention in Games: Experimental Evidence," working paper.

Matejka, F. and A. McKay (2015): "Rational Inattention to Discrete Choices: A New Foundation
 for the Multinomial Logit Model," American Economic Review, 105, 272­298.

McKelvey, R. D. and T. R. Palfrey (1995): "Quantal Response Equilibria for Normal Form
 Games," Games and Economic Behavior, 10, 6­38.

Mullainathan, S. (2002): "A Memory-Based Model of Bounded Rationality," Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 117.

Natenzon, P. (2019): "Random Choice and Learning," Journal of Political Economy, 127, 419­457.

Rao, B. P. (1992): Identifiability in Stochastic Models: Characterization of Probability Distributions,
 Academic Press.

Ratcliff, R. (1978): "A Theory of Memory Retreival," Psychological Review, 85.

Rees-Jones, A. and D. Taubinsky (forthcoming): "Measuring Schmeduling'," Review of Economic
 Studies.

Schwartzstein, J. (2014): "Selective Attention and Learning," Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 12, 1423­1452.

Shenhav, A., S. Musslick, F. Lieder, W. Kool, T. L. Griffiths, J. D. Cohen, and M. M.
  Botvinick (2017): "Toward a Rational and Mechanistic Account of Mental Effort," Annual Review
  of Neuroscience, 40, 99­124, pMID: 28375769.

Shlain, A. (2019): "More than a Penny's Worth: Left-Digit Bias and Firm Pricing," Tech. rep.

Sims, C. A. (2003): "Implications of Rational Inattention," Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 665
  ­ 690.

Taubinsky, D. and A. Rees-Jones (2018): "Attention Variation and Welfare: Theory and Evidence
  from a Tax Salience Experiment," The Review of Economic Studies, 85, 2462­2496.

Woodford, M. (2012): "Inattentive Valuation and Reference-Dependent Choice," Working Paper.




                                                  36
Figures and Tables

                                  Figure 1: Screenshots of a purchase decision
                                                    (a) Introduction




                                                 (b) Purchase decision




Figure 1 shows an example of the two screenshots participants see for each of their nine purchase decisions. Subjects
first saw a screen indicating the product for which they will be shopping and the relevant sales tax environment. Store A
corresponds to a tax-free environment, store B to a standard sales tax environment, and store C to a triple-the-standard
sales tax environment. On the second screen, participants saw an image and product description from Amazon.com,
and were asked a series of questions about whether they would buy the product at various prices. The order of the
prices was randomized. When filling out the price list, participants were able to click on a "back" button to revisit the
first screen with the store information and an "instructions" button to reread the experiment instructions.




                                                           37
                                                                      Figure 2: Demand curves
                                                                       (a) Observed demand curves




                                           14
                                           12
                                     Pre-tax price
                                     8     6
                                           4  10




                                                     0               .2            .4              .6                  .8              1
                                                                                        Quantity

                                                                     Observed No Tax                      Observed Standard Tax
                                                                     Observed Triple Tax



       (b) Observed vs. counterfactual demand: standard taxes                                                 (c) Observed vs. counterfactual demand: triple taxes
        14




                                                                                                         14
        12




                                                                                                         12
  Pre-tax price




                                                                                                   Pre-tax price
           10




                                                                                                            10
  8




                                                                                                   8
        6




                                                                                                         6
        4




                                                                                                         4




                  0      .2                .4                   .6           .8              1                     0         .2             .4              .6         .8              1
                                                     Quantity                                                                                    Quantity

                      Observed No Tax                                 Observed Standard Tax                                 Observed No Tax                      Observed Triple Tax
                      Counterfactual Standard Tax                                                                           Counterfactual Triple Tax




Figure 2 presents demand curves, averaging across all nine products. We start by constructing demand curves Djk (p)
where j indexes products and k indexes the store type, A (no tax), B (standard tax), or C (triple tax). These correspond
to the fraction of consumers willing to buy product j at each price on the price list. For stores A and B, choices at ten
prices from $4.00 to $14.07 were observed, and for store C choices at nine prices from $4.00 to $12.24 were observed.
Panel (a) presents the average demand curves Davg,k (p) := 9
                                                           1
                                                               j Djk (p) for each tax-environment using observed choices.
For panel (b), we construct the demand curves that would be expected in store B if consumers reacted to the taxes fully.
We then compare this to the observed demand in stores A and B. For panel (c), we construct the demand curves that
would be expected in store C if consumers reacted to the taxes fully. We then compare this to the observed demand in
stores A and C. We construct the counterfactual demand through linear interpolation, as described in Section 4.1.




                                                                                        38
           Figure 3: Average revealed valuation weight for posted prices at or below a cutoff




                          1           .8
               Revealed valuation weight
             .2      .4   0   .6




                                           4.60   5.29   6.08      7.00      8.05     9.25      10.64   12.24   14.07
                                                                Price less than or equal to ($)

                                                                  Triple Tax                  95% CI
                                                                  Standard Tax                95% CI


Figure 3 presents estimates of store-specific estimates E [] for prices less than or equal to the cutoff specified on the
x-axis.  is defined as the revealed valuation weight that consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding
to complete neglect of the tax and  = 1 corresponding to putting the same weight on the tax as on the salient posted
price. Each value on the x-axis corresponds to a different posted price on the price list presented to consumers. The
results are estimated using equation (4) for prices below the cutoff. Standard errors are clustered at the subject level.




                                                                          39
                                         Figure 4: Average revealed valuation weight by average tax owed




                        1
            Revealed valuation weight
                .4       .6
                        .2
                        0       .8




                                        0.00      0.50      1.00         1.50       2.00       2.50        3.00
                                                                   Average tax owed ($)

                                                            Triple Tax                95% CI
                                                            Standard Tax              95% CI


Figure 4 presents store-specific estimates E [] by the average tax owed within each bin.  is defined as the revealed
valuation weight that consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding to complete neglect of the tax and
 = 1 corresponding to putting the same weight on the tax as on the salient posted price. For each tax environment--
store B and store C--each bin is constructed by dividing the 10 prices in the experiment into 5 ordered pairs. The
average tax owed is constructed by taking the average of the two prices in each bin, and multiplying it by the average
tax rate in stores B and C, respectively. The estimating equation is an extension of equation (4), described in footnote
21. Standard errors are clustered at the subject level.




                                                                        40
               Figure 5: Illustration of the estimation procedure for individual differences




Figure 5 illustrates the estimation procedure for computing the average  for high and low valuation weight groups, as
described in Section 5.1.  is defined as the revealed valuation weight that consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0
corresponding to complete neglect of the tax and  = 1 corresponding to putting the same weight on the tax as on the
salient posted price.




                                                          41
         Figure 6: Lower bound on the fraction of individuals who over-react to the sales tax




                        .5          .4
            Fraction of over-reactors
                   .2   .1
                        0  .3




                                         1.75   2.25     2.75        3.25         3.75            4.25
                                                         Supremum of support

                                                       Triple Tax              5% Bound
                                                       Standard Tax            5% Bound


This figure presents store-specific estimates for the lower bound on the fraction of consumers with  > 1, as a function
of the supremum of the support of .  is defined as the revealed valuation weight that consumers place on the sales tax,
with  = 0 corresponding to complete neglect of the tax and  = 1 corresponding to putting the same weight on the tax
as on the salient posted price. The lower bound on P r(ik ) > 1, k  B, C is estimated from equation (12). The dashed
lines present the 5% lower bound computed from a percentiled-based bootstrap procedure (1000 replications, clustered
at the subject level).




                                                               42
Figure 7: Lower bound on the fraction of individuals whose valuation weight  decreases in response
to higher stakes



                            .4
            Fraction with negative adjustment
               .1          .2
                            0          .3




                                                -3.5   -3           -2.5          -2       -1.5         -1
                                                                      Infimum of support

                                                            Triple Tax - Standard Tax        5% Bound


Figure 7 presents estimates for the lower bound on P r(iC - iB ) < 0 as a function of the infimum of the support.  is
defined as the revealed valuation weight that consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding to complete
neglect of the tax and  = 1 corresponding to putting the same weight on the tax as on the salient posted price. The
dashed lines present the 5% lower bound from bootstrapped percentile-based confidence intervals (1000 replications,
clustered at the subject level).




                                                                           43
                             Table 1: Average revealed valuation weights by group

                                                    Standard          Triple        Triple - Standard
                  (1): High valuation wgt.             1.04            1.20                  0.16
                                                   [0.83, 1.26]    [1.10, 1.31]         [-0.02, 0.33]
                  (2): Low valuation wgt.              0.25            0.64                  0.39
                                                   [0.08, 0.42]    [0.57, 0.72]          [0.26, 0.52]
                  (3): (1) - (2)                       0.79            0.56                  -0.23
                                                   [0.52, 1.06]    [0.44, 0.68]        [-0.43, -0.03]
                  (4): Full sample                     0.48            0.79                  0.31
                                                   [0.32, 0.63]    [0.72, 0.86]          [0.20, 0.42]
Rows (1) and (2) of table 1 present estimates for the high and low valuation weight groups, whose construction is
described in Section 5.1. Row (3) presents the difference of the estimates in rows (1) and (2), for each column. Row
(4) presents estimates using the full sample. The "Standard" column contains estimates of store B valuation weights in
each of the two groups, as well as the differences between these groups. The "Triple" column contains estimates of store
C valuation weights in each of the two groups, as well as the differences between these groups. The "Triple-Standard"
column presents estimates of E [ijC ] - E [ijB ] for each of the two groups in rows (1) and (2), and contains the differences
in differences in row (3). Bootstrapped confidence intervals from 1000 replications, clustered at the subject level, are
reported in brackets.



                     Table 2: Average revealed valuation weights by adjustment group

                                              Standard            Triple       Triple - Standard
                      (1): Low Adj.              0.85              0.86                 0.01
                                             [0.64, 1.07]      [0.77, 0.96]        [-0.15, 0.17]
                      (2): High Adj.             0.34              0.76                 0.43
                                             [0.17, 0.51]      [0.68, 0.84]         [0.30, 0.55]
                      (3): (1) - (2)             0.52              0.10                 -0.42
                                             [0.28, 0.75]     [-0.01, 0.20]       [-0.60, -0.24]
                      (4): Full sample           0.48              0.79                 0.31
                                             [0.32, 0.63]      [0.72, 0.86]         [0.20, 0.42]
Rows (1) and (2) of table 2 present estimates for the low and high adjustment groups, whose construction is described
in Section 5.2. Row (3) presents the difference of the estimates in rows (1) and (2), for each column. Row (4) presents
estimates using the full sample. The "Standard" column contains estimates of store B valuation weights in each of
the two groups, as well as the differences between these groups. The "Triple" column contains estimates of store C
valuation weights in each of the two groups, as well as the differences between these groups. The "Triple-Standard"
column presents estimates of E [ijC ] - E [ijB ] for each of the two groups in rows (1) and (2), and contains the differences
in differences in row (3). Bootstrapped confidence intervals from 1000 replications, clustered at the subject level, are
reported in brackets.




                                                             44
                     Table 3: Bounds on the dispersion of revealed valuation weights

                                                      Standard (B )      Triple (C )     B -  C
                   Variance (Lower Bound)                  0.83              0.71         0.86
                                                          [0.52]            [0.59]       [0.31]
                   Supremum (Lower Bound)                  2.21              1.69         0.94
                                                          [1.55]            [1.54]       [0.16]
Columns (1) and (2) of table 3 present store-specific estimates of the lower bound on V ar[ijB ] and V ar[ijC ],and on
the supremum   ¯. Column (3) presents estimates of the lower bound of V ar[ijB - ijC ] and the supremum of ijB - ijC .
The methodology is described in Section 6.2 and the estimating equations are described in Section 6.3. Fifth percentile
results from 1000 bootstrap replications, clustered by subject, are reported in brackets.




                                                          45
                          Online Appendices (Not for Publication)

A     General results about costly attention models and preliminary
      lemmas
A.1       Lemma for revealed valuation weight representation
We begin by establishing the following set of results, which we will use repeatedly throughout the
proofs.

Lemma A1. Suppose that the probability that consumer i chooses to buy the product given a valuation
v , salient price ps , and opaque price po is given by G(v - ps , po ), with G increasing in the first argument.
Then the consumer's decision process can be represented as if the consumer chooses to buy if and only
if v - ps - po  0, where  is a random variable whose distribution is independent of v and ps .
Moreover:
    1. If G  {0, 1} for all v, ps , po , then the distribution of  is degenerate (i.e., it is a scalar).
    2. If G2 (u, po )  G1 (u, po ) for all u, then the distribution of  corresponding to G2 first order
stochastically dominates the distribution of  corresponding to G1 .
    3. If G(po - , po ) = 1 - G(po + , po ) for all  , then the distribution of  is symmetric about 1 and
satisfies E [] = 1.

Proof. Fix po , and let F (|po ) be the distribution of  in the reduced-form representation given by
F (|po ) = G(po , po ). In the reduced-form model, the probability that a consumer buys is given by
             v -ps         v -ps
Pr             po    =F      po |po   = G(v - ps , po ).
    If G  {0, 1}, as in condition (1), then there exists a value u = v - ps such that the consumer
buys if and only if v - ps  u . Equivalently, the consumer buys if v - ps  po , where  = u /po .
    To prove condition (2), note that the assumption implies that F2 (|po ) = G2 (po , po )  G1 (po , po ) =
F1 (|po ).
    To prove (3), note that the assumptions imply that F (|po ) = G(po , po ) = G(po (1 - ), po ) =
F (1 - , po ). This implies that the density function corresponding to F is symmetric around a mode
of 1. Therefore, E [] = 1.

    Lemma A1 implies that any attention model that predicts that consumers are more likely to buy
when the transparent surplus v - ps is higher can be represented using the reduced-form attention
weight model. The additional statements in the Lemma help provide further structure on the attention
weights. For example, when the buying decision is not stochastic, as in the Gabaix (2014) model, the
reduced-form valuation weight will not be stochastic either.

A.2       Models in the spirit of rational inattention
We consider a model in which po =  , where  are the salient stakes, and    is the initially
unknown state. The set  includes the true value qo . A consumer has a prior µ about  . The


                                                           46
consumer selects a probability distribution over signals, with each signal identified with a posterior
   = (). Formally, the consumer selects a mapping  :   (). The posterior  must satisfy

                                                        µ( ) ( | )
                                 ( ) = P r( | ) =
                                                        µ( ) ( | )d

where  ( | ) is the probability of signal  given state  . The cost of selecting  is K ( )  R+ , where
R+ denotes the non-negative reals. Given a posterior  , the consumer chooses to buy if and only if
v - ps -      ( )d  0.
   The net utility of choosing  is given by V ( ) = Q( )(v -p0 )-R( ), where Q( ) =        ( ) ( )dd
is the expected probability of buying, and

                                 R( ) = -      ( ) ( )dd - K ( )

is the next expected cost, inclusive of both the attention cost and expected size of the opaque price.

Lemma A2. Let  be the information structure chosen for u = v - ps and let  be the information
structure chosen for u = v - ps , with u < u. Then Q( )  Q( )

Proof. Suppose the contrary: Q( ) < Q( ). Then uQ( ) - R( )  uQ( ) - R( ), which implies
u(Q( ) - Q( ))  R( ) - R( ). Similarly, if  is optimal at u , then u (Q( ) - Q( ))  R( ) - R( ),
or u (Q( ) - Q( ))  R( ) - R( ). This implies that u(Q( ) - Q( ))  u (Q( ) - Q( )), which is
impossible if u > u .

   Lemma A2 implies that the ex-ante expected likelihood of buying is increasing in u = v - ps .
However, it does not by itself imply that the ex-ante expected likelihood of buying is increasing in
every state, and  = qo in particular. If as u increases, the relative likelihood of buying in  = qo
decreases sufficiently quickly, then the likelihood of buying in that state would not decrease. Although
we have not confirmed this exhaustively, this seems like an unlikely result. Below, we confirm that
the likelihood of buying in state  = qo is increasing in u when attention costs are proportional to
(Shannon) entropy reduction.

Lemma A3. Let the cost function be given by (H (µ) - E [H ( )]), where H denotes entropy. Then
the probability of buying in the particular state  = qo is increasing in u = v - ps , and does not depend
on v and ps separately.

Proof. If the probability of buying is in the interior (0, 1), then Theorem 1 in Matejka and McKay
(2015) implies that
                                                              u-qo
                                                         Qe     
                                P r(buy | = qo ) =                   u-qo                           (15)
                                                     (1 - Q) + Qe      


Since the right-hand side of (15) is increasing in both Q and u, Lemma A2 implies that P r(buy | = qo )
is increasing in u.


                                                   47
   The last result immediately leads to the following:

Proposition A1. If attention costs are proportional to entropy reduction, then the consumer's behav-
ior can be represented by the reduced-form valuation weight model.

Proof. Lemma A3 implies that the probability that the consumer buys the product can be written as
G(v - ps , po ), where G is increasing in the first argument. Lemma A1 leads to the result.

   A key general comparative static is that systematic misreaction (E [] = 1) cannot occur if the
consumer has an unbiased prior. Thus, systematic misreaction can only come about from biased
initial perceptions.

Proposition A2. Suppose that the prior µ is symmetric around qo ; i.e., µ( ) = µ( ) if |w - qo | =
|w - qo |. If attention costs are proportional to entropy reduction, then the consumer's behavior is
represented with a reduced-form valuation weight model in which E [] = 1.

Proof. For u = qo +  , let  ( ) be the probability of choosing to buy in state  at the optimal
attention strategy. Now when u = qo -  , the relative gains from not buying at  = qo - ( - qo )
are equal to the relative gains from buying at  when u = qo +  . By symmetry, this implies that
at the optimal attention strategy, the probability of buying when u = qo -  , denoted - ( ), must
satisfy 1 - - (2qo -  ) =  ( ). In particular, this implies that  (qo ) + - (qo ) = 1. Point 3 of
Lemma A1 then implies the result.

Generalization to other cost functions: In general, Proposition A2 will hold whenever i) there
exists a reduced-form valuation weight representation and ii) the attention cost function satisfies a
basic "anonymity" assumption such that the "labels" of the states do not matter, only the probabilities
of the states and their contingent payoffs.
   Finally, we establish a general result about stakes and attention costs.

Proposition A3. Let the cost function be given by (H (µ) - E [H ( )]), where H denotes entropy.
As   0 or as   , the distribution of  approaches, in probability, a distribution that places unit
mass on 1.

Proof. We first show that as   0, P r(buy |v - ps - po  0)  1 and P r(buy |v - ps - po < 0)  0. Let
Q denote the ex-ante expected probability of buying. By Proposition 1 of Caplin et al. (forthcoming),
Q must satisfy

                                                 v -ps -
                                         exp              µ( )
                                              v -ps -                   1,
                                  
                                     Qexp                + (1 -   Q)




                                                   48
with equality if Q > 0. Now
                                v -ps -                                          v -ps -
                          exp            µ( )                              exp            µ( )
             lim             v -ps -                  = lim                   v -ps -
             0
                   
                      Qexp              + (1 -   Q)       0
                                                               v -ps
                                                                       Qexp              + (1 -   Q)
                                                                      µ( )
                                                      =
                                                                   lim0 Q
                                                           v -ps
                                                          P r(  v - ps )
                                                      =
                                                             lim0 Q

Thus Q0 := lim0 Q  P r(  v - ps ). If P r(  v - ps ) = 1 then we are done since in that case
the consumer buys with probability 1, just like the fully attentive consumer (recall the assumption
that qo  ). If P r(  v - ps ) = 0 then Q0 = 0 by rational expectations, so we are again done.
   Consider now the case in which P r(  v - ps )  (0, 1), which implies that Q0 = P r(  v - ps ) 
(0, 1). In this case, Theorem 1 of Matejka and McKay (2015) implies that


                                                                         v -ps -qo
                                                                    Qexp     
                      lim P r(buy | = qo ) = lim
                      0                     0
                                              v -ps
                                                     (1 - Q) +          Qexp v-ps  -qo

                                            
                                            0 if v - p - q < 0
                                                      s     o
                                          =
                                            1 if v - p - q > 0
                                                      s     o


Consider now the impact of increasing  . It is sufficient to show that as l  , P r(buy |lv, lps , lpo ) 
0 if v - ps - po < 0 and P r(buy |lv, lps , lpo )  1 if v - ps - po > 0. This is because P r( >
x) = P r(buy |v - ps = xpo ). Thus if x > 1 and P r(buy |lv, lps , lpo )  0 if v - ps - po < 0, then
P r(buy |v - ps = xpo )  0 as   . Conversely, P r( < x) = 1 - P r(buy |v - ps = xpo ). Thus if
x < 1 and P r(buy |lv, lps , lpo )  1 if v - ps - po > 0, then P r(buy |v - ps = xpo )  1 as   .
   To that end, note that the impact on attention strategies of scaling up payoffs by l is equivalent to
scaling down the attention costs to /l. But since behavior approaches the full attentive benchmark
when   0, the conclusion follows.

Generalization to other cost functions: The result about stakes follows more generally. If
attention costs are given K = Ko , then scaling up stakes by k has the same impact on attention
strategies as scaling down attention costs to /k . Then the reasoning in the proof of Proposition A3
implies that any cost function that generates behavior that is continuous in  at 0 will also generate
the prediction that the distribution of  approaches 1.

A.3    Gabaix (2014) model of attention adjustment
Again, we consider a model in which po =  , where  are the salient stakes, and    is the initially
unknown state. The set  includes the true value qo . The consumer has a prior µ about  . We set
q
¯o =   µ( ).


                                                       49
     Consumers form an estimate of qo given by qo                  qo . The case m = 0 corresponds
                                                 (m) = mq + (1 - m)¯
                                                         o
to no adjustment and the case m = 1 corresponds to full adjustment. The attention cost of choosing
m  0 is m , where   0. Consumers approximate the perceived benefit of choosing m  0 with
the quadratic approximation B - (1 - m)2 B , where B is the benefit of full information. Formally,



                          B=                (v - ps -  )µ( ) if v - ps -  q
                                                                          ¯o < 0
                                  v -ps

                          B=                (ps +  - v )µ( ) if v - ps -  q
                                                                          ¯o  0
                                  v -ps

Lemma A4. The consumer's propensity to buy is monotonically increasing in u = v - ps .

Proof. To establish monotonicity in u = v - ps , we need to show that as u increases, the consumer
cannot go from buying to not buying. Suppose first that u -  q
                                                             ¯o < 0, so that the consumer does not
buy when m = 0. If the consumer buys at the optimal m at that u, then u -  (mqo +(1 - m)¯
                                                                                        qo )  0 by
definition, which is possible only if u - qo > 0. Now since B (u) =     u (u -  )µ( )   for u -  q
                                                                                                 ¯o < 0,
B is an increasing function of u when u -  q
                                           ¯o < 0. And since m is increasing in B, this means that
m is increasing in u when u < qo .
     Let m be the chosen attention weight for some u  (u, qo ). Since m > m, and u > u > qo ,
it follows that u -  (m qo + (1 - m )¯
                                     qo )  0 if u -  (mqo + (1 - m)¯
                                                                   qo )  0, and thus the consumer
buys when v - ps = u . Finally, note that if u   q
                                                 ¯o and u > qo , then the consumer buys when
v - ps = u . Thus, if u -  q
                           ¯o < 0 but the consumer buys when v - ps = u, then the consumer buys
for all other v, ps such that v - ps > u.
     Second, suppose that u -  q
                               ¯o  0 and the consumer buys for this value of v - ps = u. Then for the
optimal m at that u, u -  (mqo + (1 - m)¯
                                        qo )  0. Now if u  qo , then plainly the consumer buys for
any u > u. Suppose instead that u < qo . The value of full information is B =       u (      - u)µ( ),
which is decreasing in u. Consequently, m is decreasing in u for u   q
                                                                     ¯o . This means that the optimal
attention weight m at u is m  m. Then since m  m, it holds that u -  (m qo + (1 - m )¯
                                                                                     qo )  0
if u -  (mqo + (1 - m)¯
                      qo )  0.

     Since the propensity to buy is deterministic and is increasing in u = v - ps , Lemma A1 then
implies:

Proposition A4. Consumer behavior in the Gabaix (2014) model of attention adjustment can be
represented by a revealed valuation weight model in which the consumer chooses to buy if and only if
v - ps - po  0 for   R.

     We next consider comparative statics on  and  .

Proposition A5. In the revealed valuation weight representation,  = 1 if q
                                                                         ¯o = qo . The relative
misreaction |1 - | is increasing in  and is decreasing in  , with lim0 |1 - | = 0 and lim |1 - | =
0.


                                                      50
Proof. The case q
                ¯o = qo is immediate, since in this case qo
                                                           = q for all m.
                                                              o
      Let m(u) be the optimal m chosen when v - ps = u. Note that since B is continuous in u, m(u)
is continuous in u as well. Define u to be the smallest u such that u  m(u)qo + (1 - m(u)) q
                                                                                           ¯o .
Continuity implies that u must satisfy

                                      u = m(u )qo + (1 - m(u )) q
                                                                ¯o                                     (16)

Recall that Lemma A4 implies that there is a unique u satisfying this equation.
      Then
                                        qo              qo
                                    =    
                                           =                                                           (17)
                                        u    m(u )qo + (1 - m(u ))¯
                                                                  qo
Note that  is a function of m and u only, and does not directly depend on stakes. The combination
of (16) and (17) imply that m(u) is decreasing in  and increasing in  for all u.
      Consider first the case in which q
                                       ¯o < qo . The case q
                                                          ¯o > qo follows analogously. Since m is decreasing
in  for all u, the assumption qo > q
                                   ¯o implies that q  = mqo + (1 - m)¯
                                                                     qo is decreasing in  for all values
of u. Consequently, the solution u to equation (16) decreases in , and thus  must be increasing in
 as well. Finally, since m  1 as   0, it follows that lim0  = 1.
      Next, consider the impact of increasing stakes from  to  >  . Let B (, u) denote the value of
acquiring full information at stakes  and transparent surplus v - ps = u. Now for u = ( / )u, and
u > q
    ¯o
                                                                                 
                  B ( , u ) =          (  - u )µ( ) =            ( - u)µ( ) =     B (, u)              (18)
                                 u /                                             
Since the perceived benefit of increasing m is linear in B , equation (18) above implies that increasing
stakes to  has the same impact on m as decreasing attention costs from m to            
                                                                                          m . Thus, since
m is decreasing in , it must be increasing in stakes  .

      Finally, we work out a simple comparative static on prior beliefs that complements the comparative
static in the body of the paper about how prior perceptions affect the revealed valuation weights .
We show that for a family of distributions of prior beliefs indexed by the mean and the variance, the
revealed valuation weight  will be increasing in the mean and in the variance.

Proposition A6. Suppose that prior beliefs are given by the random variable d + l, where  is a
mean-zero random variable. Then the revealed valuation weight  is decreasing in d, and the relative
misreaction |1 - | is decreasing in l.

Proof. Note that q
                 ¯o is constant in l, and thus increasing l cannot change behavior when m = 0.
Consequently, B is proportional to l, and thus m is increasing in l as well. By the reasoning in the
proof of Proposition A5, this implies that |1 - | is decreasing in l.
      Next, we show that if a consumer with prior (d, l) buys when v - ps = u, then a consumer with
prior (d - , l) will also buy when v - ps = u. This will establish that (d - , l)  (d, l) by Lemma
A1.



                                                     51
    Consider first the case in which u -  q
                                          ¯o (d, l) < 0, so that the consumer does not buy when m = 0,
but buys at the optimal m because u > qo . Now for  such that u -  q
                                                                   ¯o (d, l) +  < 0, the consumer
with prior (d - , l) will also not buy when m = 0. But because B (u, d + , l) > B (u, d, l) by the same
reasoning as in the proof of Lemma A4, the consumer with prior (d - , l) will choose a higher m. Now
since qo < u <  q
                ¯o (d, l), it follows that qo < q
                                                ¯o (d, l) and thus

               m(d, l)qo + (1 - m(, l))¯
                                       qo (d, l)  m(d - , l)qo + (1 - m(d - , l))¯
                                                                                 qo (d, l)
                                               > m(d - , l)qo + (1 - m(d - , l))¯
                                                                                qo (d - , l)

Consequently, the consumer with prior (d - , l) also buys.
    Next, consider the case in which u -  q
                                          ¯o (d, l) > 0 and the consumer buys for this value of v - ps = u.
Then for the optimal m at that u, u -  (m(d, l)qo + (1 - m(d, l))¯
                                                                 qo (d, l))  0. Now if u  qo , then
plainly the consumer buys at prior (d - , l) since q              ¯o (d, l) -  . Suppose instead that
                                                   ¯o (d - , l) = q
u < qo , which also implies that qo > q
                                      ¯o . Then B (u, d + , l) > B (u, d, l) by the same reasoning as in
the proof of Lemma A4. Consequently, m(d - , l)  m(d, l). Thus

               m(d, l)qo + (1 - m(, l))¯
                                       qo (d, l)  m(d - , l)qo + (1 - m(d - , l))¯
                                                                                 qo (d, l)
                                               > m(d - , l)qo + (1 - m(d - , l))¯
                                                                                qo (d - , l)

which implies that the consumer with prior (d - , l) also buys.


B     Proofs of propositions in the body of the paper
B.1    Proof of Proposition 1
Proposition A1 establishes that the model has a revealed valuation weight representation. Proposition
A3 establishes that lim0 |1 - | = 0 and lim |1 - | = 0. This proves the first part of the
proposition.
    We now move on to the second statement. Set u = v - ps . To characterize the model, begin
by noting that Lemma 1 of Matejka and McKay (2015) implies that it is optimal for consumers to
only choose at most two different posteriors, 0 and 1 , such that b(0 ) = 0 and b(1 ) = 1. Now
Proposition 2 of Caplin et al. (forthcoming) implies that the distribution  is optimal if and only if
(i) Q1 + (1 - Q)0 = r, where Q is the ex-ante expected probability of buying, and (ii)


                                                   1  u-t
                                                     e 
                                                   0
                                               1 - 1    ^
                                                      u-t
                                                     e 
                                               1 - 0

with equality in both equations when buying and not buying are ex-ante expected with positive
probability. The constraint Q1 + (1 - Q)0 = r implies the constraints 1  r and 0  r.


                                                     52
          When the equalities hold, we have a system of two equations and two unknowns given by

                                                                              u-t
                                                             1 = 0 e           

                                                                                          ^
                                                                                        u-t
                                                         1 - 1 = (1 - 0 )e               



                                                                   u-t                              ^
                                                                                                  u-t                ^
                                                                                                                   u-t        u-t          ^
                                                                                                                                         u-t
Plugging the first into the second gives (1 - 0 e                          ) = (1 - 0 )e                , or 0 e         -e         =e         - 1,
from which it follows that                                                  ^
                                                                          u-t
                                                                      e           -1
                                                           0 =          ^
                                                                      u-t           u-t
                                                                                                                                               (19)
                                                                  e           -e     


We then have

                                                           0 - r
                                                    Q=
                                                           0 - 1
                                                             0 - r
                                                       =               u-t
                                                           0 (1 - e           )
                                                              1                         r
                                                       =         u-t      -                 u-t
                                                           1-e                0 (1 - e            )
                                                             1
                                                       =         u-t   (1 - r/0 )
                                                           1-e    


Now the ex-post probability of buying, by Bayes' rule, is

                                                                 P r(q | = 1 )P r(buy )
                                             P r(buy |q = t) =
                                                                          P r(q )
                                                                 1 Q
                                                               =
                                                                   r
                                                                        u-t          u-t
                                                                 0 e               e 
                                                               =            -t -       u-t
                                                                  r 1 - e u       1-e 
                                                                     1        0
                                                               = t-u              -1
                                                                 e  -1 r

To consider comparative statics, first consider comparative statics on 0 . An alternative formulation
is
                                                                                  ^-u
                                                                                  t
                                                                      1-e           
                                                             0 =                  ^-t
                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                               (20)
                                                                       1-e          


Now clearly 0 is increasing in u; in general, the numerator goes from 0 for u = t^ to 1 for u = .
Since the denominator is constant in u, 0 is increasing in u. Next, we see that 0 is decreasing in t
                                                                                                   ^
                                                                 u-t                          ^
                                                                                            u-t
from the formulation in equation (19), since e                            < 1 and e               > 1 but is decreasing in t
                                                                                                                           ^.30 Finally,
 is constant in r.
          Now for comparative statics on P r(buy |q = t), note that                           1
                                                                                             t-s      > 0 is increasing in u, and thus the
                                                                                            e  -1
                                                                                                                                                 ^
                                                                                                                                               u-t
                                                                                            (x-a)-(x-1)
     30
          For a function f (x) =   x-1
                                   x-a
                                         for a < 1, the derivative in x is f (x) =             (x-a)2
                                                                                                          > 0. Thus 0 is monotone in e               .



                                                                       53
probability is increasing in u. Next, since 0 is constant in r, the probability of buying is decreasing
in r. And since 0 is decreasing in t^, we also see that the ex-post probability of buying is decreasing
in t
   ^.
                                                                                   0 -r
   The boundary conditions must be such that in general Q = min max                      u-t   , 0 , 1 , with
                                                                                0 (1-e     )
0 = 1 if Q is not interior. It can be shown that there exist u and u¯ such that Q = 0 if u < u
and Q = 1 if u > u
                 ¯. We can show that the same comparative statics for r and t
                                                                            ^ apply to u and u
                                                                                             ¯.
Intuitively, the higher are r and t
                                  ^, the higher are u and u  ¯, since buying the good becomes only less
advantageous. Formally, this is because Q is increasing in u but is decreasing in r and t    ^. Thus if r
and t
    ^ get bigger, and Q is fixed at either 0 or 1, then the values of u have to be bigger to compensate.


B.2    Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. Proposition A4 establishes that the model has a revealed valuation weight representation.
Proposition A5 establishes that the relative misreaction |1 - | is increasing in  and is decreasing in
 , with lim0 |1 - | = 0 and lim |1 - | = 0.
   We now need to show decreasing q
                                  ¯o through changes in r or t
                                                             ^ cannot lead a consumer to go from
buying to not buying. That is, the likelihood of buying is decreasing in q
                                                                         ^o . Combined with Lemma
A1, and the fact that the revealed valuation weight representation has  = 1 when t   ^ = t, this will
imply the remaining statement of the proposition.
   Case 1: t < u < t ^ and u -  q¯o > 0. In this case u -  (mt + (1 - m)¯  qo )  0 for all m  [0, 1].
Decreasing q
           ^o by either decreasing r or t does not change that inequality.
                                        ^
   Case 2: t < u < t
                   ^ and u -  q
                              ¯o < 0. The value of full information in this case is B = r(u - t). If
the consumer buys at the optimal m at these parameters, then u -  (mt +(1 - m)¯
                                                                              qo )  0 by definition,
which is possible only if u - t > 0. In this case, increasing r increases B and consequently the chosen
m, and it decreases q¯o . Thus the propensity to buy increases in r when t < u < t ^. Moreover, since B
is not a function of t
                     ^ when u -  q
                                 ¯o < 0, increasing t
                                                    ^ has no impact on the consumer's propensity to
buy in this region.
   Case 3: t^ < u < t and u -  q
                               ¯o < 0. In this case u -  (mt + (1 - m)¯  qo ) < 0 for all m  [0, 1]. The
consumer does not buy for all parameters r and t ^ satisfying these conditions.
   Case 4: t
           ^ < u < t and u -  q
                              ¯o > 0. In this case, B = r(t - u). If the consumer buys at the
optimal m at these parameters, then u -  (mt + (1 - m)¯
                                                      qo )  0 by definition. Decreasing q
                                                                                        ¯o by
decreasing r decreases B and thus decreases the optimal m. Since t > q¯o , decreasing r thus decreases
mt + (1 - m)¯ qo , and thus increases the propensity to buy. And since B is constant in t ^, it is then
mechanical that decreasing t
                           ^ decreases mt + (1 - m)¯
                                                   qo , and thus increases the propensity to buy.




                                                   54
B.3    Proof of Proposition 3
Proof. Let E [Xi |Y ] = (Y ). By the law of iterated expectations, and the conditional independence
assumption that E [X1 X2 |Y ] = E [X1 |Y ]E [X2 |Y ],

                        Cov [X1 , X2 ] = E [X1 X2 ] - E [X1 ]E [X2 ]
                                      = E [E [X1 X2 |Y ]] - E [E [X1 |Y ]]E [E [X2 |Y ]]
                                      = E [(Y )2 ] - E [(Y )]2
                                      = V ar[(Y )]

Again by the law of iterated expectations,



                             Cov [Y, Xi ] = E [Y Xi ] - E [Y ]E [Xi ]
                                          = E [E [Y Xi |Y ]] - E [Y ]E [E [Xi |Y ]]
                                          = E [Y (Y )] - E [Y ]E [(Y )]
                                          = Cov [Y, (Y )]

The first statement of the proposition is therefore equivalent to


                                   V ar[Y ]V ar[(Y )]  Cov [Y, (Y )]2 ,

which holds by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. More generally, if E [X1 X2 |Y ]  E [X1 |Y ]E [X2 |Y ],
meaning that the two proxies are correlated conditional on Y , then Cov [X1 , X2 ]  V ar[(Y )] and the
statement of the proposition still holds.
   The second statement follows by the Bhatia-Davis inequality: (Y¯ - E [Y ])(E [Y ] - Y )  V ar[Y ].
   To show that both inequalities are tight, suppose that Y takes on the values Y and Y   ¯ only, with
            ¯ ). Since (Y ) must trivially be a linear function of Y when Y has binary support,
a = P r(Y = Y
and since the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality reduces to an equality when one random variable is a linear
transformation of the other, this implies V ar[Y ]V ar[(Y )] = Cov [Y, (Y )]2 . Moreover,


                                ¯ - aY
                   V ar[Y ] = a(Y    ¯ - (1 - a)Y )2 + (1 - a)(Y - aY
                                                                    ¯ - (1 - a)Y )2
                                        ¯ - Y )2 + (1 - a)a2 (Y
                           = a(1 - a)2 (Y                     ¯ - Y )2
                                      ¯ - Y )2
                           = a(1 - a)(Y

At the same time,

                  ¯ - E [Y ])(E [Y ] - Y ) = (Y
                 (Y                           ¯ - aY
                                                   ¯ - (1 - a)Y )(aY
                                                                   ¯ + (1 - a)Y - Y )
                                                      ¯ - Y )a(Y
                                            = (1 - a)(Y        ¯ - Y ),



                                                        55
which shows that (Y
                  ¯ - E [Y ])(E [Y ] - Y ) = V ar[Y ] for a distribution with binary support.


B.4    Proof of Proposition 4
We start with the more general statement.

                                                             ¯ ]. Then
Proposition B1. Let Y be a random variable supported on [Y , Y

                                          E [(Y - Y )2 ] - (y - Y )E [Y - Y ]
                             P r(Y > y )           ¯ - y )(Y ¯ -Y)                                (21)
                                                  (Y
                                              ¯ - Y )2 ] - (Y
                                          E [(Y             ¯ - y )E [Y
                                                                      ¯ -Y]
                             P r(Y < y )                     ¯ -Y)                                (22)
                                                  (y - Y )(Y

and both bounds are tight.

Proof. For shorthand, set  = P r(Y > y ). Suppose first that Y = 0. Now for y  [Y , Y
                                                                                    ¯ ]:



E [(Y - Y )2 ] = (1 - )E [(Y - Y )2 |Y  y ] + E [(Y - Y )2 |Y > y ]
                                                ¯ - Y )E [Y - Y |Y > y ]
              (1 - )(y - Y )E [Y - Y |Y  y ] + (Y
                                                                             ¯ - y )E [Y - Y |Y > y ]
             = (1 - )(y - Y )E [Y - Y |Y  y ] + (y - Y )E [Y - Y |Y > y ] + (Y
                                     ¯ - y )E [Y - Y |Y > y ]
             = (y - Y )E [Y - Y ] + (Y
                                    ¯ - y )(Y
              (y - Y )E [Y - Y ] + (Y       ¯ -Y)

Consequently,

                                      E [(Y - Y )2 ] - (y - Y )E [Y - Y ]
                                               ¯ - y )(Y ¯ -Y)
                                              (Y

Similarly, for shorthand, set  = P r(Y < y ), then for y > Y ,


    ¯ - Y )2 ] = (1 -  )E [(Y
E [(Y                       ¯ - Y )2 |Y  y ] + E [(Y
                                                   ¯ - Y )2 |Y < y ]
                      ¯ - y )E [(Y
              (1 -  )(Y          ¯ - Y )|Y  y ] +  (Y
                                                    ¯ - Y )E [(Y
                                                               ¯ - Y )|Y < y ]
                       ¯ - y )E [(Y
             = (1 -  )(Y          ¯ - Y )|Y  y ] +  (Y
                                                     ¯ - y )E [(Y
                                                                ¯ - Y )|Y < y ] +  (y - Y )E [(Y
                                                                                               ¯ - Y )|Y < y ]
                ¯ - y )E [Y
             = (Y         ¯ - Y ] +  (y - Y )E [(Y
                                                 ¯ - Y )|Y < y ]
               ¯ - y )E [Y
              (Y         ¯ - Y ] +  (y - Y )(Y
                                             ¯ -Y)

Consequently,
                                          ¯ - Y )2 ] - (Y
                                      E [(Y             ¯ - y )E [Y
                                                                  ¯ -Y]
                                                         ¯ -Y)
                                              (y - Y )(Y
Both bounds are tight. For the first one, consider a random variable that puts weight  on Y = Y
                                                                                              ¯,
weight  on Y = y , and weight 1 -  -  on Y = Y . Then


                                                   56
                                                        ¯ - Y )2 +  (y - Y )2
                 E [(Y - Y )2 ] - (y - Y )E [Y - Y ] = (Y
                                                                ¯ - Y ) +  (y - Y )
                                                    - (y - Y ) (Y
                                                       ¯ - Y )2 - (y - Y )(Y
                                                    = (Y                   ¯ -Y)
                                                       ¯ - Y )(Y
                                                    = (Y       ¯ -Y -y+Y)
                                                       ¯ - Y )(Y
                                                    = (Y       ¯ - y)

and thus
                                 E [(Y - Y )2 ] - (y - Y )E [Y - Y ]
                                                    ¯ -Y)            = .
                                         (y - Y )(Y
Similarly, for a distribution that places weight  on Y = Y , weight  on Y = y , and weight 1 -  - 
on Y = Y ¯,



                     ¯ - Y )2 ] - (Y
                 E [(Y             ¯ - y )E [Y
                                             ¯ - Y ] =  (Y
                                                         ¯ - Y )2 + (Y
                                                                     ¯ - y )2
                                                       ¯ - y )  (Y
                                                    - (Y         ¯ - Y ) +  (Y
                                                                             ¯ - y)
                                                        ¯ - Y )2 -  (Y
                                                    =  (Y            ¯ - y )(Y
                                                                             ¯ -Y)
                                                        ¯ - Y )(Y
                                                    =  (Y       ¯ -Y -Y
                                                                      ¯ + y)
                                                        ¯ - Y )(y - Y )
                                                    =  (Y

from which the conclusion follows.

    We obtain Proposition 4 as a corollary. When Y = 0 and y = 1, equation (21) translates to

                                                    E [Y 2 ] - E [Y ]
                                     P r(Y > 1)           ¯ - 1) .
                                                       ¯ (Y
                                                      Y

When Y
     ¯ = 1 and y = 0, equation (22) translates to

                                          E [(1 - Y )2 ] - E [1 - Y ]
                            P r(Y < 0) 
                                                (-Y )(1 - Y )
                                               2
                                          E [Y ] - 2E [Y ] + 1 - (1 - E [Y ])
                                        =
                                                      -Y (1 - Y )
                                               2
                                          E [Y ] - E [Y ]
                                        =
                                            Y (Y - 1)

C     Predictions 3 and 4 with heterogeneity in attention costs
We set  ~i ( ) to be individual i's expected revealed valuation weight at stakes  . The realized weight
                                                                 ~i ) 
i ( ) =  ~i ( ) +  , where Cov [, ~i ] = 0. We set i ( ) = - d(1-      to be the elasticity of misreaction
                                                             d     1-~i
with respect to the stakes  . The costly attention models imply that i ( )  0 for all consumers i.


                                                   57
Our key question is when

                                          ~
                             Cov ~i ( ), di     =
                                                    1
                                                      Cov [~i ( ), i ( )(1 - ~i ( ))]
                                         d          

is negative. To that end, first note that if i ( )  ~i ( ) then

                       1      ~i ( ), i ( )(1 - ~i ( ))] = - E [i ( )] V ar[~i ( )] < 0
                         Cov [
                                                                

That is, if the elasticities of misreaction are independent of the valuation weights, then it is guaranteed
that consumers with the highest valuation weights will on average increase those valuation weights
the least.
   The condition i ( )  ~i ( ) is satisfied when, for example, a consumer's ~i can be approximated by
~i ( ) = (1 - Ai w( )) + i Ai w( ), where w( ) is a function of stakes and Ai is a constant determining
                         d
sensitivity to stakes, and di is the valuation weight that results in the absence of any attention. In

this case, 1 - ~i = Ai w( )(1 -  ~i ), and
                                  d


                              d~i
                                             i
                                  = Ai w ( )(d - 1) = -(1 - ~i )w ( )/w( )
                              d

which implies that i = -w ( )/w( ), homogeneous.
   To examine the implications of correlated heterogeneity in i , we now suppose that the following
linear approximation is valid:


                                               i = a0 + a1 ~i +                                       (23)

where      and E [ ] = 0. A positive a1 means that i is on average positively related to i , while a
negative a1 means that i is negatively related to i .
   For the remainder of this appendix, we will often omit writing i and ~i as functions of  to
economize on notation. We now have that

                        Cov [i , i (1 - ~i )] = Cov [i , (a0 + a1 ~i )(1 - ~i )]

                                              = -(a0 - a1 )V ar[~i ] - a1 Cov [~i , ~2 ]              (24)
                                                                                     i

                                                                     ~
Now suppose that, as in our data, that E [i (1 - ~i )] =  dE [i ] > 0. Multiplying (23) by 1 - ~i and
                                                           d
taking expectations yields

                                  0 <a0 E [1 - ~i ] + a1 [~i (1 - ~i )]

                                    =a0 (1 - E [~i ]) + a1 (E [~i ] - E [~2 ])
                                                                          i




                                                       58
This implies that if E [~2 ] = V ar[i ] + E [~i ]2 > 1, as in our data, then
                         i


                                                   a1 (E [~2 ] - E [  ~i ])
                                            a0 >           i
                                                                            > a1                                     (25)
                                                       (1 - E [ ~i ])

In other words, if there is large variance in  ~i , then i and ~i cannot be too strongly positively
related--else it would imply that decreasing stakes would decrease the average ~i .
    Next, observe that given an upper bound ¯ on ~i ,



                                     Cov [~i , ~2 ] = E [(~i - E [~i ])(~2 - E [~2 ])]
                                                i                        i       i

                                                    E [(¯ - E [~i ])(~2 - E [~2 ])]
                                                                      i       i

                                                    (¯ - E [~i ])V ar[~i ]

                                                        ¯ 1  0, we thus have that a1  -a0 /
And because the restriction that i  0 implies that a0 + a                                  ¯ and
thus that

                -(a0 - a1 )V ar[~i ] - a1 Cov [~i , ~2 ]  -(a0 - a1 )V ar[ ~i ] + a0 (¯        ~   ~
                                                     i                             ¯ - E [i ])V ar[i ]
                                                                                   
                                                         < -(a0 - a1 )V ar[~i ] + a0 V ar[~i ]

                                                       = a1 V ar[~i ]                                                (26)

Putting (25) and (26) together to sign (24), we see that: (i) if a1 is positive, then both terms of (23)
must be negative by (25). On the other hand, (ii) if a1 is negative, then the expression in (24) must
be negative by (26).

C.1      Simple example with binary attention costs
For concreteness, consider the simple in Section 2.2. In this example, if i < 1 then either                     di
                                                                                                                d    =0
or d
   d
     i
         =   i
              2 tr
                     = (1 - i )/ . Similarly, if i  1 then either           di
                                                                            d      = 0 or   di
                                                                                            d    = (1 - i )/ . Thus the
elasticity of misreaction is either i = 0 or i = 1. Simple algebra reveals that

Cov [i , i (1 - i )]/P r(i = 1) = Cov [i , (1 - i )|i = 1] + E [(1 - i )|i = 1] (E [i |i = 1] - E [i ])
                                    = -V ar[i |i = 1] + P r(i = 1)(1 - P r(i = 1))(E [i |i = 1] - E [i |i = 0])

Thus when P r(i = 1) is close enough to 1--i.e., sufficiently many individuals are at least somewhat
elastic to stakes--the covariance is negative.


D        Detailed comparisons to TRJ
Design. Our experimental design shares two similarities with TRJ, and differs in all other respects.
First, we use the same products and product descriptions, and second, we exogenously increase the


                                                            59
tax rate to triple its standard size. Unlike TRJ we use simple "yes-no" buying decisions rather than
a less natural Becker-DeGroot-Marschak (BDM) bidding mechanism, and we create experimental
stores that consumers have to "enter." The BDM mechanism generates additional complexity, and
in particular requires subjects to divide by "one plus the tax rate" when computing the before-tax
price they should be willing to pay. In contrast, natural shopping decisions, as well as decisions in
our experiment, involve looking at the posted price and thinking about what the final post-tax price
would be--a simpler operation that involves multiplication. In particular, the rules-of-thumb and
attention strategies that people employ in their day-to-day shopping decisions are much more likely
to be faithfully captured by the experimental design in this paper, rather than that of TRJ.
   Within-person variation in tax rates. TRJ do not have an experimental design that varies
tax rates within individual because of their focus on normative implications of tax salience. Their
experimental design only varies tax rates between-subjects. Thus their data cannot be used to test
predictions 2-5 examined in our paper.
   Statistical power. TRJ's design affords significantly less power in both estimates of average 
and in particular how it varies with posted prices. For example, as column 1 of TRJ's Table 3 shows,
TRJ have no evidence that attention varies by price in the standard tax condition. There is some
evidence that  is increasing in price in the high tax condition, but TRJ can only detect a difference
between small prices and all other prices. By contrast, our study allows us to relatively precisely trace
out how  varies by price at a much more granular level.
   The differences in statistical power are likely a consequences of two design differences. First, TRJ
have more "noise" in any given decision created by the apparently more confusing BDM mechanism.
Second, TRJ do not fully randomize the order of all the tax conditions within subject. Consequently,
they must use a "control" arm to estimate the order effects, which decreases statistical power.
   Bounds on individual differences at a given tax rate. TRJ's normative focus leads them
to study V ar[] at a given tax rate, for which they estimate a lower bound of 0.1. Although V ar[]
is not a direct focus of our paper--we study individual differences in attentional responses to changes
in tax rates --we use a better-suited experimental design and new econometric methods to estimate a
new lower bound on the variance that is about an order of magnitude higher. Thus, our experimental
design presents a substantial advance over TRJ even for the statistic that is a key focus of TRJ but
not of our paper.
   Appropriate designs for applying our econometric methods. TRJ create data that violates
the key assumption underlying our approach to individual differences, stated in Section 5.1: that
  ^ijk  ^ij k |ijk when j = j . Although relatively weak, the validity of this assumption does rely
on an important design feature: that all decisions are presented in random order. In the absence
of this design feature, "order effects" that, for instance, lead to declining valuations over time as in
TRJ would lead to correlated measurement error and violate our assumption. Consequently, our new
methods for bounding V ar[] are not applicable to experimental datasets such as those in TRJ or
Feldman et al. (2018) that do not vary the order of tax environments.
   Ensuring comprehension of the experiment. TRJ have three arms in their experiment, and
screen out participants who fail the comprehension questions before starting the shopping decisions


                                                   60
in each round. However, because some comprehension questions are harder than others, this leads
to differentially selected samples in the three arms: 35% of the sample is screened out in the no-tax
arm and 22% of the sample is screened out in the triple tax arm. Our fully within-subject design
avoids this potential confound, generates higher comprehension rates, and utilizes more relevant tests
of comprehension. Our higher comprehension rates are due to our experiment presenting participants
with questions twice. Once before the decisions, when we review the rules for the different stores if
participants answer the questions incorrectly, and once after participants are finished making deci-
sions. We screen out participants if they fail to correctly report back the rules after they finish their
decisions--a more relevant screener because what matters is whether participants had knowledge of
the rules all the way through their last decisions.
       Review of related work by Feldman et al. (2018). Like TRJ, Feldman et al. (2018) begin
to examine the first prediction by similarly varying tax rates. However, Feldman et al. (2018) report
results that are statistically imprecise and consistent both with the null of exogenous attention as well
as the results we report in this paper. The (Feldman et al., 2018) is not set-up to identify E [] or
V ar[], and otherwise features the same weaknesses as TRJ.


E        Counterfactual demand curve construction
Formally, let pn denote the nth lowest price on the price list. Recall that we constructed the price
list such that p1 = 4 and pn = 1.15 · pn-1 for n > 1. We thus estimate the counterfactual demand
 ~ jB (pn ) for store B at price pn as D                                0.15-i
                                                     i 0.15 DijA (pn ) + 0.15 DijA (pn+1 ) , where iB
D                                      ~ jB (pn ) :=    i

is the tax rate faced by the person in store B , and DijA (p)  {0, 1} is an indicator for whether
the consumer bought the product at price p in store A.31 For store C, if iC < 0.15 we use the
same interpolation as in the store B counterfactual demand; if iC > 0.15, we calculate D
                                                                                       ~ jC (pn ) :=
3i -0.15                      0.30-3i
                                 0.15 DjA (pn+2 ).   To construct D
                                                                  ~ jC (p9 ), we use the self-reported maximum
 0.15 DjA (pn+1 )        +
willingness to pay to see if individuals willing to purchase at price p10 would be willing to purchase at
price 1.15p10 .


F        Interpreting coefficients in the probit regression
                                                                                             µj -log p-i log(1+ik )
We have that person i chooses to buy product j in store k , with probability F                         j              ,
where F is the standard normal CDF. Let f denote the standard normal density function. Here we
formally verify that

                              µj - log p - i log(1 +  )            µj - log p - E [i ] log(1 +  )
                     Ei F                                     F
                                          j                                     j
with negligible error terms. For shorthand, we set  := log(1 +  ). A first-order Taylor expansion
                  µj -log p       E [i ]
around y :=          j        -     j      yields
  31
       All sales tax rates in our sample are less than 15%.




                                                              61
                       µj - log p - i                                             E [i ]
                E F                       = F (y ) + E [i - E [i ]]f     xj -                + O(2 )
                              j                                                     j
                                          = F (y ) + O(2 )

    Thus, the estimated population  in our probit model corresponds to the average  up to terms
of order 2 . These are certainly negligible in store B. To more carefully assess the impact of second
                                                                                           µj -log p       E [i ]
order-terms, we now compute a second-order Taylor expansion, around y :=                      j        -     j      , using
the fact that for a normal distribution, f (x) = -xf (x):


                µj - log p - i 
       E F                         = F (y ) + E [i - E [i ]]f (y )
                       j
                                     1      i  - E [i ] 2
                                   + E[                    ]f (y ) + O(3 )
                                     2          j
                                              1   V ar[i ]
                                   = F (y ) - y2           f (y ) + O(3 )
                                              2     j 2
                                              1   V ar[i ]
                                   = F y - y2                 + O(3 )
                                              2     j 2
                                          µj - log p      µj - log p            E [i ]
                                   =F                -          3    V ar[i ] +                        + O(3 )
                                             j               2j                  k

                                                                 µj -log p       E [i |]
    If we instead assume that the probability is given by F         j        -      j      , how much bias do we
get from this model specification? The answer depends on the average value of xk , which determine
the extent to which introducing taxes leads to a lower probability of buying. Note that we can
estimate 1/j and µj /j from the probit regression in which there are no taxes, which on average are
given by 2.073 and 3.897, respectively. Using those estimates, we can find that the average value of
µj -log p
   j        is given by -0.24. This means that our representative population estimates produce slight
underestimates of the actual population average, and that the degree of underestimation is greater
for triple taxes than for standard taxes. Under the conservative upper bound on V ar[|] of 1, this
implies that the margin of error is about -0.24 · (1/2) · 2.0732 · E [] = -0.52E []. For standard taxes,
this gives a margin of error of about -.036 and for triple taxes this gives a margin of error of about
-0.101. When studying how a particular covariate affects E [], the margin of error is even smaller,
since the difference in variances should be smaller than 1. If the covariate does not affect variances,
then the margin of error vanishes to be of order three or higher.
    One way of assessing whether our model produces estimates close to the average is to consider
estimates  ^pop |X for a binary proxy X  {0, 1}. If the probit model produces estimates close to the
average, then we should have   ^pop = (1 - P r(X = 1))^pop |X =0 + P r(X = 1)^pop |X =1 . To the extent that
we underestimate taxes significantly due to the variance, notice that because the average of variances




                                                     62
of two distributions is lower than the variance of their mixture,32 the average of the  estimates from
two samples should be lower than our estimate of the overall average. We do not find this to be a large
effect. For our binary proxies, we compare the estimates in tables 2 and 3 for the triple tax. Recall
that the estimate of E [] for the triple tax from the baseline regression is 0.79. When we average the
two values in table 1 we get 0.25 × 1.20 + 0.75 × 0.25 = 0.78. When we average the two values in table
2 we get 0.25 × .86 + 0.75 × 0.76 = 0.785. These results suggest that there is not a significant bias.
       Finally, note that the bias induced by the approximation works against our results on how 
                                                             µj -log p
changes with the price. This is because                         2j3      is decreasing in p, which dampens our findings about
how E [] varies with price.


G        Point estimates and confidence intervals for Figures 3 and 4

                                Table D.1: Average revealed valuation weights in Figure 3

             Price cutoff         Avg. revealed val.                     95% CI        Avg. revealed val.         95% CI
                                  wgt.: standard tax                                    wgt.: triple tax
                  4.60                    0.23                     [0.10,   0.35]             0.40               [0.34,   0.47]
                  5.29                    0.27                     [0.12,   0.42]             0.55               [0.48,   0.63]
                  6.08                    0.27                     [0.11,   0.44]             0.64               [0.56,   0.71]
                  7.00                    0.34                     [0.17,   0.51]             0.72               [0.65,   0.80]
                  8.05                    0.39                     [0.22,   0.56]             0.77               [0.69,   0.85]
                  9.25                    0.43                     [0.26,   0.59]             0.80               [0.72,   0.87]
                 10.64                    0.46                     [0.30,   0.62]             0.81               [0.74,   0.88]
                 12.24                    0.47                     [0.31,   0.62]             0.80               [0.73,   0.87]
                 14.07                    0.48                     [0.32,   0.63]             0.79               [0.72,   0.86]
Table D.1 presents the estimates for E [] and average tax owed displayed in figure 3.  is defined as the revealed
valuation weight that consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding to complete neglect of the tax and
 = 1 corresponding to putting the same weight on the tax as on the salient posted price. Each price cutoff corresponds
to a different posted price on the price list presented to consumers. The results are estimated using equation (4) for
prices below the cutoff. Standard errors are clustered at the subject level.
  32
       The    variance    of      a     mixture          X   of   random       variables   Xi   with   weights    wi      is   given   by
                         n
             2     2
E [(X - µ) ] =  =              wi (µ2
                                    i   +   2
                                            i )     2
                                                  -µ .
                         i=1




                                                                          63
                          Table D.2: Average revealed valuation weights in figure 4

         Bin   Avg. price    Avg. tax rate      Avg. tax owed       Avg. revealed val. wgt.          95% CI
          1       4.30          7.24%                0.31                    0.23                  [0.11, 0.36]
          2       5.69          7.24%                0.41                    0.28                  [0.05, 0.50]
          3       7.52          7.24%                0.54                    0.52                  [0.32, 0.71]
          4       9.95          7.24%                0.72                    0.65                  [0.44. 0.87]
          5      13.15          7.24%                0.95                    0.72                  [0.40, 1.05]
          6       4.30         21.72%                0.93                    0.41                  [0.35, 0.47]
          7       5.69         21.72%                1.24                    0.80                  [0.69, 0.90]
          8       7.52         21.72%                1.63                    0.87                  [0.77, 0.97]
          9       9.95         21.72%                2.16                    0.87                  [0.75, 0.99]
         10      13.15         21.72%                2.66                    0.91                  [0.73, 1.08]
Table D.2 presents store-specific estimates of E [] by the average tax owed within each bin.  is defined as the revealed
valuation weight that consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding to complete neglect of the tax and
 = 1 corresponding to putting the same weight on the tax as on the salient posted price. For each tax environment--
store B and store C--each bin is constructed by dividing the 10 prices in the experiment into 5 ordered pairs. The
average tax owed is constructed by taking the average of the two prices in each bin, and multiplying it by the average
tax rate in stores B and C, respectively. The estimating equation is an extension of equation (4), described in footnote
21. Standard errors are clustered at the subject level.


H        Replication of results restricting to participants with nearly-accurate
         beliefs and high computational ability
At the end of our experiment we asked participants (1) to report their sales tax rate in their current
city of residence, and (2) to estimate the sales tax they would owe on an $8.00 (non-tax exempt) item
purchased in their city of residence. We restricted the sample to the 60.0% of participants who (1)
know their tax rate within 0.5 percentage points and (2) are able to calculate their tax burden within
$0.05.
    We first separately examine the effects of the two possible mechanisms, by estimating average
revealed valuation weights restricting to (1) the 70.3% who know their sales tax rate within 0.5
percentage points, and (2) the 62.9% who can estimate the sales tax burden on an $8.00 item purchased
in their city of residence within $0.05. Figures E.1 and E.2 present the results.
    We next repeat our individual differences analysis, restricting to the "nearly-accurate beliefs and
computation" sample. Tables E.1-E.3 recreate tables 1-3 restricting to this sample. Consistent our
main results, the low valuation weight group exhibits a larger increase in the revealed valuation weights
than the high valuation weight group when tax rates are tripled (0.40 vs. 0.20; 95% CI for difference
-0.06-0.44). The adjustments and their difference are similar in magnitude to our main sample results
(0.39 vs. 0.16; 95% CI for difference -0.43 to -0.03).
    When dividing consumers by adjustment group, we still find that there are significant individual
differences: consumers in the low adjustment group increase their valuation weights by an average of
0.04 (95% CI -0.16-0.24), and those in the high adjustment group increase their revealed valuation
weights by an average of 0.43 (95% CI 0.28-0.58). Consistent with our main prediction, and the
possibility that some consumers might be over-reacting, we find that consumers in the low adjustment


                                                          64
group have higher valuation weights in both the standard tax regime (0.91 vs. 0.43; 95% CI for
difference 0.20-0.76) and in the triple tax regime (0.95 vs. 0.86; 95% CI for difference -0.04-0.21). The
average valuation weight estimates are all slightly higher in this sample than in our main sample, but
the differences all have a magnitude within 0.05 of our main results for both the standard tax regime
(0.52, 95% CI 0.28-0.75) and the triple tax regime (0.10, 95% CI -0.01-0.20).
    As with our main sample, the bounds on the variance of individual differences (0.84, 5% confidence
bound of 0.24) imply at least some consumers overreact to taxes significantly. Consistent with the
presence of overreaction in costly inattention models, we also estimate that some consumers reduce
their valuation weights by at least 0.93 (5% confidence bound of 0.05) when shopping in the triple
tax stores instead of the standard tax store. This estimate is very similar to the bound of 0.94 (5%
confidence bound of 0.16) estimated from our main sample.

Figure E.1: Average revealed valuation weight for posted prices at or below a cutoff: nearly-accurate
beliefs subsample
                         1           .8
              Revealed valuation weight
            .2      .4   0   .6




                                          4.60   5.29   6.08      7.00      8.05     9.25      10.64   12.24   14.07
                                                               Price less than or equal to ($)

                                                                 Triple Tax                  95% CI
                                                                 Standard Tax                95% CI


Figure E.1 recreates figure 3, restricting to the 70.3% of the main sample who could identify their local sales tax rate
within 0.5 percentage points.




                                                                         65
Figure E.2: Average revealed valuation weight for posted prices at or below a cutoff: restricting to
participants with nearly-accurate beliefs and strong computational ability



                          1           .8
               Revealed valuation weight
             .2      .4   0   .6




                                           4.60   5.29   6.08      7.00      8.05     9.25      10.64    12.24   14.07
                                                                Price less than or equal to ($)

                                                                  Triple Tax                    95% CI
                                                                  Standard Tax                  95% CI


Figure E.2 recreates figure 3, restricting to the 62.9% of the main sample who could identify their tax burden within
$0.05 on an $8.00 item purchased in their city of residence.



Table E.1: Average revealed valuation weights by group: restricting to participants with nearly-
accurate beliefs and strong computational ability

                                                                  Standard          Triple      Triple - Standard
                                  (1): High valuation wgt.           1.11            1.32               0.20
                                                                 [0.85, 1.37]    [1.18, 1.45]      [-0.01, 0.42]
                                  (2): Low valuation wgt.            0.34            0.73               0.40
                                                                 [0.13, 0.55]    [0.64, 0.83]       [0.24, 0.55]
                                  (3): (1) - (2)                     0.77            0.58               -0.19
                                                                 [0.47, 1.08]    [0.44, 0.73]      [-0.44, 0.06]
Table E.1 repeats table 1, restricting to the 60.0% of the main sample who could identify their local sales tax rate within
0.5 percentage points and compute the sales tax they would owe for an $8.00 item purchased in their city of residence
within $0.05.




                                                                          66
Table E.2: Average revealed valuation weights by adjustment group: restricting to participants with
nearly-accurate beliefs and strong computational ability

                                               Standard           Triple      Triple - Standard
                           (1): Low Adj.          0.91             0.95                0.04
                                              [0.64, 1.17]     [0.82, 1.07]       [-0.16, 0.24]
                           (2): High Adj.         0.43             0.86                0.43
                                              [0.23, 0.63]     [0.76, 0.96]        [0.28, 0.58]
                           (3): (1) - (2)         0.48             0.08               -0.39
                                              [0.20, 0.76]    [-0.04, 0.21]      [-0.62, -0.17]
Table E.2 repeats table 2, restricting to the 60.0% of the main sample who could identify their local sales tax rate within
0.5 percentage points and compute the sales tax they would owe for an $8.00 item purchased in their city of residence
within $0.05.


Table E.3: Bounds on the dispersion of revealed valuation weights: restricting to participants with
nearly-accurate beliefs and strong computational ability

                                                             Standard   Triple    Standard-Triple
                         Variance (Lower Bound)                 0.71     0.75           0.84
                                                               [0.41]   [0.60]         [0.24]
                         Supremum (Lower Bound)                 1.84     1.74           0.93
                                                               [1.31]   [1.56]         [0.05]
Table E.3 repeats table 3, restricting to the 60.0% of the main sample who could identify their local sales tax rate within
0.5 percentage points and compute the sales tax they would owe for an $8.00 item purchased in their city of residence
within $0.05.



I         Replication of main results without excluding study participants
          failing comprehension questions or violating monotonicity
In our primary analyses we exclude 256 respondents who incorrectly answered one or more of the
comprehension questions and an additional 47 respondents who had monotonicity violations within
a price list. Figure F.1 repeats figure 3 including these 292 participants.33 We again find strong
evidence for Prediction 1, indicating that poor computational ability was not the sole mechanism
driving consistency with the prediction. The estimates are of smaller magnitude than the full sample
results, but are consistent with the theory which predicts average valuation weights are increasing in
the absolute size of the tax. Using all prices we estimate an average revealed valuation weight of 0.36
(95% CI 0.22-0.51) for the standard tax environment in the restricted sample compared to 0.48 (95%
CI 0.32-0.63) in the main sample. Similarly, we estimate an average revealed valuation weight of 0.67
(95% CI 0.60-0.74) for the triple tax environment in the restricted sample, which is only slightly higher
than the estimate in the main sample (0.79, 95% CI 0.72-0.86).
         Tables F.1-F.3 replicate tables 1-3 including the respondents who failed the comprehension checks.
We still exclude participants with monotonicity violations, as our estimation procedure in Section 5.1
assumes monotonic preferences in estimating a willingness-to-pay.
    33
         We continue to exclude one of these participants who reported being under age 18.


                                                              67
   As with our main results, the low valuation weight group exhibits a larger increase in the revealed
valuation weights than the high valuation weight group when tax rates are tripled (0.39 vs. 0.13; 95%
CI for difference -0.42 to -0.08). The adjustments and their difference are similar in magnitude to our
main sample results (0.39 vs. 0.16; 95% CI for difference -0.43 to -0.03).
   When dividing consumers by adjustment group, the estimates are also very similar in magnitude:
consumers in the low adjustment group increase their valuation weights by an average of -0.00 (95%
CI -0.15-0.15) compared to 0.01 (95% CI -0.15-0.17) in our main sample. Similarly, those in the high
adjustment group increase their revealed valuation weights by an average of 0.42 (95% CI 0.30-0.54)
compared to 0.43 (95% CI 0.30-0.55) in our main sample. Consistent with our main results, we find
that consumers in the low adjustment group have higher valuation weights in both the standard tax
regime (0.77 vs. 0.24; 95% CI for difference 0.32-0.74) and in the triple tax regime (0.77 vs. 0.66;
95% CI for difference 0.01-0.20). The average valuation weight estimates are all slightly lower in this
sample than in our main sample, but the differences all have a magnitude within 0.01 of our main
results for both the standard tax regime (0.52, 95% CI 0.28-0.75) and the triple tax regime (0.10, 95%
CI -0.01-0.20).
   Including participants who failed comprehension checks leads to a lower variance bound on adjust-
ment (0.32, 5% confidence bound of 0.18) than the bound of 0.86 (5% confidence bound of 0.31) in our
main sample. Additionally, we estimate an upper bound on  to be -0.16 (95% confidence bound of
0.06), which is smaller than the bound from our main sample (-0.94, 95% confidence bound of -0.16)
and not statistically significantly below 0.




                                                  68
Figure F.1: Average revealed valuation weight for posted prices at or below a cutoff: including partic-
ipants who fail comprehension checks



                         1           .8
              Revealed valuation weight
            .2      .4   0   .6




                                          4.60   5.29   6.08      7.00      8.05     9.25      10.64    12.24   14.07
                                                               Price less than or equal to ($)

                                                                 Triple Tax                    95% CI
                                                                 Standard Tax                  95% CI


Figure F.1 recreates figure 3, including the 292 participants who failed comprehension checks or had monotonicity
violations in purchase decisions.



Table F.1: Average revealed valuation weights by group: including participants who fail comprehension
checks

                                                                 Standard          Triple      Triple - Standard
                                 (1): High valuation wgt.           0.96            1.09                0.13
                                                                [0.76, 1.16]    [0.99, 1.19]       [-0.02, 0.29]
                                 (2): Low valuation wgt.            0.16            0.54                0.39
                                                                [0.00, 0.32]    [0.48, 0.61]        [0.27, 0.50]
                                 (3): (1) - (2)                     0.80            0.55                -0.25
                                                                [0.57, 1.03]    [0.44, 0.65]      [-0.42, -0.08]
Table F.1 repeats table 1 including 223 participants who were excluded from our main sample solely for failing our
comprehension check.




                                                                         69
Table F.2: Average revealed valuation weights by adjustment group: including participants who fail
comprehension checks

                                          Standard         Triple      Triple - Standard
                      (1): Low Adj.          0.77           0.77                -0.00
                                         [0.57, 0.97]   [0.68, 0.86]       [-0.15, 0.15]
                      (2): High Adj.         0.24           0.66                0.42
                                         [0.09, 0.40]   [0.59, 0.74]        [0.30, 0.54]
                      (3): (1) - (2)         0.53           0.11                -0.42
                                         [0.32, 0.74]   [0.01, 0.20]      [-0.59, -0.26]
Table F.2 repeats table 2 including 223 participants who were excluded from our main sample solely for failing our
comprehension check.



Table F.3: Bounds on the dispersion of revealed valuation weights: including participants who fail
comprehension checks

                                                     Standard     Triple   Standard-Triple
                    Variance (Lower Bound)              0.73       0.71          0.32
                                                       [0.51]     [0.59]        [0.18]
                    Supremum (Lower Bound)              2.29       1.73          0.16
                                                       [1.70]     [1.55]       [-0.06]
Table F.3 repeats table 3 including 223 participants who were excluded from our main sample solely for failing our
comprehension check.



J       Order Effects
One potential concern with our experiment design is that purchase decisions could be influenced by
the order in which the nine purchase decisions are presented to consumers. In this appendix we test
four potential order effects, and report the results in table G.1. First we examine whether the tax
environment first shown to consumers impacts their buy probability. We test for this effect via the
following model:


                                ln(p) +  B ln(1 + i ) · I (ik = i ) +  C ln(1 + 3i ) · I (ik = 3i ) - µj
        1 - P r(buyijk |p) = 
                                                                   j

                             B F irstB   C      C
                                     i +  F irsti
                        +                                                                                    (27)
                                       j

    This model modifies equation (4) by adding the terms F irstB
                                                               i and F irsti . F irsti is an indicator
                                                                           C         k

variable which equals one if the consumer's first purchase decision occurred in store k and equals zero
otherwise. We compute the Wald statistic for  B =  C = 0, which has a corresponding p-value of
0.95.
    In our next three tests, we examine product-specific order effects, or whether a consumer's buy
probability for product j is affected by the store order in which the consumer shops for product j .

                                                        70
For our second test, we construct indicator variables F irstk
                                                            ij which equal one if the consumer's first
purchase decision for product j occurred in store k and equals zero otherwise. We then repeat equation
(27), using F irstk
                  ij instead of F irsti :
                                      k




                                    ln(p) +  B ln(1 + i ) · I (ik = i ) +  C ln(1 + 3i ) · I (ik = 3i ) - µj
        1 - P r(buyijk |p) = 
                                                                       j
                                 B F irstB    C      C
                                         ij +  F irstij
                            +
                                            j

       We compute the Wald statistic for  B =  C = 0, which has a corresponding p-value of 0.70.
       For our third test, we examine whether the last store shown to consumers for a product affects
their purchase decision. We construct indicator variables Lastk
                                                              ij which equal one if the consumer's
last purchase decision for product j occurred in store k and equals zero otherwise. We then repeat
equation (27), using Lastk
                         ij instead of F irsti :
                                             k



                                    ln(p) +  B ln(1 + i ) · I (ik = i ) +  C ln(1 + 3i ) · I (ik = 3i ) - µj
        1 - P r(buyijk |p) = 
                                                                       j
                               B LastB    C    C
                                     ij +  Lastij
                            +
                                        j

       We compute the Wald statistic for  B =  C = 0, which has a corresponding p-value of 0.28.
       For our last test, we construct indicator variables for each possible combination stores A, B, and
C were presented to consumer i for product j . We then estimate the following model for 1 , 2 , 3 =
{A, B, C }:34


                                    ln(p) +  B ln(1 + i ) · I (ik = i ) +  C ln(1 + 3i ) · I (ik = 3i ) - µj
        1 - P r(buyijk |p) = 
                                                                       j

                                  2 =1 ;3 =2, 1    1 2 3 I (F irstij = 1 , Secondij = 2 , T hirdij = 3 )
                            +
                                                                   j

       We compute the Wald statistic for  ACB =  BCA = ... = 0, which has a corresponding p-value of
0.28.
       Finally, in Table G.2, we estimate the average value of  using the first N decisions made by the
consumer.
  34
       We omit the store ordering A, B, C due to collinearity.




                                                             71
                    Table G.1: Tests for the impact of order effects on buy probability

                          Order effect tested                                          p-value
                          Tax env. of first purchase decision                           0.95
                          Tax env. of first purchase decision (by product)              0.70
                          Tax env. of last purchase decision (by product)               0.28
                          Ordering of tax env. (by product)                             0.17
Table G.1 presents p-values of Wald statistics for the impact of order effects on buy probabilities. The Wald statistics
and p-values are calculated by adding indicators for the different orderings tested to equation (4). For the first row,
we add two indicators for whether the tax environment of the first purchase decision shown to consumers was standard
tax or triple tax. For the second (third) row, we add two indicators for whether the tax environment of the first (last)
purchase decision for product j was standard tax or triple tax. For the fourth row, we add five indicators for each of the
possible orders in which store A, B, and C were presented to the consumer for product j (order A, B, C was omitted
due to collinearity).



           Table G.2: Average revealed valuation weights using the first N purchase decisions

                               N    Store B        95% CI        Store C       95% CI
                               1      0.27      [-0.54, 1.07]      0.57      [0.28, 0.85]
                               2      0.10      [-0.43, 0.62]      0.71      [0.52, 0.91]
                               3      0.05      [-0.36, 0.47]      0.72      [0.57, 0.87]
                               4      0.25      [-0.08, 0.59]      0.73      [0.61, 0.86]
                               5      0.30       [0.02, 0.59]      0.75      [0.64, 0.86]
                               6      0.49       [0.24, 0.73]      0.82      [0.73, 0.92]
                               7      0.54       [0.33, 0.75]      0.84      [0.76, 0.93]
                               8      0.52       [0.33, 0.70]      0.81      [0.73, 0.89]
                               9      0.48       [0.32, 0.63]      0.79      [0.72, 0.86]
Table G.2 presents store-specific estimates of E [] for the first N purchase decisions made by participants.  is defined
as the revealed valuation weight that consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding to complete neglect
of the tax and  = 1 corresponding to the equal weight of the tax and salient price. The final row includes all nine
purchases decisions, and matches the estimates from row (4) in Table 1. The results are estimated using equation (4),
interacting the covariate with price and tax. Standard errors are clustered at the subject level.



K      Covariates of attention
K.1     Local tax rate variation
We first divide the sample into those whose local tax rate is above 7.00%, the median in our sample
("high tax group"), and those below 7.00% ("low tax group"). We then run the regression in equation
(4) separately for the above-median and below-median tax groups to create figures analogous to figure
3.
     Figure H.1 presents the results. Panel (a) uses the main sample and is identical to figure 3. Panel
(b) restricts to participants with a local sales tax rate above 7.00%, the median of the sample. Panel
(c) restricts to participants with a local sales tax rate at or below 7.00%. The results provide evidence
that participants in high sales tax locations have lower revealed valuation weights than those from low
sales tax locations.


                                                           72
              Table H.1 presents estimates of average  by tax group using all prices. These estimates match
the rightmost points of the series in figure H.1. The third column presents the difference, which is
statistically significant for store C.


                                    Figure H.1: Average revealed valuation weight for posted prices at or below a cutoff
                                                                                                                (a) Main sample

                                                                        1           .8
                                                             Revealed valuation weight
                                                           .2      .4   0   .6




                                                                                         4.60   5.29   6.08        7.00      8.05     9.25      10.64                           12.24       14.07
                                                                                                                Price less than or equal to ($)

                                                                                                                  Triple Tax                                          95% CI
                                                                                                                  Standard Tax                                        95% CI



                                         (b) Local sales tax rate above 7.00%                                                                                              (c) Local sales tax rate at or below 7.00%
               1




                                                                                                                                                  1
                           .8




                                                                                                                                                              .8
    Revealed valuation weight




                                                                                                                                       Revealed valuation weight
                   .6




                                                                                                                                                      .6
          .4




                                                                                                                                             .4
  .2




                                                                                                                                     .2
               0




                                                                                                                                                  0




                                $4.60   $5.29   $6.08     $7.00     $8.05    $9.25 $10.64                        $12.24   $14.07                                   $4.60    $5.29   $6.08     $7.00     $8.05    $9.25 $10.64   $12.24   $14.07
                                                        Price less than or equal to ($)                                                                                                     Price less than or equal to ($)

                                                          Triple Tax                                   95% CI                                                                                 Triple Tax              95% CI
                                                          Standard Tax                                 95% CI                                                                                 Standard Tax            95% CI




Panels (b) and (c) of figure H.1 recreate figure 3, restricting to participants above and below the median local sales tax
rate respectively.




                                                                                                                          73
                           Table H.1: Average revealed valuation weights by tax group

                                                            Standard           Triple
                                     High tax group            0.41             0.70
                                                           [0.26, 0.56]     [0.61, 0.79]
                                     Low tax group             0.54             0.87
                                                           [0.38, 0.70]     [0.79, 0.96]
                                     Difference               -0.13             -0.17
                                                          [-0.35, 0.09]    [-0.29, -0.05]
Table H.1 presents estimates of store-specific estimates E [] by tax group.  is defined as the revealed valuation weight
that consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding to complete neglect of the tax and  = 1 corresponding
to the equal weight of the tax and salient price. Individuals with a local sales tax rate above 7.00% are classified as high
tax, and individuals with a local sales tax rate at or below 7.00% are classified as low tax. The results are estimated
using equation (4), interacting the covariate with price and tax. Standard errors are clustered at the subject level.


K.2        Demographics
In this section we analyze how revealed valuation weights vary according to observed demographics.
We separately analyze the effects of political party, education, income, and age.
       Political party: Table H.2 presents average  estimates for self-identified Republicans (28.5%
of our sample), Democrats (32.1% of our sample), and individuals with independent or other polit-
ical beliefs (39.6% of our sample).35 Republicans and Democrats have an average B of 0.52 and
0.51 respectively (95% CI for difference: -0.39-0.39). Republicans have a slightly larger C than do
Democrats in our sample (0.86 vs. 0.74), but the difference is not statistically significant (95% CI for
difference: -0.06-0.30).
       Education: Table H.2 compares the average  estimates between college graduates (35.3% of our
sample) and participants with no or some college experiences (64.7% of our sample; includes associate's
degree recipients). College graduates have a slightly higher B (0.51 vs. 0.46), but the difference is
not statistically significant (95% CI for difference -0.27-0.38). Both education groups have the same
estimate for C (0.79, 95% CI for difference -0.14-0.15).
       Income: Table H.4 presents average  estimates for each income quartile. Individuals in the top
income quartile have self-reported annual income above $80,000, in the second quartile from $49,000-
$80,000, in the third quartile from $25,000-$49,000, and in the bottom quartile below $25,000.
       All quartiles have average C point estimates in the 0.77-0.84 range. Individuals in the top 3
quartiles have average B estimates in the 0.50-0.52 range, while individuals in the bottom quartile
have average an average B of 0.39 (95% CI: 0.07-0.71). A test of equivalence between the  estimates
in all quartiles yields 2 = 0.44, (p = 0.93) for store B and 2 = 0.51, (p = 0.92) for store C.
  35
       30.6% of participants self-identify as independent and 8.9% of participants self-identify as other.




                                                              74
                     Table H.2: Average revealed valuation weights by political party

                                                              Standard             Triple
                             (1): Republicans                    0.52               0.86
                                                             [0.25, 0.78]       [0.74, 0.99]
                             (2): Democrats                      0.51               0.74
                                                             [0.23, 0.80]       [0.62, 0.86]
                             (3): Independent/Other              0.42               0.77
                                                             [0.18, 0.67]       [0.66, 0.89]
                             (4): (1) - (2)                      0.00               0.12
                                                            [-0.39, 0.39]      [-0.06, 0.29]
Table H.2 presents store-specific estimates of E [] by political party affiliation.  is defined as the revealed valuation
weight that consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding to complete neglect of the tax and  = 1
corresponding to the equal weight of the tax and salient price. Individuals were asked to select which of independent,
Republican, Democrat, or other best described their political party affiliation. The results are estimated using equation
(4), interacting the covariate with price and tax. Standard errors are clustered at the subject level.


Table H.3: Average revealed valuation weights by education: college graduates versus not college
graduates

                                                             Standard            Triple
                               College graduate                 0.51              0.79
                                                            [0.26, 0.77]      [0.68, 0.90]
                               Not college graduate             0.46              0.79
                                                            [0.27, 0.65]      [0.70, 0.88]
                               Difference                       0.06              0.00
                                                           [-0.27, 0.38]     [-0.14, 0.15]
Table H.3 presents store-specific estimates of E [] by education level.  is defined as the revealed valuation weight that
consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding to complete neglect of the tax and  = 1 corresponding
to the equal weight of the tax and salient price. Not college graduate includes participants with associate's degrees or
with some years in college. The results are estimated using equation (4), interacting the covariate with price and tax.
Standard errors are clustered at the subject level.


                     Table H.4: Average revealed valuation weights by income quartile

                                                          Standard            Triple
                                  Top quartile               0.52              0.77
                                                         [0.22, 0.81]      [0.64, 0.90]
                                  Second quartile            0.52              0.79
                                                         [0.25, 0.79]      [0.67, 0.91]
                                  Third quartile             0.50              0.84
                                                         [0.16, 0.84]      [0.68, 1.00]
                                  Bottom quartile            0.39              0.77
                                                         [0.07, 0.71]      [0.62, 0.93]
Table H.4 presents store-specific estimates of E [] by income quartile.  is defined as the revealed valuation weight that
consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding to complete neglect of the tax and  = 1 corresponding to
the equal weight of the tax and salient price. The median income in our sample is $49,000 and the interquartile range
is $25,000-$80,000. The results are estimated using equation (4), interacting the covariate with price and tax. Standard
errors are clustered at the subject level.


                                                           75
L     Alternative construction of proxies for valuation weights

                                         Figure I.1: Average revealed valuation weight by posted price

                         1
             Revealed valuation weight
                 .4       .6
                         .2
                         0       .8




                             4.00-4.60             5.29-6.08         7.00-8.05         9.25-10.64      12.24-14.07
                                                                     Price range ($)

                                                               Triple Tax                    95% CI
                                                               Standard Tax                  95% CI


Figure I.1 presents store-specific estimates E [] by the posted price.  is defined as the revealed valuation weight that
consumers place on the sales tax, with  = 0 corresponding to complete neglect of the tax and  = 1 corresponding to
the equal weight of the tax and salient price. Each point is estimated using equation (4) for the specified posted prices.
Standard errors are clustered at the subject level.




Table I.1: Average revealed valuation weights by valuation weight group: instrumenting with an 80th
percentile cutoff

                                                                Standard         Triple      Triple - Standard
                                  (1): High valuation wgt          1.24           1.32                0.08
                                                               [0.99, 1.48]   [1.19, 1.45]       [-0.11, 0.27]
                                  (2): Low valuation wgt           0.29           0.67                0.38
                                                               [0.12, 0.45]   [0.60, 0.74]        [0.26, 0.50]
                                  (3): (1) - (2)                   0.95           0.65                -0.30
                                                               [0.67, 1.23]   [0.52, 0.79]      [-0.51, -0.08]
Table I.1 repeats table 1 with an alternative instrument for valuation weight groups. In this table high valuation weight
individuals are those with F (^ijB ) > 0.80 and low valuation weight individuals are those with F ( ^ijB )  0.80.




                                                                        76
Table I.2: Average revealed valuation weights by valuation weight group: instrumenting with an 85th
percentile cutoff

                                                 Standard         Triple       Triple - Standard
                 (1): High valuation wgt            1.23           1.31                 0.08
                                                [0.90, 1.55]   [1.17, 1.45]        [-0.17, 0.34]
                 (2): Low valuation wgt             0.35           0.70                 0.35
                                                [0.22, 0.50]   [0.63, 0.77]         [0.25, 0.46]
                 (3): (1) - (2)                     0.88           0.61                 -0.27
                                                [0.55, 1.22]   [0.47, 0.75]       [-0.53, -0.00]
Table I.2 repeats table 1 with an alternative instrument for high and low valuation weight groups. In this table
high valuation weight individuals are those with F (^ijB ) > 0.85 and low valuation weight individuals are those with
F (^ijB )  0.85.



Table I.3: Average revealed valuation weights by adjustment group: instrumenting with an 20th
percentile cutoff

                                           Standard          Triple       Triple - Standard
                      (1): Low Adj.           0.85            0.85                 0.01
                                          [0.62, 1.08]    [0.74, 0.97]        [-0.16, 0.17]
                      (2): High Adj.          0.38            0.77                 0.39
                                          [0.23, 0.53]    [0.71, 0.84]         [0.27, 0.52]
                      (3): (1) - (2)          0.47            0.08                -0.39
                                          [0.24, 0.69]   [-0.03, 0.19]       [-0.57, -0.21]
Table I.3 repeats table 2 with an alternative instrument for high adjustment groups and low adjustment groups. For
this table high adjustment individuals are those with F (^i1C - ^i1B ) > 0.20 and low adjustment individuals are those
with F (^i1C - ^i1B )  0.20.



Table I.4: Average revealed valuation weights by adjustment group: instrumenting with an 15th
percentile cutoff

                                           Standard          Triple       Triple - Standard
                      (1): Low Adj.           0.93            0.87                -0.06
                                          [0.66, 1.21]    [0.74, 1.01]        [-0.27, 0.14]
                      (2): High Adj.          0.39            0.77                 0.38
                                          [0.24, 0.55]    [0.70, 0.85]         [0.26, 0.50]
                      (3): (1) - (2)          0.55            0.10                -0.45
                                          [0.25, 0.84]   [-0.05, 0.24]       [-0.66, -0.23]
Table I.4 repeats table 2 with an alternative instrument for high adjustment groups and low adjustment groups. For
this table high adjustment individuals are those with F (^i1C - ^i1B ) > 0.15 and low adjustment individuals are those
with F (^i1C - ^i1B )  0.15.



M      Additional details of the experiment
The experiment proceeded in the following order:

    · Consent form: Participants were first shown a consent form, which is shown in Figure J.1.

                                                         77
   · Questions on residence: Participants answered the questions in Section M.2.1 about their resi-
     dence. The city and state selected in Question 1 were entered in future questions.

   · Instructions: Participants were shown three screens containing the experiment instructions.
     Figures J.2-J.4 contain the screenshots.

   · Pre-purchase comprehension questions: Participants answered the questions in Section M.2.2.
     Participants must answer all questions correctly to proceed. They were informed if they answered
     a question incorrectly, and were given unlimited attempts to get the correct answers.

   · Purchase decisions: participants made nine purchase decisions. Each participant was randomly
     assigned three products from the list in Section M.3, and shopped for each product in all three
     stores. For each purchase, participants were first shown a screen detailing which store they
     entered, as seen in Figure J.5a. They then filled out an MPL, as seen in Figure J.5b.

   · Post-purchase comprehension questions: Participants answered the questions in Section M.2.3.

   · Additional closing questions: Participants answered the questions in Section M.2.4.

Section M.1 contains screenshots of the instructions shown to participants. Section M.2 contains
text of the questions asked of participants, and, where applicable, the correct answer displayed in
parenthesis and italics. Section M.3 contains a list of the products used, along with the Amazon.com
prices and product descriptions.




                                                78
M.1   Instructions

                     Figure J.1: Introduction Screen




                                   79
                                   Figure J.2: Instructions (screen 1 of 3)




Note: Subjects did not shop for the Oversize Golf Umbrella in the experiment.




                                                        80
Figure J.3: Instructions (screen 2 of 3)




                  81
Figure J.4: Instructions (screen 3 of 3)




                  82
                                Figure J.5: Screenshots of a purchase decision
                                                    (a) Introduction




                                                 (b) Purchase decision




Figure J.5 shows an example of the two screenshots participants see for each of their nine purchase decisions. Subjects
first saw a screen indicating the product for which they will be shopping and the relevant sales tax environment. Store A
corresponds to a tax-free environment, store B to a standard sales tax environment, and store C to a triple-the-standard
sales tax environment. On the second screen, participants saw an image and product description from Amazon.com,
and were asked a series of questions about whether they would buy the product at various prices. The order of the
prices was randomized. When filling out the price list, participants were able to click on a "back" button to revisit the
first screen with the store information and an "instructions" button to reread the experiment instructions.




                                                           83
M.2     Text of questions
M.2.1       Residence

Question 1: Please select the state, county, and city in which you currently live:
Question 2: How long have you live in [city], [state]

   · Less than 1 year

   · Between 1 and 3 years

   · Between 3 and 5 years

   · 5 years or longer

Question 3: Where did you live prior to living in [city], [state]? (Asked only if "5 years or longer" was
not selected on the previous question)

M.2.2       Pre-purchase comprehension questions

Question 1: How big of a shopping budget do you have for each purchase decision? (Correct answer:
option 2)

   · $10

   · $16

   · $30

Question 2: If you are selected to receive the shopping budget, how many of your purchase decisions
will the computer randomly choose to implement? (Correct answer: option 1)

   · The computer randomly chooses one decision to play out for real outcomes

   · The computer randomly chooses ten decisions to play out for real outcomes

   · The computer plays out all decisions

Question 3: At what prices do you see the products in this study? (Correct answer: The prices vary)

   · The prices are always fixed at $5

   · The prices are always fixed at $15

   · The prices vary from low to high

Question 4: If you purchase an item for $10 in Store A, then... (Correct answer: option 1)

   · ... you will pay no sales tax in addition to the $10 (the sales tax is included in the price).



                                                   84
   · ... in addition to the $10, you will pay the standard sales tax that you pay on a $10 purchase in
     [city], [state].

   · ... in addition to the $10, you will pay triple the standard sales tax that you pay on a $10
     purchase in [city], [state].

Question 5: If you purchase an item for $10 in Store B, then... (Correct answer: option 2)

   · ... you will pay no sales tax in addition to the $10 (the sales tax is included in the price).

   · ... in addition to the $10, you will pay the standard sales tax that you pay on a $10 purchase in
     [city], [state].

   · ... in addition to the $10, you will pay triple the standard sales tax that you pay on a $10
     purchase in [city], [state].

Question 6: If you purchase an item for $10 in Store C, then... (Correct answer: option 3)

   · ... you will pay no sales tax in addition to the $10 (the sales tax is included in the price).

   · ... in addition to the $10, you will pay the standard sales tax that you pay on a $10 purchase in
     [city], [state].

   · ... in addition to the $10, you will pay triple the standard sales tax that you pay on a $10
     purchase in [city], [state].

M.2.3    Closing comprehension questions

The questions below are about a hypothetical survey respondent Alex, who lives in [city], [state]
just like you. You must answer these three questions correctly to be eligible for the $16
shopping budget.
Question 1: If Alex purchases an item for $10 in Store A, then... (Correct answer: option 1)

   · ... Alex will pay no sales tax in addition to the $10 (the sales tax is included in the price).

   · ... in addition to the $10, Alex will pay the standard sales tax that he pays on a $10 purchase
     in [city], [state].

   · ... in addition to the $10, Alex will pay triple the standard sales tax that he pays on a $10
     purchase in [city], [state].

Question 2: If Alex purchases an item for $10 in Store B, then... (Correct answer: option 2)

   · ... Alex will pay no sales tax in addition to the $10 (the sales tax is included in the price).

   · ... in addition to the $10, Alex will pay the standard sales tax that he pays on a $10 purchase
     in [city], [state].


                                                  85
   · ... in addition to the $10, Alex will pay triple the standard sales tax that he pays on a $10
     purchase in [city], [state].

Question 3: If Alex purchases an item for $10 in Store C, then... (Correct answer: option 3)

   · ... Alex will pay no sales tax in addition to the $10 (the sales tax is included in the price).

   · ... in addition to the $10, Alex will pay the standard sales tax that he pays on a $10 purchase
     in [city], [state].

   · ... in addition to the $10, Alex will pay triple the standard sales tax that he pays on a $10
     purchase in [city], [state].

M.2.4    Additional closing questions

Question 1: What percent is the sales tax rate in your city of residence, [city], [state]? If your city
exempts some goods from the full sales tax, please indicate the rate for a standard non-exempt good.
If you're not sure, please make your best guess. (Note: Please enter your answer as a percent. For
example, if you think that the tax rate is 1 percent, please enter 1, rather than 0.01. Do not include
a percent sign in your answer.)
Question 2: Suppose that you bought a (standard, not tax-exempt) product for $8. What would be
the [city], [state] sales tax that you would have to pay for that product? (Note: Please enter your
answer in dollar units. For example, if you think that the sales tax is 10 cents, please enter 0.10 and
not 10. Do not include a dollar sign in your answer.)
Question 3: Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2 percent per year.
After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow?
(Correct answer: option 1)

   · More than $102

   · Exactly $102

   · Less than $102

   · Do not know

Question 4: Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1 percent per year and inflation
was 2 percent per year. After 1 year, would you be able to buy more than, exactly the same as, or
less than today with the money in this account? (Correct answer: option 3)

   · More than today

   · Exactly the same as today

   · Less than today

   · Do not know

                                                  86
Question 5: Do you think that the following statement is true or false? "Buying a single company
stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund." (Correct answer: option 2)

   · True

   · False

   · Do not know

Question 6: How many people are in your household (including yourself)?
Question 7: What is your marital status?

   · Single

   · Married or domestic partnership

   · Widowed

Question 8: What was your total household income for the year 2015?
   Question 9: What is the highest level of education that you have attained?

   · Some high school

   · High school graduate

   · Some college or associate degree

   · College graduate

   · Master's degree

   · Doctoral degree (Ph.D., M.D., J.D., or equivalent)

Question 10: Are you currently a student?

   · Yes

   · No

Question 11: What is your age?
Question 12: Which best describes your political party affiliation?

   · Independent

   · Republican

   · Democrat

   · Other



                                                  87
M.3     Items used in the study

Product                 Amazon.com   Amazon.com product description
                        price

Energizer AA            $11.15       Energizer AA max alkaline batteries 20 pack super fresh, Expiration Date:
Batteries max                        2024 or better. Packed in original Energizer small box 4 batteries per box x 5
Alkaline 20-Pack                     boxes total 20 batteries.

Glad OdorShield Tall    $12.79       Glad OdorShield Tall Kitchen Drawstring Trash Bags backed by the power of
Kitchen Drawstring                   Febreze are tough, reliable trash bags that neutralize strong and offensive odors
Trash Bags, Fresh                    for lasting freshness. These durable bags are great for use in the kitchen, home
Clean, 13 Gallon, 80                 office, garage, and laundry room.
Count

Rubbermaid Lunch        $10.47       The Rubbermaid 1813501 Lunch Blox medium durable bag - Black Etch is an
Blox medium durable                  insulated lunch bag designed to work with the Rubbermaid Lunch Blox food
bag - Black Etch                     storage container system. The bag is insulated to achieve the maximum benefit
                                     of Blue Ice blocks and keep your food cold. The bag features a bottle holder,
                                     side pocket, comfort-grip handle and removable shoulder strap. The lunch Blox
                                     bag is durable and looks good for both the professional bringing their lunch to
                                     work or the kid taking their lunch to school.

Scotch-Brite Heavy      $7.73        O-Cel-OTM sponges and Scotch Brite scrubbers are truly a
Duty Scrub Sponge                    fashion-meets-function success story. The highly absorbent and durable
426, 6-Count                         sponges come in different sizes and scrub levels for the various surfaces around
                                     the home. Their assorted colors and patterns follow the current fashion trends
                                     to create the perfect accent in any room.

Microban                $8.99        The Microban cutting board from Uniware is the perfect cutting board for the
Antimicrobial Cutting                health conscious. The cutting board has a soft grip with handle and is
Board Lime Green -                   dishwasher safe. The cutting board can be reversible, used on both sides, and is
11.5x8 inch                          non-porous, non-absorbent. The rubber grips prevents slipping on countertop.
                                     Doesn't dull knives, juice-collecting groove. Microban is the most trusted
                                     antimicrobial product protection in the world. Built-In defense that inhibits
                                     the growth of stain and odor causing bacteria, mold, and mildew. Always
                                     works to keep the cutting board cleaner between cleanings. Lasts throughout
                                     the lifetime of the cutting board. Size: 11.5"x8" Color: Lime Green.

Nordic Ware Natural     $11.63       Nordic Ware's line of Natural Commercial Bakeware is designed for commercial
Aluminum                             use, and exceeds expectations in the home. The durable, natural aluminum
Commercial Baker's                   construction bakes evenly and browns uniformly, while the light color prevents
Half Sheet                           over-browning. The oversized edge also makes getting these pans in and out of
                                     the oven a cinch. Proudly made in the USA by Nordic Ware.




                                                   88
 Product                 Amazon.com   Amazon.com product description
                         price

 Libbey 14-Ounce         $12.99       Great for any party, this set includes four 14-ounce clear classic white wine
 Classic White Wine                   glasses which match perfectly with the classic collection by libbey. The glasses
 Glass, Clear, 4-Piece                are dishwasher safe and made in the USA.

 Envision Home           $10.82       Enjoy spa luxury at home with the Envision Home Microfiber Bath Mat,
 Microfiber Bath Mat                  featuring memory foam! Designed to absorb water like a sponge and help
 with Memory Foam,                    protect floors from damaging puddles of water, your feet will love stepping on
 16 by 24-Inch,                       to this soft cushion of memory foam encased in super-absorbent microfiber.
 Espresso                             The Microfiber Bath Mat starts with fibers that are split down to microscopic
                                      level, resulting in tiny threads that love to absorb every drop of water. Because
                                      of this increased surface area, this microfiber mat can collect more water than
                                      an ordinary bath mat. Plus, it dries unbelievably fast. The soft memory foam
                                      interior provides a comfortable and warm place to stand, or when kneeling to
                                      bathe a child or pet, preventing aches and pains. The seams across the mat
                                      allow for it to be easily folded for storage, or simply hang it from the
                                      convenient drying loop. It is available in three colors to compliment your
                                      personal décor and style ­ Cream, Celestial and Espresso. Caring for your
                                      Microfiber Bath Mat is easy; simply toss it in the washing machine with cold
                                      water and a liquid detergent and then place in the dryer on a low heat setting.
                                      The Microfiber Bath Mat is just one of the many impressive items offered in
                                      the Envision Home Collection.

 Carnation Home          $8.99        Protect your favorite shower curtain with our top-of-the-line Hotel Collection
 Fashions Hotel                       Vinyl Shower Curtain Liner. This standard-sized (72" x 72") liner is made with
 Collection 8-Gauge                   an extra heavy (8 gauge), water repellant vinyl that easily wipes clean. With
 Vinyl Shower Curtain                 metal grommets along top of the liner to prevent tearing. Here in Monaco
 Liner with Metal                     Blue, this liner is available in a variety of fashionable colors. With its
 Grommets, Monaco                     wonderful features and fashionable colors, this liner could also make a great
 Blue                                 shower curtain.


Note: Prices are from February 2015, as documented in Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018). They may
vary over time or by geographic region.




                                                    89
