                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE LABOR SUPPLY CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING A BOY IN CHINA

                                        Shing-Yi Wang

                                      Working Paper 26185
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26185


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




This paper has benefitted from feedback from Santosh Anagol, S. Anukriti, Rachel Heath,
Melanie Khamis, Annemie Maertens, Laura Schecter, Thomas Fujiwara and seminar participants
at Duke, Northwestern, Oxford, and UCL. Sunny Lee, Hu Liu and Imran Idzandqar provided
excellent research assistance. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Shing-Yi Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Supply Consequences of Having a Boy in China
Shing-Yi Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 26185
August 2019
JEL No. J13,J16,J22,O12,O53

                                          ABSTRACT

Combining eight years of panel data with an event study approach, we show that rural Chinese
women's labor supply falls for one year following the birth of a daughter before returning to their
pre-birth levels. The negative impact of the birth of a son on women's labor supply is much larger
in magnitude and persists for four years. We also find that households reduce their cigarette
consumption more following the arrival of a boy than a girl. Furthermore, there is an increase in
the mother's probability of being in school, her leisure time, and her participation in household
decision-making following the birth of boys relative to daughters. There is no evidence of
increases in investments in boys that would be complementary to mothers' time, such as
breastfeeding, immunizations or consumption of milk or meat. Together, these results are
consistent with the idea that mothers are rewarded for giving birth to boys, leading them to have
more leisure and work less.


Shing-Yi Wang
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
was@wharton.upenn.edu
1        Introduction

In developing countries, theory suggests a U-shaped relationship between economic growth and

female labor force participation (Goldin 1994, Mammen and Paxson 2000). At the initial stage,

economic activity is dominated by household enterprises, mainly farming, and men and women both

participate in this work. Economic development corresponds with a shift from family enterprises

into formal manufacturing jobs; this corresponds with an improvement in labor market opportu-

nities for men as well as overall positive income effects for households. As a result, female labor

force participation declines. Then, the next stage of development entails a shift towards service

and white-collar jobs which draws women back into the labor force.

        Many of the existing papers in economics focus on policies and developments that increase

female labor force participation (Jensen 2012, Heath and Mobarak 2015, Goldin and Katz 2000

and 2002, Bailey 2006), but there is less focus on declines in female labor force participation.1 As

shown in Panel A of Figure 1, labor force participation rates in China for both women and men

have generally been declining for the past 25 years. Part of the reason for these overall trends is

the shift away from the Communist labor market system that both expected everyone to work and

facilitated the provision of jobs.2 However, the decline for rural women is much steeper, providing

some suggestive evidence that the economic shift away from agriculture to other jobs may drive

these trends as predicted by theory of the U-shaped relationship between development and women's

work.3 This decline in labor force participation rates among rural women corresponds with a sharp

increase in rural women reporting that they are housewives (Panel B of Figure 1).

        The paper examines how the labor force participation of rural women and men in China responds

to the birth of a son versus a daughter. We begin by exploiting a panel data set collected by the

Chinese Ministry of Agriculture over an 8 year period that has a large enough sample to see a

substantial number of births of boys and girls. This data set allows us to take an event-study
    1
     Some exceptions include recent working papers studying declines in female labor force participation in India
(Afridi, Dinkelman and Mahajan 2018, Fletcher, Pande and Moore 2017).
   2
     As shown in Appendix Figure A.2, individuals reporting that they are unemployed (and searching for work) is
generally increasing over this period.
   3
     Figure 1 used data from a household survey called the China Health and Nutrition Survey. As shown in Appendix
Figure A.1 with Ministry of Agriculture data, these trends are also evident in a much larger survey of rural households.




                                                                                                                      2
approach where we look at the labor market outcomes of the same individuals for the periods

leading up to birth of sons and daughters as well as the years following birth. In a context in which

most rural women are engaged in family agricultural enterprises, any impacts of birth on labor

market outcomes are not about rigidities in formal sector jobs or labor market discrimination by

employers. Rather, changes in the labor supply of women in the context where family agricultural

work is the primary source of work tells us about the preferences of households.

   The research question in this paper is particularly important for policy given the recent policy

changes in China related to fertility. Implemented in 1979, the One Child Policy aimed at limiting

population growth by introducing a system of carrots and sticks to encourage households to reduce

their fertility. One unintended consequence of this policy was a dramatic increase in the male-to-

female sex ratio at birth, as seen in Figure 2. Indeed, given that our paper documents different

labor market responses to the birth of a son versus daughter, changes in the number of births of

boys versus girls can have unintended effects on labor market outcomes.

   The main result of the paper is that women reduce their labor force participation rates and

amount of days worked more for boys than for girls. There is no corresponding decline in men's

labor force participation or days worked following the birth of either a boy or a girl. The key

threat to identification in this analysis is that the gender of the child may not be exogenous, and

household preferences over the gender of their children are correlated with household preferences

over whether women work after giving birth to any child. We present three sets of results that

address this concern. First, we show that there are very few significant differences in the observable

characteristics of individuals or households prior to birth of a son versus daughter. Second, we look

at the sub-sample of first-born children, for whom the sex ratio at birth is less skewed. Third,

we implement a bounding exercise where we re-assign some male births to female births in order

to achieve a balanced sex ratio at birth and to maximize the impact of the sex selection on the

outcomes.

   We explore several mechanisms that might explain why labor supply responses differ by a baby's

gender. Two are related to health differences. If male infants have worse health than female infants,

women may need to reduce work in order to provide care for their sons. Similarly, if male infants



                                                                                                    3
correspond to higher risk births, then women themselves may be worse off after birthing boys and

not be able to work. We are able to reject the health-based mechanisms by looking directly at the

health status of mothers and their children.

   We also consider two mechanisms driven by economic differences related to boys and girls. If

there are higher returns to investments in boys than girls, households may want to invest more in

boys (and have mothers provide inputs into sons rather than work). We test this hypothesis by

examining whether there is evidence of other types of investments in boys that would be comple-

mentary to mothers' effort. We observe two changes that may be complementary investments: a

decrease in household cigarette consumption and an increase in mothers' schooling. However, there

are no other significant changes in investments in households in which boys are born, including

spending on meat and milk, breastfeeding, and immunizations. Moreover, while women work less

following the birth of a son, there is no evidence that they spend more time in child care on sons

than daughters. Overall, the evidence does not strongly support the investment mechanism.

   A related economic mechanism is that there is a pure wealth effect associated with a son (i.e.

households need to save less for retirement) and even if they invest equally in sons and daughters, the

wealth effect means that women can work less and consume more leisure. We test this hypothesis

by examining whether consumption increases as expected with a positive wealth effect. We do not

observe any increases in consumption following the birth of a boy, suggesting that the labor supply

effects do not reflect a wealth effect.

   Another possibility is that the mechanism is through total fertility and the gender of the birth

provides information to the household about their total fertility. Given that the gender of the child

does not predict subsequent household size in rural China, this also cannot explain the differences

in the labor market responses to boys and girls.

   Finally, we consider whether the results can be explained by household discrimination where

households reward mothers for producing a son. These rewards can correspond to the changes

we observe for women following a son's birth: less agricultural work, more investment in mothers'

education and increased participation of women in household decision-making (over the purchase of

durable goods). Given that women in China dislike smoking, the decrease in smoking following the



                                                                                                     4
birth of a son can also be explained by this mechanism. The most compelling evidence to support

this theory is that mothers do not provide more child care for sons than daughters but they spend

more time in adult leisure activities after having a son relative to a daughter.

      This paper contributes to an emerging literature on the labor market consequences of having

children. Kleven, Landais and Sogaard (2018) show that the arrival of children in Denmark cor-

responds with a 20% drop in women's earnings relative to men's, driven by drops in participation

rates, hours worked and wage rates.4 Kuziemko et al (2018) show similar employment declines for

women in the U.S. and U.K. following birth, and argue that this is driven by an information shock

to households about how hard parenting is. This paper takes a similar empirical approach to these

two papers in using an event study, but focuses on the effects of boys versus girls rather than just

the effects of parenthood. The focus on gender is particularly relevant for the context that we focus

on, rural China, which is very different from the contexts in the other papers.

      There is a large existing literature that examines the consequences of having boys versus girls on

parents' outcomes. Ichino, Lindstrom and Viviano (2014) find that women work less after a first-

born son than a daughter in the U.S., U.K., Italy and Sweden, possibly due to the positive impact

of a first-born son on total fertility. Lundberg and Rose (2002) find that fatherhood increases

men's wages and labor supply in the U.S. more for boys than girls. Having a son increases women's

decision-making power in China (Li and Wu 2011) but not in India or Bangladesh (Heath and Tan

2018, Zimmerman 2012). Having a son (rather than a daughter) leads to cleaner fuel use in India

(Kishore and Spears 2014), heavier mothers during children's adolescence in the U.S. (Pham-Kanter

2010), less criminal activities of fathers (Dustmann and Landerso 2018) and changes marriage

outcomes (Anukriti, Kwon and Prakash 2016, Dahl and Moretti 2008, Bedard and Dechenes 2005,

Ananat and Michaels 2008). Because of small sample sizes and often the lack of panel data, none

of the prior papers in this literature are able to employ the event study approach we utilize. In

fact, none of them use any pre-birth data; they regress the outcomes of interest on the presence of

a girl or boy.

      There is a corresponding literature that looks at gender differences in investments in children in
  4
      Kleven et al (2019) show similar declines in 5 other countries.




                                                                                                      5
developing countries and generally finds more investments in boys than girls (Barcellos, Carvalho

and Lleras-Muney 2014, Jayachandran and Kuziemko 2011). However, our focus is on the labor

market outcomes of women rather than the outcomes on children.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section discusses in greater detail the

mechanisms through which the gender of the child may matter for women's labor market choices.

Section 3 discusses the data sets and presents summary statistics. After outlining the empirical

specification in Section 4, the next two sections present the empirical results. Finally, the paper

concludes.



2        Conceptual Framework

There are many reasons that a women's labor market outcomes may respond differently to the

birth of a son versus a daughter. First, we discuss two mechanisms that relate to physical and

developmental differences in boys and girls. Next, we consider two mechanisms related to differences

in the economic returns to having boys and girls. Finally, there are three mechanisms related to

fertility and conscious or unconscious gender discrimination by households and firms.


2.1        Physical Differences

The results may be explained by the idea that boys require more care than girls due to health

differences after birth. Under this scenario, households treat boys and girls differently in order to

bring boys up to the same level of outcomes as girls. Indeed, newborn boys are less robust physically

than newborn girls, including having a higher probability of being born premature (Pongou 2013).

Furthermore, research has shown that boys have higher rates of developmental and behavioral

disorders, including hyperactivity and autism.5 To test the idea that women leave the labor force

to provide more time and care to male babies due to their health issues, we can use the household's

own reports of the health status of children following birth to examine this hypothesis.

        A related story is that the physical recovery process for mothers is different following the birth

of a boy than of a girl. Indeed, research suggests that boys do correspond to higher risk pregnancies,
    5
        See Kraemer (2000) for a review of the literature.


                                                                                                        6
including gestational diabetes and pre-eclampsia, and hence higher risk deliveries, including higher

rates of cesarean deliveries (Eogan et al 2003, Verburg et al 2016). Negative health outcomes

corresponding to delivering boys may lead women to leave the labor force. We are able to test this

hypothesis by using individual-level data on self-reported health status of mothers.


2.2      Economic Differences

Another possible mechanism is not about physical differences in delivery or physical needs during

infancy, but women take more time out of the labor force for boys because the economic returns to

their time and effort spent with boys is higher. This may be driven by the fact that men earn more

than women, or even if their earnings were equal, it is possible that men provide more financial

support for elderly parents than daughters. Consistent with this idea, parents are much more likely

to co-reside with an adult son than with an adult daughter in China. However, the literature on

whether daughter or sons provide more financial transfers in China is mixed (Gruijters 2018, Zhu

2016). To test this, we can examine investments made in children, including child care hours,

breastfeeding, expenditures on child-specific services (immunizations) and cigarette consumption.6

      A related mechanism is that boys will contribute more to household lifetime earnings, and the

reduction in female labor supply is not a direct investment in boys but a response to a pure wealth

effect associated with a boy. Women work less because households don't need to save as much (i.e.

for retirement) following the birth of a boy than a girl. To test the idea of the arrival of a boy being

treated as a positive wealth shock on the household, we can examine consumption expenditures.

Note that prior research suggests the opposite. There is the potential for a negative wealth effect

of having a son in China; when the sex ratio is skewed and brides are scarce, households have to

save more for a boy in order to provide their son with a better match (Wei and Zhang 2011).7


2.3      Other Explanations

We also consider the idea that the arrival of a son versus daughter provides information to the

household about their total fertility and any differences in work behavior are driven by total fertility.
  6
      Cigarette consumption has negative effects on children's health through second-hand smoke.
  7
      Brideprice is the cultural norm in China where the groom's family pays the bride's family at the time of marriage.


                                                                                                                      7
For example, an existing literature suggests that son preference in India may lead households to

target a desired number of sons (e.g. Gupta 1987, Jayanchandran and Kuziemko 2011, Jensen

2003, Rosenblum 2013).8 Under such stopping rules, households continue to have children until

they reach their desired number of sons. The key implication of this behavior is that households

with boys will be smaller on average; boys then have on average more resources per child than

girls even if each household splits resources equally among girls and boys within the household.

Note that the standard stopping rule framework, targeting a number of boys would suggest that

households with boys have fewer total children, and women with boys would be less likely to stop

working in anticipation of their total fertility. We can examine whether there are differences in

fertility following the arrival of a boy versus a girl.

    Another explanation is that the labor market treats women who have boys differently from

women who have girls. In this scenario, the results aren't driven by the preferences of women or

the households that they are in, but that firms treat women who give birth to boys differently from

women who give birth to girls. We can test this hypothesis by examining whether the results are

different for women who work in family enterprises, including agriculture, and for women who work

for others.

    A final explanation is taste-based discrimination where households reward women with more

leisure (and less work) for having a boy. There is anecdotal evidence to support this idea. In one

newspaper story, Linlin describes how her in-laws had a lot of conflict with her after her marriage

to their son, but this reversed immediately after she had a boy; after the birth of the son, the

in-laws started doing a lot of cooking and housework for her (Fan and Qing 2014).9 We can test

this idea by looking at the amount of leisure time of women following a boy versus girl. However,

an increase in leisure following the birth of a boy may also be consistent with a model of returns

to investment in which mothers exert more effort in caring for boys, and hence need extra recovery

time to maintain a higher level of effort in her interactions and care of a son. Another outcome
   8
     To our knowledge, there is no research showing evidence for stopping rule behavior in China. This may not be
surprising given the restrictive fertility policies that may encourage households to engage in sex selective abortion
rather than stopping rules to have sons.
   9
     There are also stories of poor treatment of Chinese women following the birth of a daughter. For example, one
article describes a mother-in-law beginning to physically abuse her daughter-in-law after the birth of a daughter
(Yangtse News 2016).



                                                                                                                   8
that we can examine to test this mechanism is female participation in household decision-making.



3      Data

3.1    Ministry of Agriculture National Fixed Point Survey Data

It is rare to find a panel data set of households in developing countries where the survey is conducted

on an annual basis and contains a large enough sample to have a substantial number of births. One

such data is called the National Fixed Point Survey (NFP) collected by the Research Center of

Rural Economy (RCRE) of the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture. While the survey first began in

1986, we focus on the annual waves between 2003 and 2010 because the structure of the survey

changed substantially in 2003. The wave 2003 is the first period in which there are some questions,

including on employment and health, that are asked at the individual level.10 The individual-level

questions are key to looking at the separate effects of a birth on the labor supply of women versus

men.

    At the individual level, the survey asks a relatively small set of questions including age, gender,

education and training, relation to the household head, self-reported health status, the number

of days the individual worked, occupation, industry, and whether the person is currently enrolled

in school. At the household level, in addition to detailed questions about agricultural inputs and

outputs, the survey also asks about total household income and several categories of consumption.

    There are several limitations to the data set. The main goal of the survey is to ask agricultural

households about farm inputs and outputs. Thus, the data lack detail on non-agricultural decision-

making of households. For example, it might be interesting to know about child care time or cash

expenditures on boys versus girls, but this is not available in the data.

    Another important limitation of the data is that it doesn't have specific questions about birth,

so we need to infer the timing of birth by the arrival of a zero or one year old baby into the panel.

For a child who arrives in the household and is reported to be age one, we assign the prior calendar
   10
      Prior to 2003, all of the questions were asked at the household level. In other words, we can observe how many
days of work the total household supplied but we couldn't separate out whether a woman or man worked those days
if the household contained both a woman and man.




                                                                                                                  9
year as the child's birth year. However, this may lead to our assignment of birth year actually

capturing the year prior to birth in many cases. This is because there seems to be a substantial

amount of rounding up of an infant's age to one year. For example, in the data set, there are 668

reports of a child of age zero and 7141 reports of a child of age one.

       Because the parentage of each child is not specifically asked, we assign the father and mother of

a child based on a question about the relationship to the household head. If a child to the household

head is born in a year, the household head and spouse are assigned as its father and mother. In

rural China, households often include three generations, so many babies born in households are

the grandchild of the head of household. In this scenario, we only assign the child of the head and

spouse of the head's child as the parents if there is only one child of the head and corresponding

spouse residing in the household. In other words, if two adult children of the household head reside

in the household, we cannot determine which sibling is the parent of the baby.

       Given that a woman may give birth to more than one child in the 8 year panel, we focus our

analysis on the first birth that occurs within the sample. We also exclude from the sample the

birth of twins (or higher order multiple births).11 Finally, we exclude the rare cases where the

assignment of a child to parent corresponds to a parent who is under age 11.


3.1.1      NFP Variables and Statistics

We present summary statistics for individual-level variables in the year prior to the birth of a son

or daughter in Table 1. The first four columns show statistics for women and the last four columns

show the same statistics for men.12 In addition to showing the mean and standard deviation for

individuals prior to the arrival of a son or a daughter, we show the p-value of the test of whether

these two means are statistically different. For women, there are no significant differences in any

of these variables. For men, out of the 11 variables, only the probability of working is statistically

different (at the 1% level) prior to the arrival of a son versus daughter. This provides some assurance

for the identification strategy that compares individuals before and after the arrival of daughter
  11
    The main issue with twins is we cannot assign gender properly in the regression equation.
  12
    The sample size is slightly larger for men because women are less likely to have pre-birth data. This is because
women are more likely to join their husbands' families than vice versa. If she joins the NFP household at marriage
and gives birth in the same year, then we don't observe any pre-birth periods for her.



                                                                                                                 10
with individuals before and after a son is born.

       The work indicator is defined based on the number of days that the individual worked in the

past year. About three-quarters of women were working in the year prior to the arrival of a son or

daughter. The number is higher for men; 89% of men were working prior to the arrival of a boy

and 92% prior to the arrival of a daughter. Women worked about 160 days per year while men

worked over 230 days on average.

       Health status is self-reported on a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 corresponds to the best health and

5 the poorest health. Men report being very slightly healthier than women prior to the birth of a

child. The average age prior to birth is 27.7 years for women and 29 years for men. Women have

slightly less than 8 years of education whereas men in the sample have an average of 8.4 years of

schooling. There is also a question of whether the individual is currently enrolled in school. Just

over 2% of women are enrolled in school prior to the arrival of an infant, and the corresponding

number for men is slightly lower.

       Temporary migration is common in the data. Women are living at home about 283 days of the

year prior to the birth of a child. Men are away from home slightly more than women; their average

number of days at home is about 242. Corresponding to being away from home more, men also

earn more away from home. Men earn about 5000 yuan per year in work away from while women

earn about one-third of that amount.13 The survey does not ask about total individual earnings

while at home; this is because most of the survey respondents are engaged in household agricultural

production and it would be hard to assign joint agricultural profits to individuals. As a measure

of more permanent migration, we examine whether the individual attrites from the survey (i.e. is

not surveyed in the subsequent year).14 Individual level attrition is fairly low at less than 4% for

women and slightly lower for men.

       The survey asks questions about the primary industry of each individual. About 50% of women

report agriculture as their primary industry, while the corresponding number for men is much lower

at around 30%. There is also information about whether the primary occupation of the individual
  13
     This amount is converted into real 2002 RMB using a consumer price index from the Regional Economy Database.
  14
     This is only measured in years 2003 to 2009 as we don't know whether they will attrite in the subsequent year
for the last period (2010) for which we have data.




                                                                                                               11
is in a family-based enterprise, including agriculture. About 59% of women and 46% of men work

in an occupation in a family enterprise.

       We next examine household-level variables in the NFP in Table 2.15 Prior to the birth of a boy,

households report an average total income of 34,000 RMB. Prior to the birth of a girl, households

report an average income of 36,000 RMB, but the difference between the two is not statistically

significant at the standard levels. Total expenditures are slightly lower than income, implying that

the average household is saving. We examine several categories of consumption: cigarettes, alcohol,

milk and meat. Cigarettes are measured as expenditures while alcohol, milk and meat are measured

in kilograms. Given that the survey questions on cigarette and alcohol consumption changed in

2009, we limit the analysis on cigarette and alcohol consumption to the waves prior to 2009.16 We

aggregate the number of days of work for all other people in the household (excluding the parents

of the baby). In total, people other than the parents work an average of 300 days. The average

household size prior to the arrival of a baby is a little over 4. This is statistically different (at the

10% level) for households prior to a son and a daughter, but this difference is small in magnitude.

The vast majority of households include the people who will become grandparents in the subsequent

year. Over 10% of the households are minorities (non-Han ethnicity).


3.2      China Health and Nutrition Survey

To address some of the limitations of the NFP data, we supplement the main analysis with a panel

survey of households in China called the China Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS). There are

10 rounds of surveys in years 1989, 1991, 1993, 1997, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2009, 2011 and 2015.17

The sampling entailed a multistage, random cluster design where counties were stratified into three

levels of income, and a weighted sampling technique selected four counties in each province plus

the provincial capital and one low-income city. The sample size included about 3800 households in

1989 increasing to about 5900 in 2015.
  15
     Most of the questions are household-level questions about detailed inputs and outputs into agricultural production
broken down at the crop level. These are not useful for the purposes of this paper.
  16
     In other words, we drop 2009 and 2010 because we cannot make those values comparable to the prior years.
  17
     The provinces include Beijing, Chongqing, Guangxi, Guizhou, Heilongjiang, Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Jiangsu,
Liaoning, Shaanxi, Shandong, Shanghai, Yunnan, and Zhejiang.




                                                                                                                    12
       Unlike the NFP data, we are able to link parents to children using direct birth history questions.

There are also questions on time use, including time spent on child care and leisure activities. While

there are several advantages of this data set over the NFP data, the smaller number of households

means that there are relatively fewer births happening in the sample period. Thus, there will be

issues with power in some of these analyses.


3.2.1      CHNS Variables and Statistics

As shown in Table 3, about 65% of women are working prior to the birth of either a son or daughter.

This is slightly lower than in the NFP data. Women in the CHNS are substantially younger than

women in the NFP prior to birth at 26 years old. They also have slightly less education, averaging

over 7.3 years of schooling. About 70% of households in the CHNS have a smoker. None of these

variables are statistically different for women prior to a boy as compared to a girl; however, the

number of births in the CHNS sample is not large.

       Individuals report the total number of child care hours that they provided in the last week.

The question is specific in that this should include times where they are simultaneously watching

their child and doing something else, like cooking. It is asked in every wave except 1989. Women

are watching children for 18.5 hours per week prior to a boy and 19.1 hours per week prior to a

girl, and this difference is not statistically significant.

       Questions about time spent on leisure activities are asked in terms of minutes per day, sepa-

rately for weekdays and weekends; we then calculate total leisure by aggregating across categories

into total hours per week. These activities include TV, movies, video games, computer/smart

phone surfing/games, reading/writing/drawing, chat rooms and board games.18 These questions

are available only in the waves 2004, 2006, 2009, 2011 and 2015. Prior to the arrival of an infant,

women spent about 22 hours per week on leisure activities.

       Another set of time use questions asks about the time the individual spends on chores in an

average day. We sum together their responses to three questions about the amount of time spent

on buying food, preparing food and washing and ironing clothing. These three questions are asked
  18
   Note that some of these questions are re-worded over time. For example watching DVDs has become watching
movies.



                                                                                                        13
in all waves. Women spend an average of two hours per day on food purchases and preparation

and cleaning clothing prior to the birth of a boy or a girl.

    In every round of the survey, the CHNS also asks about the breastfeeding status of each child in

the birth history questions to women. We construct a variable that equals 1 if the mother reports

currently or ever having breastfed the child. Given the spacing of the survey of the CHNS of two to

four year intervals, the fact that a fraction (14%) of women were breastfeeding in the survey wave

prior to the birth of a son or daughter is likely to be driven by a prior child.

    We also make use of a question in the CHNS about whether each child had any immunization

shots in the past year. This question is asked of all children under the age of 12 in the seven waves

prior to the 2009 round. We create a household-level variable for the total number of immunizations

received by children under the age of 12 in the past year. This is the only variable that is statistically

different (at the 10% level or lower) for CHNS households in the survey wave prior to the birth of

a son versus daughter with households who will subsequently have a son having a higher rate of

immunizations (58% versus 48%).

    Finally, we construct a variable regarding the wife's participation in the decision-making process

for durable goods. This is based on questions that first ask the household about whether they own

the good.19 Most goods are asked about in each of the four waves between 1989 and 1997, but

some are only asked in a subset of the waves. Conditional on the household owning the good, they

are asked who made the decision to purchase it where the options are: husband, wife, husband

and wife together, and other. We generate an index representing the share of goods that the wife

participates in the decision of purchasing.20 Women participate in purchasing decisions (either by

themselves or jointly with their husbands) for 69% of durable goods purchases prior to the birth of

a boy and for 64% prior to the arrival of a girl. This difference is not statistically significant.
   19
      The 17 goods that the CHNS asks about are: stereo, VCR, black and white TV, color TV, washer, refrigerator,
air conditioning, sewing machine, fan, clock, camera, microwave, electric pot, pressure cooker, cooking tools.
   20
      In other words, among the goods that the household reports owning, we add up the number where the response
is wife or husband and wife together and divided by the total number of goods owned.




                                                                                                              14
4         Empirical Specification

To look at an event study analysis around the birth of a child, we begin by estimating the following

equation:

                                7                              7
                   yit =  +           j Birthit,j × Soni +           j Birthit,j + t + i +     it                   (1)
                              j =-3                          j =-3


where i denotes individual and t denotes calendar time. The variables denoted by Birthit,j are

indicator variables that equal one in the period relative to the birth of a child. For example,

Birthit,-2 indicates two years prior to the birth year while Birthit,2 indicates two years after the

birth year. Soni is an indicator for whether the birth is a male child. Thus, the coefficients j

provide information on how the outcome moves around the birth of a girl while the coefficients

j provide information on whether the effects of a birth of male are different from the effects of a

birth of a female. The regression is restricted to the three periods prior and seven periods after

to birth.21 The omitted category is the year prior to birth (j = -1). The regression includes a

constant term and fixed effects for calendar year. We also exploit the panel nature of the data

and include individual fixed effects to absorb any time-invariant characteristics of the individual or

household. The standard errors are clustered at the individual level.

         The estimates of the years prior to the birth allow us to examine whether households who will

have a boy are systematically different from households who will have a girl, and provide a way

to test the identification assumption that these households are not systematically different prior

to the birth of a child. The estimates of the years after birth allow us to examine whether any

outcomes that change after birth are temporary or long lasting.

         Given the large number of coefficients associated with the event study equation, we also present

some estimates using the following more parsimonious difference-in-difference equation:


                 yit =  + 1 P ostBirthit,j × Soni + 2 BirthY earit,j × M aleChildi +

                                          1 P ostBirthit,j + 2 BirthY earit,j + t + i +             it              (2)
    21
     Women often marry into an existing household (and enter into a household in the data) and give birth to their
first child shortly after marriage, so we usually observe women in more periods after the birth than prior to the birth.


                                                                                                                     15
where P ostBirthit,j indicates all years after (and not including) the year of birth and BirthY earit,j

equals one in the year of birth. As discussed in describing the data, for many births, BirthY earit,j

may actually indicate the year prior to birth, so it is important to treat it separately from the

periods that we are certain are after the arrival of the child.



5         Results on Labor Supply Outcomes

We present the event study estimates of equation 1 where the outcomes are mothers' labor supply

outcomes in Figure 3. The first row shows the coefficient estimates where the dependent variable is

the labor force participation of women. The figure on the left shows the estimates of j around the

birth of a daughter, while the figure on the right shows the estimates of j (the differential effect

of a son). There are no significant trends in labor force participation of women prior to the birth

of a child and no differential effects of a boy versus a daughter. In the year immediately following

birth (t = 1), there is a 5 percent decline in the probability of worker among mothers who gave

birth to daughters, and this estimate is significant at the 5% level. However, these effects are quite

transitory as there are no significant differences in the probability of working 2 to 7 years after the

birth of the daughter relative to the year prior to birth.

         In panel B, we see the labor supply decisions of women are quite different following the birth

of a son. There is a significant decline in labor force participation in the year of birth (t = 0),

suggesting that women are 5.7% more likely to stop working when they are pregnant with a son

but not a daughter. Women are also more likely to leave the labor force for 4 years after the birth

of a son relative to the birth of a daughter. The magnitude of the additional effect is 6.6 to 8.8%

and these estimates are all significant at the 5% level. Starting when the child is around 5 years

old, the probability of the mother working is no longer statistically different for a boy relative to a

daughter. The total impact of having a son on work (given by adding together j and j ) is largest

in the year immediately following birth with a 14% reduction.

         The bottom row of Figure 3 shows the same estimates on the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS)

function of the number of days that the mother spent working in the past year.22 This captures
    22
         The IHS function is similar to the logarithmic function but is well defined for zero values.


                                                                                                        16
both the extensive margin given by the indicator for work as well as the intensive margin where

women who work can change the amount that they work. The pattern of results is similar to

those for labor force participation. For the birth of a daughter, there is only a significant decline

in the number of days of work in the year immediately following birth when we see a very large

46% decline in days of work. These large effects for boys persist for the following four years where

mothers of boys are working 28% to 48% fewer days than mothers of daughters, and these four

estimates are significant at the 10% level or higher.

       Figure 4 shows the corresponding estimates for fathers. As we saw with mothers, prior to birth,

there are no significant trends in anticipation of the birth of a daughter or a son. However, the

labor supply response of fathers after birth is quite different from mothers. First, if anything, it

appears that fathers are more likely to work around the time of arrival of a child and for a few

years afterwards (relative to the year prior to birth). This positive effect on work is significant at

the 5% level when the child is two years old and the magnitude corresponds with a 2.6% increase

in the probability of working for fathers. There are no significant differences in the labor supply

response of fathers of boys as compared with daughters. The results for the number of days of work

in the bottom row are similar to the labor force participation estimates.

       Next, we present the parsimonious estimates of equation 2 using the NFP data in Table 4.23

The estimates for women are shown in panel A and men in Panel B. The estimates that use the

full sample are presented in columns 1 and 5, where the dependent variables are an indicator for

work and the IHS function of the days of work, respectively. We begin by discussing the results

for women in Panel A. In the full sample, the estimate indicates that women are 4% less likely to

work in the year of birth of a daughter and 6% less likely to work afterwards. These estimates are

significant at the 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The impacts of a son are significantly larger with

mothers 5% less likely to work in the year of birth of a son relative to a daughter and 6% less likely

to work in the years after the birth of a son relative to a daughter. This implies that women are

twice as likely to leave the labor force following the birth of a son as compared to daughter.
  23
    Column 1 of Table 8 also shows the estimates using the CHNS. While the coefficient on whether the woman
works is negative, it is not significant at the standard levels. This may be driven by the relative lack of power given
the small sample size in the CHNS.




                                                                                                                    17
       Column 5 shows the corresponding estimate where the dependent variable is the IHS function

of the days of work. We observe a large 42% decline in work days in the birth year for women

with daughters and a 56% decline in the years thereafter. These estimates are significant at the

1% level. The effects are even larger for mothers of boys. Following the birth year, mothers of boys

work an additional 33% fewer days than mother of girls for a total reduction in days of work for

mothers of boys of 89%.

       We address concerns about sample selection by examining the estimates where the sample is

limited to individuals who appear for each of the 6 periods around the birth. For example, given

prior research (Dahl and Moretti 2008), we may be concerned that parents are more likely to

permanently leave the household following the birth of a daughter; a permanent migration would

imply that we would no longer observe them in the data and this could bias the estimates. This

reduces the sample substantially as there are some years that either the household or an individual

is not present in data. The key estimate for labor force participation, the post-birth effects of a

son relative to a daughter, remains significant at the 5% level and the magnitude increases to 9.1%.

Similarly, the estimates on the number of days worked are also slightly larger in magnitude.

       In order to address the potential concern that sex selection is driving the results, we draw

upon the prior research that demonstrates that the sex ratio in China is not very skewed for the

first birth but the distortion increases for higher order births (Ebenstein 2010). Thus, we look

at a sample where the estimates are limited to the first birth.24 The estimates on labor force

participation are similar to those using the full sample but slightly larger in magnitude, and the

estimates are significant at the standard level. With this sample restriction, the estimates are no

longer significant at the standard levels when the dependent variable is work days.

       Finally, in columns 4 and 8, we include indicators for each age. This allows for very flexible

life-cycle patterns in labor force participation. The magnitude and significance of the estimates are

very similar to the baseline estimates. This provides reassurance that the post-birth estimates are

not simply picking up life-cycle patterns in labor supply outcomes.
  24
    We limit the analysis to the first birth in the sample where the parents have no older children residing in the
household. If the parents have older children who are not residing in the household, we would not be able to identify
that the birth in the sample is not their first child because the MOA does not ask a full birth history.




                                                                                                                  18
    The estimates in Panel B show that there are no significant differences in the labor supply

behavior of men following a son as compared with a daughter. None of the estimates of the

interaction between son and post birth are significant. The magnitudes of the coefficients for labor

force participation are close to economically zero.


5.1    Bounding Exercise for Sex Selection

The sex ratio in China is quite skewed, suggesting that households are choosing to have boys rather

than girls. Consistent with aggregate statistics for rural areas in China, in the MOA data used in

this analysis, 57% of births in the sample period are males. The main concern for the identification

strategy is that households with strong son preferences are also households that prefer for women

to reduce their labor supply after any child. In other words, we might over-estimate the impact of

having a boy on female labor supply if households who actively choose to have a boy rather than

a girl would have reduced the amount that a mother works substantially even if they had a girl.

    We have already shown that the observable characteristics of individuals and households prior

to the birth of a son or daughter are similar. In addition, we have shown the results are robust

in the sample limited to first-born children, where the gender bias at birth is less pronounced.25

To further support the idea that selection in gender is not driving the results, we do a bounding

exercise where we re-assign some male births to female births such that we achieve the gender

ratio at birth that is considered the natural sex ratio. More specifically, to test specifically for the

idea that preferences for women working post-baby are correlated with sex selective behavior, we

identify the pool of households for which the women gave birth to a son and were working prior

to the birth and stop working after birth. Then, among those households, we randomly select

one-third to re-assign those births from boys to girls.26 This bounding exercise is very conservative

in that we are maximizing the impact of sex selective abortion on the estimates of labor supply

effects.

    The results are presented in Table 5. Mechanically, we must (and do) see smaller differences
   25
      However, in this data, unlike in Ebenstein (2010), the skewed sex ratio is more muted but does still exist among
first births.
   26
      The number one-third is chosen to achieve the natural gender ratio at birth in the sample for the bounding
exercise.


                                                                                                                   19
in the effects of having a son as compared with having a daughter. However, the magnitudes are

not trivial; women are 8% less likely to work after the birth of a daughter and 11.2% less likely to

work after the birth of a son. The difference, 3.2%, is significant at the 10% level. In terms of the

number of work days, women work 65.2% fewer days after the birth of a daughter and 83% fewer

days after the birth of a son. The difference between having a boy or girl on the number of work

days is also significant at the 10% level.


5.2   Permanent Control Group Robustness Check

Our main estimates include a sample of households that either give birth to a son or daughter in

the sample period. We examine whether the event study results are robust to the inclusion of a

"permanent" control that does not experience any births in the sample period. This control group

solves a potential under-identification problem by helping to identify the time effects in the event

study regression (Borusyak and Jaravel 2017). More specifically, the permanent control group is

restricted to women in households where there are no births happening in the sample period and

whose age is restricted to the range 12 to 50 to be comparable to the women who give birth (and

the 10 years around birth). The estimates are presented in Appendix Figure A.3 and show that the

magnitudes of the coefficients and their significance remain very similar to the estimates without

this additional control group.



6     Impacts on Other Outcomes

6.1   Consumption

In order to better understand the mechanisms of the different labor supply responses that we observe

of mothers following the birth of sons versus daughters, we examine other outcomes of interest. To

test whether the birth of a son represents a wealth effect that allows women to work less and

consume more leisure, we look at household consumption (as measured by expenditures). Total

expenditure is presented in column 2 of Table 6. Following the birth of a son, a household consumes

2.4% less relative to household consumption following the arrival of a girl, but this estimate is not



                                                                                                  20
statistically different from zero.27 Similarly, we do not observe positive changes in the consumption

of cigarettes, alcohol, milk or meat following the birth of a boy. Overall, the results on consumption

are not consistent with the idea of the household behaving like there is a positive wealth effect

following the birth of a son. Furthermore, if milk and meat are investments in children, we don't

see support for the idea of more investment in boys than girls in these consumption outcomes.28

       The only significant estimate for the interaction terms are negative effects on cigarette con-

sumption where the arrival of a son corresponds to a large 32% decline in cigarette expenditure.

This is significant at the 5% level.29 Similar to the NFP results, in the CHNS data in column 2 of

Table 8, we see a significant 11% decline in the probability that someone in the household smokes

following the birth a son relative to a daughter. The decline in cigarette consumption is consis-

tent with a couple of the mechanisms. First, given the negative health consequences to children

of second hand smoke, the result is consistent with the investment story where households invest

more in the health of sons than daughters because they expect higher returns to investments in

boys than in girls. Second, if mothers dislike people in the household smoking, it is also potentially

consistent with the mechanism where household rewards mothers for producing a son. Smoking is a

male-favored good in China; over half of Chinese men in 2010 were current smokers with only 3.4%

of Chinese women reporting ever smoking (Liu et al 2017). Moreover, ethnographic studies with

Chinese women suggest that they strongly dislike male smoking for a variety of reasons, including

the health consequences and the associated dirtiness that falls on women to clean (Mao, Bristow

and Robinson 2012).


6.2      Migration

We next consider the impact of the birth of son or daughter on migration outcomes. In columns 1

and 2 of Table 7, the outcome variable is the IHS function of the number of days that the person

spent at home in the past year. The birth of a daughter corresponds to a significant increase in
  27
     The magnitude of the effects on total income in column 1 are similar. This may be surprising, given that women's
labor force participation has dropped substantially and we will return to this in Section 6.2.
  28
     Milk consumption in the household increases after birth but not differently for boys versus girls.
  29
     Appendix Figure A.4 shows the event study estimates around birth. The relative decline in cigarette consumption
for boys (given by the interaction term) persists for about four years, which is similar to the timing of the labor effects
for mothers.


                                                                                                                        21
the number of days at home for both mothers and fathers. Following the arrival of a girl, mothers

spend 37% more days at home and fathers 27%. These estimates are significant at the 1% level.

There is no significant difference in the number of days the mother spends at home following a

son as compared with a daughter. In contrast, the number of days that the father is at home is

different for a son versus daughter. More specifically, fathers are more likely to be away from home

following the birth of a son than a daughter.

    We examine whether an individual attrites from the survey as a measure of migration that

would capture permanent migration. In contrast, the number of days at home versus away captures

seasonal or temporary migration of household members. As shown in columns 5 and 6, there are no

significant differences in the rates of attrition from the sample following sons or daughters. There is

a significant increase in the attrition of 1.6% of fathers following birth of either a son or daughter.

    Corresponding to the increase in temporary migration, we see an increase in the amount that

fathers earn away from home (by 1634 RMB) following the birth of their sons relative to daughters.

This estimate is significant at the 10% level. This helps to explain how the results can tie together:

following the arrival of a son, mothers work less and fathers don't work much more (in terms of

total days), but household consumption and income do not fall because the composition of men's

work has changed.30 Men are more likely to migrate temporarily for work in order to maintain the

households' standard of living while the mothers work less.

    There is no direct way to compare the increased earnings associated with men's temporary

migration with the loss of earnings associated with the decline in women's labor supply because

household agricultural profits are not assigned to individuals in the NFP survey. However, as a

back of the envelope calculation, we calculate the average amount paid to a hired female laborer

among the households in the sample of analysis. This corresponds to an average of 41.3 RMB

per day. Assuming that women work an average of 160 days per year, the 33% reduction in days

worked corresponds to 52.8 fewer days of work of the women. This translates into an average

loss in household income of 2180 RMB following the birth of a son relative to a daughter. Thus,

the increase in earnings from male migration makes up for three-quarters of the loss in earnings
  30
     As shown in column 1 if Table 9, the labor supply of other people in the household (not including the parents)
doesn't change significantly following the birth of a boy relative to a girl in the household.



                                                                                                                22
associated with women reducing their labor supply following a boy's birth.


6.3   Time Use

We next turn to time use outcomes available in the CHNS, including time spent on child care,

shown in column 3 of Table 8. Not surprisingly, the number of hours that women spend on child

care increases dramatically (and significantly) post-birth by 32 hours per week. However, there

is no significant difference in the time spent on caring for a male or female child. In fact, the

coefficient estimate on the interaction between a son and post-birth is negative (-2 hours).

   In terms of time spent on leisure (column 4), the birth of a girl leads to an insignificant decline

on average in women's leisure. Interestingly, women's total leisure actually increases following the

birth of a son by 16 hours in the birth year and 10 hours per week thereafter. The difference

between the effect of a girl versus boy on leisure is statistically significant at the 10% level. After

the birth of a child, a woman spends about 23 minutes more per day on food preparation and

washing clothes. This estimate is significant at the 1% level. However, there are no significant

differences in the time she spends on chores by the gender of the child.

   As expected, we see a 58% increase in the probability of breastfeeding in the year that an infant

is born and a 53% increase after the birth year (in column 6). These estimates are significant at

the 1% level. However, there are no significant differences in breastfeeding by gender.

   We also consider whether households spend time and money investing in the health of their

children. In column 7, we see that the number of immunizations that children under 12 receive

in the household increases by 0.55 in the year of birth and by 1.1 in the year following the birth.

Both of the estimates are significant at the 1% level. However, as with breastfeeding, there are no

significant differences by the gender of the child.

   Finally, the CHNS allows us to consider whether women participate in household decisions to

purchase durable goods in column 8. There is no effect of the birth of a daughter on her decision-

making power, but there is a 26.5% increase in the mothers' probability of participating in these

household decisions following the birth of a son. This estimate is significant at the 10% level.

   Overall, the results from the CHNS are most consistent with the idea that women are being



                                                                                                    23
rewarded for having a boy with less work, more leisure and more power in household decision-

mkaing. Despite working less following sons than daughters, they are not spending more time taking

care of their sons or breastfeeding them more. While the results on leisure are also potentially

consistent with the investment mechanism where women exert more effort (but not time) with

their sons than their daughters; under the investment story, the additional effort is exhausting, so

women may need more leisure to be able to maintain this high level of interaction and investment

for sons. However, the results on breastfeeding, immunizations and female decision-making are not

supportive of the idea that households are generally making more investments in boys than girls.

       Unfortunately, there are no questions about child care, leisure or female participation in house-

hold decision-making in the NFP data. However, we can get some limited information about time

use by looking at a variable in the NFP about current enrollment in school. In Table 9, we see a

drop in school enrollment of 1.8% (significant at the 1% level) following the birth of a daughter.

Given that only 2% of women were enrolled in school prior to birth, this means that essentially

all women who were in school dropped out following the birth of their daughters. However, the

coefficient on the interaction between birth and a son is 1.3% suggesting that women are more likely

to be in school following the birth of a son than a daughter. Consistent with the child care results

from the CHNS, the results on school enrollment using the NFP data indicate that the shift away

from work following the birth of a son is not entirely about shifting into child care. Mothers of

sons shift into other activities beyond child care, including remaining in school and leisure. Thus,

these results are consistent with the mechanism whereby women are rewarded for producing a son.

However, the results are also consistent with the investment mechanism if households believe that

having educated mothers represent an investment in the children.31


6.4      Health

We consider the possibility that the observed labor outcomes are driven by physical differences in

the health of mothers following the birth of a son or daughter. In the first row of Figure 5, we show

the estimates using the NFP data where the dependent variable is mothers' health broken down
  31
     There is a large literature in economics linking mothers' education outcomes with the outcomes of children. See
for example Thomas, Strauss and Henriques (1991) and Currie and Moretti (2003).


                                                                                                                 24
by each year around birth given that this mechanism seems likely to be concentrated around the

time of birth. In Panel B, we see that there are no significant differences in the health status of the

mother around the time of birth associated with a son as compared with a daughter. Interestingly,

there does seem to be a trend in the mother's health prior to birth, suggesting that worsening

health may trigger people to try to have children. There is also a strong trend in health outcomes

after birth, where self-reported health status is worse after the birth of a child; this may not be

surprising if parents are sleeping less or have more stress. These trends are not merely driven by

life-cycle effects; they persist even with the inclusion of indicators for every age (Appendix Figure

A.5). Overall, the results do not support the idea that having a son has substantially different

consequences for the health of mothers than having a daughter.

       Another related mechanism is that boys require more care to achieve the same level of outcomes

as girls because they are born less physically robust.32 To consider this idea, we look at the reported

health status of boys and girls following their births in the NFP data in Panels C and D of Figure

5. There are no significant differences in the health status of boys and girls, suggesting that this

mechanism is not driving the gender differences in the labor supply of mothers following birth.


6.5      Fertility and Household Size

To consider whether the gender differences in the labor supply response of mothers is driven by

the information that a son versus daughter provides about total fertility, we look at the impact of

the birth of a girl versus boy on the number of children and total household size. In Table 9, we

see that there are no significant differences in the total number of children that a couple has after

the birth of a son or a daughter (column 4). The magnitude of the coefficient is also quite small.

This suggests that having a boy or girl doesn't strongly affect total fertility in our sample. This

is perhaps not surprising in the Chinese context where the number of total children is small, and

households then prefer to practice sex selective abortion rather than gender-based stopping rules.

Similarly, column 5 shows that the total household size after a birth doesn't change significantly

for a boy or a girl. In addition to providing information about subsequent fertility, household size
  32
     Note that this mechanism isn't consistent with the finding that women are more likely to be enrolled in school
following the birth of a boy relative to a girl.


                                                                                                                25
tells us that the probability of co-residence of other individuals, such as grandparents, doesn't vary

by the gender of the child. It is interesting to note that the number of children increases by 0.822

after birth, but the total household size only increases by 0.671; this indicates that some other

adults are likely to leave the household after the arrival of a child.33 Overall, these results tell us

that the changes in the labor market outcomes of women are not driven by what the arrival of a

son or daughter signals about her total fertility or the composition of the household.



7         Heterogeneity

Rural parents in China are much more likely to co-reside with an adult son than with an adult

daughter. We consider the idea that the expectation of future co-residence and care drives parental

investment decisions in sons and daughters. Prior research shows that rural parents are more likely

to co-reside with their youngest son relative to other children (Lei, Strauss, Tian, Zhao 2015).

Thus, we use the NFP data to examine whether birth order matters for the labor supply response

to sons and daughters.

         In Table 10, we look at a sub-sample of mothers who already have a son. Thus, these estimates

give us the labor supply impact of having a son versus daughter among women who already have

one son. Women are 6% more likely to not work after the birth of a son than a daughter when

they already have a son; this estimate is only significant at the 11% level. For the number of days

worked, in households that already have a son, the birth of an additional son leads the mother to

work 47% less than the birth of a daughter. This estimate is significant at the 5% level. Comparing

these estimates to those for first-born children shown in columns 3 and 7 of Table 4, the coefficient

on the interaction between post-birth and son are similar in magnitude. The estimate for first-born

children is slightly larger when the outcome is female labor force participation and slightly smaller

for days of work. Thus, the gender differences in the labor market effects of birth exist for both

first-born and higher order births and are not concentrated in one type of son.34
    33
     In other words, the arrival of a child drives other members out rather than attracting the co-residence of grand-
parents.
  34
     However, the results may still be consistent with investment in the son with whom they plan to co-reside given
that there is uncertainty when the first son is born in whether they will have another son or not.




                                                                                                                   26
       Next, we focus on the type of work that the woman was engaged in prior to birth in order to

consider whether discrimination by firms or rigidities in the formal labor market can explain the

results. For this mechanism to explain the results, firms would discriminate against mothers of

sons differently than mothers of daughters. We examine heterogeneity in the labor market effects

by whether the women's primary occupation prior to birth was in a family enterprise and whether

her primary industry was agriculture.

       The results are presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table 11.35 There are no significant differences

in the impact of a son on women who were in family enterprises or agricultural work and those

women who were in other enterprises and non-agricultural work. However, it is important to note

that the magnitudes of the estimates as well as the standard errors on the triple interaction between

son, post birth and the woman's work type are large.

       Next, we look at heterogeneity by the presence of a co-resident grandparent prior to the birth.

A grandparent may be able to provide care for young children and allow women to continue to

work following birth.36 In column 3, we see that there are no significant differences in the gender

differences in the labor response of mothers to the arrival of a baby based on the presence of

grandparents in the household. However, these are not precisely estimated.

       In columns 4 through 6, we also look at heterogeneity along demographic characteristics of the

mother. More specifically, we look at whether the age of the mother at the time of birth was above

the average age, whether the woman had above average education and whether the household is

an ethnic minority (not ethnic Han Chinese). The one child policy was generally less restrictive for

minority households, who were allowed to have more children without penalties than Han Chinese

households. There are no significant differences in the impact of a birth of son along any of these

characteristics.

       Finally, it may be interesting to consider whether the labor supply response of mothers is

stronger in areas where there is a stronger preference for sons. We examine heterogeneity by the

provincial sex ratio. If the sex ratio is less skewed than average, the variable equals zero and if the
  35
    The results with the days of work are presented in Appendix Table A.1.
  36
    Alternatively, a co-resident grandparent may be able to substitute into women's labor activities in agriculture or
a family enterprise, which may then work in the opposite direction.




                                                                                                                   27
sex ratio in the province is more skewed than average, then the variable equals one.37 We don't

see any significant differences in the participation response of mothers to sons by the provincial sex

ratio.



8         Conclusion

This paper provides new evidence on the gender differences in the impact of a birth on the labor

supply of rural women in China. Women reduce their probability of working and the number of

work days for one year following the birth of a daughter before returning to their pre-birth levels

of work. For the birth of a son, the magnitude of the decline is larger and persists for four years

after birth. There are no declines in the labor supply of men for either a daughter or son, though

the composition of where the man works does change in order to maintain household consumption

while his wife works less.

         The results of the paper also suggest that smoking in the household declines more for boys than

girls, and mothers have more time for leisure and for schooling after the arrival of a son than a

daughter. Interestingly, women do not report more time spent on child care for boys than for girls,

but they do spend more time on leisure activities and in school. Women have more bargaining

power in decision-making over household durable goods following a boy relative to a girl.

         We consider several reasons that female labor supply may respond differently following the

birth of a son than a daughter. There is no support for the idea that the observed labor supply

responses are driven by physical differences in boys versus girls or in mothers after giving birth to

boys versus girls. We are also able to reject the possibility that there are different wealth effects

or fertility effects associated with boys and girls. Given the large increase in leisure of mothers

following a son's birth, the increased participation in decision-making and the lack of increase in

time inputs into boys relative to girls, the results are most consistent with the idea that mothers

are being rewarded by households with less work and more leisure for producing sons. Another

leading mechanism is that households are simply investing more in sons than daughters because the

returns to investment in boys are higher. Under the investment mechanism, mothers spend more
    37
         The provincial sex ratio used here is calculated within the MOA sample.


                                                                                                     28
effort per unit of time on their sons and this effort is tiring and leads them to need more leisure.

However, we don't observe any evidence that there are other increases in investment in boys over

girls in terms of immunizations, breastfeeding and consumption of milk and meat. The results are

consistent with Anderson and Ray (2010) who show that there is a skewed sex ratio at birth in

China, but no evidence of household discrimination against girls and in favor of boys after birth.

   The micro-level estimates in this paper suggest a potential linkage in the macro-level trends in

falling female labor force participation rates and the rise in sex ratios over time in China. Given

that we find that rural women work less following the birth of sons relative to daughters, this may

explain part of the overall fall in women working in China. Furthermore, this suggests that policies

that affect the sex ratio, including changes to the one child policy, may then have unintended

consequences on female labor force participation.




                                                                                                 29
References
Afridi, Farzana, Taryn Dinkelman, and Kanika Mahajan, "Declining female labour force
 participation in rural India: The supply side," Working paper, 2018.

Ananat, Elizabeth O and Guy Michaels, "The effect of marital breakup on the income dis-
 tribution of women with children," Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (3), 611­629.

Anderson, Siwan and Debraj Ray, "Missing women: age and disease," The Review of Economic
 Studies, 2010, 77 (4), 1262­1300.

Anukriti, S, Sungoh Kwon, and Nishith Prakash, "Dowry: Household responses to expected
 marriage payments," IZA Working Paper 11464, 2016.

Bailey, Martha J, "More power to the pill: the impact of contraceptive freedom on women's life
 cycle labor supply," The quarterly journal of economics, 2006, 121 (1), 289­320.

Barcellos, Silvia Helena, Leandro S Carvalho, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, "Child gender
 and parental investments in India: Are boys and girls treated differently?," American Economic
 Journal: Applied Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 157­89.

Bedard, Kelly and Olivier Deschenes, "Sex preferences, marital dissolution, and the economic
 status of women," Journal of human Resources, 2005, 40 (2), 411­434.

Borusyak, Kirill and Xavier Jaravel, "Revisiting event study designs," SSRN Working Paper
 2826228, 2017.

Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti, "Mother's education and the intergenerational transmission
 of human capital: Evidence from college openings," The Quarterly journal of economics, 2003,
 118 (4), 1495­1532.

Dahl, Gordon B and Enrico Moretti, "The demand for sons," The Review of Economic Studies,
 2008, 75 (4), 1085­1120.

Dustmann, Christian and Rasmus Landersø, "Child's Gender, Young Fathers' Crime, and
 Spillover Effects in Criminal Behavior," Technical Report, Centre for Research and Analysis of
 Migration (CReAM) 2018.

Ebenstein, Avraham, "The missing girls of China and the unintended consequences of the one
 child policy," Journal of Human Resources, 2010, 45 (1), 87­115.

Eogan, Maeve A, Michael P Geary, Michael P O'connell, and Declan P Keane, "Effect
 of fetal sex on labour and delivery: retrospective review," Bmj, 2003, 326 (7381), 137.

Fan, Muo and Qing Qing, "After having a son, I really started to understand my in-laws You
  erzi hou, wo zhenzheng lijiele gongpo," Qingdao Morning Post ( Qingdao Zao Bao), January 8,
  2014.

Fletcher, Erin, Rohini Pande, and Charity Maria Troyer Moore, "Women and work in
  india: Descriptive evidence and a review of potential policies," Working paper, 2017.


                                                                                            30
Goldin, Claudia, "The U-shaped female labor force function in economic development and eco-
 nomic history," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 1994.

   and Lawrence F Katz, "Career and Marriage in the Age of the Pill," American Economic
  Review, 2000, 90 (2), 461­465.

   and , "The power of the pill: Oral contraceptives and womens career and marriage decisions,"
  Journal of political Economy, 2002, 110 (4), 730­770.

Gruijters, Rob J, "Daughters and Sons Remittances in Rural China: Findings From a National
 Survey," Journal of Family Issues, 2018, 39 (11), 2911­2934.

Gupta, Monica Das, "Selective discrimination against female children in rural Punjab, India,"
 Population and development review, 1987, 13 (1), 77­100.

Heath, Rachel and A Mushfiq Mobarak, "Manufacturing growth and the lives of Bangladeshi
 women," Journal of Development Economics, 2015, 115, 1­15.

   and Xu Tan, "Worth fighting for: Daughters improve their mothers' autonomy in South Asia,"
  Journal of Development Economics, 2018, 135, 255­271.

Ichino, Andrea, Elly-Ann Lindstr¨  om, and Eliana Viviano, "Hidden consequences of a first-
  born boy for mothers," Economics Letters, 2014, 123 (3), 274­278.

Jayachandran, Seema and Ilyana Kuziemko, "Why do mothers breastfeed girls less than
  boys? Evidence and implications for child health in India," The Quarterly journal of economics,
  2011, 126 (3), 1485­1538.

Jensen, Robert, "Do labor market opportunities affect young women's work and family decisions?
  Experimental evidence from India," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (2), 753­792.

Jensen, Robert Todd, Equal Treatment, Unequal Outcomes?: Generating Sex Inequality Through
  Fertility Behaviour, Citeseer, 2003.

Kishore, Avinash and Dean Spears, "Having a son promotes clean cooking fuel use in urban
 India: Womens status and son preference," Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2014,
 62 (4), 673­699.

Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard, "Children and gender in-
 equality: Evidence from Denmark," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
 2018.

  , , Johanna Posch, Andreas Steinhauer, and Josef Zweim¨      uller, "Child Penalties Across
  Countries: Evidence and Explanations," CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13474, 2019.

Kraemer, Sebastian, "The fragile male," Bmj, 2000, 321 (7276), 1609­1612.

Kuziemko, Ilyana, Jessica Pan, Jenny Shen, and Ebonya Washington, "The Mommy
 Effect: Do Women Anticipate the Employment Effects of Motherhood?," Technical Report,
 National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.


                                                                                              31
Lei, Xiaoyan, John Strauss, Meng Tian, and Yaohui Zhao, "Living arrangements of the
  elderly in China: evidence from the CHARLS national baseline," China economic journal, 2015,
  8 (3), 191­214.

Li, Lixing and Xiaoyu Wu, "Gender of children, bargaining power, and intrahousehold resource
  allocation in China," Journal of Human Resources, 2011, 46 (2), 295­316.

Liu, Shiwei, Mei Zhang, Ling Yang, Yichong Li, Limin Wang, Zhengjing Huang, Lin-
  hong Wang, Zhengming Chen, and Maigeng Zhou, "Prevalence and patterns of tobacco
  smoking among Chinese adult men and women: findings of the 2010 national smoking survey,"
  J Epidemiol Community Health, 2017, 71 (2), 154­161.

Lundberg, Shelly and Elaina Rose, "The effects of sons and daughters on men's labor supply
 and wages," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2002, 84 (2), 251­268.

Mammen, Kristin and Christina Paxson, "Women's work and economic development," Jour-
 nal of economic perspectives, 2000, 14 (4), 141­164.

Mao, Aimei, Katie Bristow, and Jude Robinson, "Caught in a dilemma: why do non-smoking
 women in China support the smoking behaviors of men in their families?," Health Education
 Research, 2012, 28 (1), 153­164.

Pham-Kanter, G, "The gender weight gap, sons, daughters, and maternal weight.," University
 Library of Munich MPRA Paper No. 28997, 2010.

Pongou, Roland, "Why is infant mortality higher in boys than in girls? A new hypothesis based
 on preconception environment and evidence from a large sample of twins," Demography, 2013,
 50 (2), 421­444.

Rosenblum, Daniel, "The effect of fertility decisions on excess female mortality in India," Journal
 of Population Economics, 2013, 26 (1), 147­180.

Thomas, Duncan, John Strauss, and Maria-Helena Henriques, "How does mother's edu-
 cation affect child height?," The journal of human resources, 1991, 26 (2), 183.

Verburg, Petra E, Graeme Tucker, Wendy Scheil, Jan Jaap HM Erwich, Gus A Dekker,
 and Claire Trelford Roberts, "Sexual dimorphism in adverse pregnancy outcomes-a retro-
 spective Australian population study 1981-2011," PloS one, 2016, 11 (7), e0158807.

Wei, Shang-Jin and Xiaobo Zhang, "The competitive saving motive: Evidence from rising sex
 ratios and savings rates in China," Journal of political Economy, 2011, 119 (3), 511­564.

Yangtse News, "The fierce mother-in-law regularly takes the train to abuse her daughter-in-law
 for not giving birth to a son. (Erxi wei nengsheng xia nanhai xionghan popo dingqi zuo gaotie
 shsngmen ouda.)," August 29, 2016.

Zhu, Haiyan, "Adult childrens characteristics and intergenerational financial transfers in urban
 China," Chinese Journal of Sociology, 2016, 2 (1), 75­94.




                                                                                                32
                      Figure 1: Trends in Labor Status by Gender and Location
                                          (a) Labor Force Participation




                                              (b) Housewife Share




 Notes: Panel A shows labor force participation rates by gender and location (urban versus rural). Panel B shows
the share of individuals who report being a housewife. These trends are calculated using data from the CHNS over
    a sample of individuals aged 20 to 40. The sample size is 41,417 for labor force participation and 35,540 for
                                                 housewife status.




                                                                                                              33
                  Figure 2: Trends in Sex Ratio (Males per 100 Females) at Birth




    Data sources: National Bureau of Statistics, 1982, 1990, 2000, and 2010 Population Censuses, (respectively
published in 1985, 1993, 2002 and 2012); 1987, 1995 and 2005 One Percent Population Sample Surveys (respectively
  published in 1988, 1997 and 2007). Summarized in UNICEF's Children in China: An Atlas of Social Indicators,
                                                       2014.




                                                                                                             34
                      Figure 3: Effects of the Birth on Mothers' Labor Outcomes
               (a) Work Indicator - Daughter                       (b) Work Indicator - Son Interaction




             (c) IHS Days of Work - Daughter                      (d) IHS Days of Work - Son Interaction




 Notes: Each row corresponds with one regression. The dependent variable in the first row is an indicator for work
 over the year and the IHS of days of work over the year in the second row. The dots give the coefficient estimates
for years around the birth (j ) in the left column and for the interaction between the years around the birth and the
 birth of a son (j ) in the right column. The line denotes the 95% confidence interval where the standard errors are
  clustered at the household level. The regressions also include a constant term and fixed effects for household and
                                             year. The sample size is 18,144.




                                                                                                                  35
                      Figure 4: Effects of the Birth on Fathers' Labor Outcomes
              (a) Work Indicator - Daughter                       (b) Work Indicator - Son Interaction




             (c) IHS Days of Work - Daughter                     (d) IHS Days of Work - Son Interaction




Notes: This figure replicates Figure 3 except the sample is fathers rather than mothers. The sample size is 20,131.




                                                                                                                 36
                  Figure 5: Mothers' and Children's Health Around Birth by Gender
           (a) Mothers' Health Status - Daughter                     (b) Health Status - Son Interaction




                (c) Daughters' Health Status                                 (d) Son Interaction




Notes: Each row corresponds with one regression. The dependent variable in the first row is mother's health status,
and in the second row is children's health status. In row 1, the dots give the coefficient estimates for years around
 the birth (j ) in the left column and for the interaction between the years around the birth and the birth of a son
  (j ) in the right column. In row 2, the dots give the coefficient estimates for the years following birth in the left
 column and the interaction between the years following the birth and the birth of a son in the right column. The
    line denotes the 95% confidence interval where the standard errors are clustered at the household level. The
                   regressions also include a constant term and fixed effects for household and year.




                                                                                                                    37
                       Table 1: Individual-Level Summary Statistics (NFP)

                                            Women                                           Men
                           Pre-Boy      Pre-Girl      N       p-value    Pre-Boy      Pre-Girl      N      p-value
Work Indicator               .7521        .7546      2285      .8911       .8885        .9218      2660     .0040
                            (.4319)      (.4305)                         (.3147)       (.2684)
Days of Work                 159.1        160.1      2285      .8572       234.5        239.3      2660      .2811
                            (133.2)      (133.2)                         (114.6)       (110.6)
Health Status                1.428        1.460      2264      .1863       1.384        1.381      2638      .8878
                            (.5566)      (.6071)                         (.5474)       (.5688)
Age                          27.72        27.75      2279      .9329       29.10        29.04      2652      .8349
                            (7.334)      (7.650)                         (7.507)       (7.830)
Education                    7.950        7.900      2221      .6310       8.439        8.437      2617      .9824
                            (2.418)      (2.440)                         (2.302)       (2.442)
In School                    .0218        .0208      2240      .8613       .0183        .0159      2604      .6394
                            (.1463)      (.1428)                         (.1341)       (.1252)
Days at Home                 283.7        282.6      2225      .8470      241.9         243.9      2569      .7208
                            (125.6)      (126.9)                         (141.4)       (140.9)
Earnings Away               1769.4       1742.3      2285      .8862      4884.1       5064.8      2660      .6774
                           (4543.7)     (4375.5)                         (12673)      (8618.8)
Attrite                      .0382        .0363      2243      .8176       .0249        .0308      2618      .3650
                            (.1918)      (.1873)                         (.1560)       (.1728)
Agriculture Industry         .4763        .4915      2222      .4776       .2849        .3090      2600      .1817
                            (.4996)      (.5001)                         (.4515)       (.4623)
Family Occupation            .5948        .5872      2238      .7177       .4522        .4616      2619      .6329
                            (.4911)      (.4925)                         (.4978)       (.4987)
Notes: The first four columns show summary statistics for women and the last four for men. The mean of each
variable is shown for the year immediately prior to the birth of a boy or a girl with standard deviations below
in parentheses. The p-value refers to whether the difference between the pre-boy mean is statistically different
from the pre-girl mean.




                                                                                                                   38
                       Table 2: Household-Level Summary Statistics (NFP)

                                               Pre-Boy     Pre-Girl      N      p-value
                  Total Income                   33987       36179      2584     .4897
                                               (59743)     (10037)
                  Total Expenditures             29115       32754      2568     .2445
                                               (55813)     (10072)
                  Cigarettes                     626.1       629.5      2588     .9540
                                               (1476.0)    (1555.8)
                  Alcohol                        13.77       9.437      2588     .0497
                                                (67.89)     (33.70)
                  Milk                           7.328       8.802      2588     .3173
                                                (29.83)     (44.95)
                  Meat                           153.5       155.4      2608     .7667
                                                (152.6)     (169.1)
                  Others' Days of Work           300.0       306.7      2608     .4905
                                                (242.3)     (248.7)
                  Household Size                 4.253       4.170      2608     .0749
                                                (1.158)     (1.212)
                  Grandparents                   .8465       .8361      2608     .4684
                                                (.3605)     (.3703)
                  Minority                       .1303       .1124      2529     .1744
                                                (.3367)     (.3160)
Notes: The mean of each variable is shown for the year immediately prior to the birth of a boy or a girl with
standard deviations below in parentheses. The p-value refers to whether the difference between the pre-boy
mean is statistically different from the pre-girl mean.




                                                                                                                39
                      Table 3: Summary Statistics for Rural Women (CHNS)

                                                           Pre-Boy     Pre-Girl      N     p-value
           Work Indicator                                   .6483       .6432       357     .9208
                                                           (.4788)     (.4804)
           Age                                              26.57       26.13       617      .2710
                                                           (5.119)     (4.967)
           Education                                        7.318       7.315       540      .9929
                                                           (3.588)     (3.543)
           Household Smoking                                .6943       .7011       517      .8657
                                                           (.4615)     (.4586)
           Childcare (Hours/week)                           18.50       19.11       371      .8529
                                                           (31.07)     (32.58)
           Leisure (Hours/week)                             22.15       21.85       179      .8915
                                                           (15.65)     (13.28)
           Chores (Hours/day)                               2.166       1.933       583      .1246
                                                           (1.965)     (1.651)
           Breastfeeding Indicator                          .1479       .1441       668      .8912
                                                           (.3555)     (.3518)
           Household Immunizations                          .5809       .4754       551      .0699
                                                           (.7111)     (.6457)
           Female Share in Household Decisions              .6945       .6437       221      .3878
                                                           (.4346)     (.4328)
Notes: The mean of each variable is shown for the first year prior to the birth of a boy or a girl with standard
deviations below in parentheses. The p-value refers to whether the difference between the pre-boy mean is
statistically different from the pre-girl mean.




                                                                                                                   40
                                                Table 4: Effects of Birth on Individual Labor Outcomes

                                                   Indicator for Work                                         IHS Days of Work
                                    Full        Balanced      First Birth     Additional       Full        Balanced     First Birth     Additional
                                   Sample        Sample         Sample         Controls       Sample        Sample        Sample         Controls
                                     (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)
      Panel A: Mothers
      Son × Post Birth           -0.0630        -0.0914        -0.0757        -0.0627        -0.329         -0.401          -0.308       -0.324
                                  (0.0214)       (0.0383)       (0.0339)       (0.0210)       (0.127)       (0.225)        (0.200)        (0.125)

      Son × Birth Year            -0.0504       -0.00807       -0.0836         -0.0507        -0.248        0.0376          -0.342        -0.249
                                   (0.0236)     (0.0434)        (0.0381)        (0.0234)      (0.139)       (0.257)        (0.225)        (0.139)

      Post Birth                 -0.0609          -0.0629     -0.0882         -0.0749        -0.557         -0.542        -0.813         -0.637
                                  (0.0187)       (0.0516)      (0.0284)        (0.0184)       (0.110)       (0.306)        (0.166)        (0.108)

      Birth Year                  -0.0435        -0.0717       -0.0639        -0.0573        -0.419        -0.527         -0.630         -0.495
                                   (0.0180)      (0.0397)       (0.0278)       (0.0179)       (0.106)       (0.230)        (0.163)        (0.106)
      Observations                  19954          2947          10710          19928          19954         2947           10710          19928
      Panel B: Fathers
      Son × Post Birth            -0.00733      -0.00508       0.00408         -0.00533        -0.0138      0.0161         0.0827         0.00119
                                  (0.0130)      (0.0214)       (0.0180)        (0.0122)       (0.0806)      (0.133)        (0.111)        (0.0752)

      Son × Birth Year             -0.0204        -0.0103       -0.0158         -0.0215        -0.0795     -0.00503       -0.00308         -0.0821
                                  (0.0149)       (0.0237)      (0.0210)        (0.0140)       (0.0919)      (0.145)        (0.129)        (0.0864)

      Post Birth                  0.0279         0.0525        0.0417          0.00685         0.143         0.222         0.211          0.00268
                                  (0.0113)       (0.0278)      (0.0154)        (0.0110)       (0.0696)      (0.173)       (0.0947)        (0.0675)

      Birth Year                  0.0338          0.0244       0.0394           0.0110         0.161        0.0638          0.148          0.0108
                                  (0.0112)       (0.0216)      (0.0157)        (0.0109)       (0.0693)      (0.131)       (0.0965)        (0.0674)
      Observations                  22440          4949         12839           22414           22440        4949          12839           22414
     Notes: The dependent variable in the first 4 columns is an indicator for work status over the year, and the IHS function of the days of work over
     the year in the last 4 columns. Columns 1 and 5 include the full sample. Columns 2 and 6 restrict the sample to individuals who appear in every
     wave for 6 waves around the birth. Columns 3 and 7 restrict the sample to the first birth. Columns 4 and 8 include indicators for age as controls.
     Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




41
           Table 5: Bounding Effects of Sex Selection on Mothers' Labor Outcomes

                                                      Work Indicator       IHS Work Days
                                                           (1)                   (2)
                  Son Imputed × Post Birth              -0.0319                -0.178
                                                        (0.0177)               (0.104)

                  Son Imputed × Birth Year                -0.0419                -0.197
                                                          (0.0217)              (0.127)

                  Post Birth                             -0.0801               -0.652
                                                          (0.0172)              (0.100)

                  Birth Year                             -0.0507               -0.459
                                                          (0.0168)             (0.0992)
                  Observations                             19954                 19954
Notes: The indicator for the birth of a son is imputed to bound the effect of sex selection on the estimates. The
regressions include fixed effects for year and household, and a constant term. Standard errors are clustered at
the household level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                Table 6: Effects of Birth on Household Income and Consumption

                              Total        Total       Cigarattes       Alcohol        Milk         Meat
                             Income      Expenses        (yuan)           (kg)         (kg)         (kg)
                               (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)
    Son × Post Birth         -0.0225      -0.0242       -0.321         -0.000932     0.00317       0.0146
                            (0.0271)     (0.0329)        (0.134)        (0.0371)     (0.0831)     (0.0347)

    Son × Birth Year         0.0194       -0.00403      -0.372          -0.00922      -0.0639      0.0446
                            (0.0270)      (0.0365)       (0.139)        (0.0325)     (0.0836)     (0.0391)

    Post Birth               -0.0359       -0.0193       0.00508         -0.0233     0.434         0.0487
                            (0.0233)      (0.0278)       (0.116)        (0.0291)     (0.0736)     (0.0311)

    Birth Year               -0.0267       0.0239        0.204           -0.0252      0.157       0.0589
                            (0.0214)      (0.0282)       (0.112)        (0.0243)     (0.0687)     (0.0311)
    Observations              19779        19683          14604           12344        19835       19954
Notes: The regressions include fixed effects for year and household, and a constant term. The dependent
variables are transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Cigarette expenditures are transformed
into real 2002 yuan. To maintain consistency in the survey question, the regression for cigarettes and alcohol
exclude the waves 2009 and 2010, and the regression for alcohol further excludes 2003. Standard errors are
clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                    42
             Table 7: Effects of Birth on Individual Migration and Earnings Away

                             Days at Home            Earnings Away                  Attrition
                          Mothers      Fathers      Mothers      Fathers     Mothers        Fathers
                             (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
    Son × Post Birth       -0.0359     -0.120        -58.93      1633.6       0.0114       0.000746
                          (0.0540)     (0.0478)     (246.7)      (955.8)     (0.0108)      (0.00869)

    Son × Birth Year        -0.0539     -0.0791      -109.6       785.9      0.00553        0.00645
                           (0.0576)    (0.0542)     (239.0)      (581.7)    (0.00829)      (0.00547)

    Post Birth             0.366       0.272       -1107.7        -208.5     -0.00297       0.0161
                           (0.0445)    (0.0420)      (200.2)     (333.9)    (0.00960)      (0.00751)

    Birth Year             0.289       0.179       -677.4         -6.113    -0.0334       -0.0296
                           (0.0423)    (0.0432)     (193.4)      (301.8)    (0.00692)     (0.00510)
    Observations            19315       21544        19954        22439       17394         19836
Notes: The regressions include fixed effects for year and household, and a constant term. Days at home is
transformed using the IHS function. Earnings Away refer to earnings outside of county of residence and are
transformed into real 2002 yuan. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                             43
                                 Table 8: Effects of a Birth on Mother's and Household Outcomes (CHNS)

                                       Work       Household      Childcare     Leisure      Chores     Breastfeed      Household      Female
                                    Indicator      Smoking         Hours        Hours        Hours     Indicator        Immun.        Decision
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)             (7)           (8)
            Son × Post Birth          -0.0270      -0.109          -2.028      9.982        0.0784       0.0494          -0.0634       0.265
                                     (0.0591)      (0.0537)       (4.002)      (5.390)      (0.147)     (0.0557)        (0.0863)      (0.155)

            Son × Birth Year         -0.0327       -0.250           -0.744     15.73         0.652        0.0338          -0.128        0.233
                                     (0.177)        (0.110)        (10.90)     (8.842)      (0.532)      (0.0755)        (0.160)       (0.253)

            Post Birth               -0.0568        0.0471        32.17         -3.509     0.388         0.533          1.147           -0.135
                                    (0.0562)       (0.0438)       (3.365)      (5.093)     (0.123)       (0.0380)       (0.0787)       (0.119)

            Birth Year               -0.266        0.254          41.30         -6.999     -0.0276       0.577          0.554           -0.253
                                      (0.125)      (0.0802)       (8.028)      (7.579)     (0.232)       (0.0568)       (0.122)        (0.213)
            Observations               1306          1890          1292          1030       1806           2389           1435           432
     Notes: The sample is restricted to rural women who have data both before and after a birth. The regressions include fixed effects for year and
     individual, and a constant term. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
     respectively.




44
Table 9: Effects of a Birth on Others' Work, School Enrollment of Parents, and Household Size

                               Others' Days        Mother         Father      Number of       Household
                                 of Work          In School     In School      Children           Size
                                    (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)
      Son × Post Birth           -0.0522           0.0133        -0.0117       -0.00515         -0.0706
                                 (0.115)          (0.00804)     (0.00706)      (0.0346)        (0.0544)

      Son × Birth Year            -0.0196          0.00378       -0.00989        0.0520          -0.0481
                                  (0.119)         (0.00855)     (0.00820)       (0.0343)        (0.0572)

      Post Birth                  -0.0968        -0.0181         0.00548        0.822           0.671
                                  (0.102)        (0.00678)      (0.00549)       (0.0282)        (0.0447)

      Birth Year                   -0.0445         -0.00986      0.00292         0.0119          0.0296
                                  (0.0971)        (0.00643)     (0.00568)       (0.0255)        (0.0433)
      Observations                  19954           19568         21956          19954           19954
 Notes: The dependent variable is an IHS function of the number of days worked of people in the household
 excluding the mother and father in column 1. It is an indicator for whether the mother and father is currently
 enrolled in school in columns 2 and 3, respectively. The dependent variable is the number of children in column
 4 and total household size in column 5. The regressions include fixed effects for year and household, and a
 constant term. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%,
 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                     Table 10: Effects in a Sample of Mothers Who Have a Son

                                                 Work Indicator       IHS Work Days
                                                      (1)                   (2)
                        Son × Post Birth            -0.0612              -0.466
                                                   (0.0379)               (0.224)

                        Son × Birth Year            -0.0847               -0.609
                                                     (0.0364)              (0.219)

                        Post Birth                    -0.0388               -0.159
                                                     (0.0357)              (0.209)

                        Birth Year                   0.00469               0.0511
                                                     (0.0271)              (0.165)
                        Observations                   4200                 4200
 Notes: The sample is limited to mothers who already have at least one son. The regressions include fixed effects
 for year and household, and a constant term. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *, **, ***
 denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                    45
                              Table 11: Heterogeneity in the Impact of a Birth on Labor Force Participation

                                              Agric          Family       Grandpar         Young          High                       Skewed
             Var:                               Ind           Occ          Present         Mom            Edu         Minority      Sex Ratio
                                                (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)
             Son × PostBirth × Var            0.0631         0.0142        0.0439         -0.0334        0.0374        0.0678         -0.0175
                                             (0.0500)       (0.0536)      (0.0513)       (0.0429)       (0.0511)      (0.0554)       (0.0429)

             Son × BirthYear × Var            0.0480         0.0166         0.0585        -0.0352        0.0561        0.105          0.0243
                                             (0.0493)       (0.0525)       (0.0499)      (0.0471)       (0.0512)      (0.0553)       (0.0471)

             Son × Post Birth                -0.0664         -0.0462      -0.0997        -0.0472        -0.0611      -0.0722         -0.0544
                                             (0.0403)       (0.0455)       (0.0452)      (0.0278)       (0.0321)      (0.0232)       (0.0281)

             Son × Birth Year                 -0.0472        -0.0425      -0.0992         -0.0352      -0.0687       -0.0628        -0.0637
                                             (0.0388)       (0.0435)       (0.0419)      (0.0296)       (0.0325)      (0.0258)       (0.0320)

             Post Birth                      -0.0652        -0.0683         -0.0321     -0.0911        -0.0606       -0.0613        -0.0547
                                             (0.0341)       (0.0379)       (0.0342)      (0.0227)       (0.0281)      (0.0200)       (0.0237)

             Birth Year                     -0.0892        -0.0950          0.0353        -0.0273        -0.0198     -0.0403         -0.0417
                                             (0.0304)       (0.0332)       (0.0332)      (0.0226)       (0.0247)      (0.0195)       (0.0243)

             Post Birth × Var                0.00106        0.00958         -0.0440      0.0593         -0.00723      0.00362         -0.0126
                                             (0.0389)       (0.0413)       (0.0372)      (0.0325)       (0.0395)      (0.0385)       (0.0328)

             Birth Year × Var                0.0629         0.0693        -0.0992         -0.0256        -0.0536       -0.0300       -0.00224
                                             (0.0364)       (0.0387)       (0.0383)      (0.0345)       (0.0377)      (0.0398)       (0.0349)
             Observations                     10336          10386          16012          19818          10594         19328         19954
     Notes: The dependent variable is female labor force participation. Each column is a regression where the column label indicates the variable that
     is interacted with the regressors. The regressions include fixed effects for year and household, and a constant term. Standard errors are clustered
     at the household level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




46
                  Figure A.1: Trends in Rural Labor Force Participation by Gender




Notes: These trends are calculated using data on rural households from the Ministry of Agriculture over a sample of
                                            individuals aged 20 to 40.


                    Figure A.2: Trends in Unemployment by Gender and Location




     Notes: These trends are calculated using data from the CHNS over a sample of individuals aged 20 to 40.


                                                                                                                47
Figure A.3: Effects of the Birth on Mothers' Labor Outcomes with a Permanent Control Group
               (a) Work Indicator - Daughter                       (b) Work Indicator - Son Interaction




             (c) IHS Days of Work - Daughter                      (d) IHS Days of Work - Son Interaction




 Notes: Each row corresponds with one regression. The dependent variable in the first row is an indicator for work
 over the year and the IHS of days of work over the year in the second row. The dots give the coefficient estimates
for years around the birth (j ) in the left column and for the interaction between the years around the birth and the
 birth of a son (j ) in the right column. The line denotes the 95% confidence interval where the standard errors are
  clustered at the household level. The regressions also include a constant term and fixed effects for household and
    year. The regressions include a permanent control group (who doesn't experience either the birth of a son or
                                         daughter). The sample size is 195,699.




                                                                                                                  48
                Figure A.4: Effects of the Birth on Household Cigarette Consumption
                        (a) Daughter                                        (b) Son Interaction




Notes: The dependent variable is the IHS function of household cigarette expenditures. The dots give the coefficient
 estimates for years around the birth (j ) in the left column and for the interaction between the years around the
   birth and the birth of a son (j ) in the right column. The line denotes the 95% confidence interval where the
standard errors are clustered at the household level. The regressions also include a constant term and fixed effects
                                 for household and year. The sample size is 13,125.




          Figure A.5: Impact of Birth on Mothers' Health Outcomes Controlling for Age
           (a) Mothers' Health Status - Daughter                    (b) Health Status - Son Interaction




 Notes: The dependent variable is mother's health status. In row 1, the dots give the coefficient estimates for years
around the birth (j ) in the left column and for the interaction between the years around the birth and the birth of
a son (j ) in the right column. The line denotes the 95% confidence interval where the standard errors are clustered
 at the household level. The regressions also include a constant term and fixed effects for age, household and year.




                                                                                                                  49
                                      Table A.1: Heterogeneity in the Impact of a Birth on Days Worked

                                                  Agric        Family       Grandpar        Young          High                      Skewed
                Var:                               Ind           Occ         Present          Mom          Edu        Minority      Sex Ratio
                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)             (7)
                Son × PostBirth × Var             0.185        -0.0658        0.387          -0.116        0.232       0.273          -0.276
                                                 (0.296)       (0.320)       (0.303)        (0.255)       (0.302)     (0.334)        (0.255)

                Son × BirthYear × Var             0.154        -0.0101        0.391          -0.141        0.297        0.524         0.0874
                                                 (0.291)       (0.316)       (0.295)        (0.278)       (0.305)      (0.327)        (0.280)

                Son × Post Birth                  -0.264        -0.140       -0.647         -0.275        -0.316      -0.367           -0.193
                                                 (0.243)       (0.275)        (0.267)       (0.167)       (0.188)      (0.138)        (0.162)

                Son × Birth Year                  -0.184        -0.158       -0.573          -0.192       -0.337       -0.311          -0.299
                                                 (0.236)       (0.266)        (0.247)       (0.177)       (0.190)       (0.153)       (0.186)

                Post Birth                      -0.584        -0.596         -0.350        -0.716       -0.557        -0.574         -0.561
                                                 (0.204)       (0.227)       (0.199)        (0.135)      (0.163)       (0.117)        (0.135)

                Birth Year                      -0.634        -0.658         0.0343         -0.260       -0.303       -0.418         -0.437
                                                 (0.183)       (0.202)       (0.191)        (0.134)       (0.144)      (0.115)        (0.139)

                Post Birth × Var                 0.0507        0.0995         -0.312         0.306        0.0146        0.130        0.00667
                                                 (0.226)       (0.244)       (0.217)        (0.192)       (0.230)      (0.235)       (0.194)

                Birth Year × Var                  0.307         0.358       -0.575           -0.274        -0.238      -0.0252        0.0430
                                                 (0.213)       (0.231)       (0.222)        (0.203)       (0.223)      (0.236)        (0.207)
                Observations                      10336         10386         16012          19818         10594        19328          19954
     Notes: The dependent variable is the IHS function of the women's days worked in the past year. Each column is a regression. The regressions
     include fixed effects for year and household, and a constant term. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote significance
     at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




50
