                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE IMPACT OF MASS SHOOTINGS ON GUN POLICY

                                         Michael Luca
                                       Deepak Malhotra
                                      Christopher Poliquin

                                      Working Paper 26187
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26187


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




Funding comes exclusively from our research budgets at Harvard Business School. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Michael Luca, Deepak Malhotra, and Christopher Poliquin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Mass Shootings on Gun Policy
Michael Luca, Deepak Malhotra, and Christopher Poliquin
NBER Working Paper No. 26187
August 2019
JEL No. D0,I1,K0

                                           ABSTRACT

There have been dozens of high-profile mass shootings in recent decades. This paper presents
three main findings about the impact of mass shootings on gun policy. First, mass shootings
evoke large policy responses. A single mass shooting leads to a 15% increase in the number of
firearm bills introduced within a state in the year after a mass shooting. This effect increases with
the extent of media coverage. Second, mass shootings account for a small portion of all gun
deaths, but have an outsized influence relative to other homicides. Third, when looking at bills
that were actually enacted into law, the impact of mass shootings depends on the party in power.
The annual number of laws that loosen gun restrictions doubles in the year following a mass
shooting in states with Republican-controlled legislatures. We find no significant effect of mass
shootings on laws enacted when there is a Democrat-controlled legislature, nor do we find a
significant effect of mass shootings on the enactment of laws that tighten gun restrictions.

Michael Luca                                      Christopher Poliquin
Harvard Business School                           UCLA
Soldiers Field                                    Anderson School of Management
Boston, MA 02163                                  chris.poliquin@anderson.ucla.edu
and NBER
mluca@hbs.edu

Deepak Malhotra
Harvard Business School
dmalhotra@hbs.edu
1. Introduction

       Recent decades have witnessed a series of high-profile mass shootings throughout the

United States. While most homicides receive little attention from the public, mass shooting

incidents are extremely salient. Nonetheless, a common and frequently articulated view is that

despite extensive discussion about mass shootings, they have little influence on policymaking.

       Should we expect policymakers to propose new legislation in the wake of a mass shooting?

Given that the vast majority of gun deaths do not result from mass shootings, it would be difficult

to reconcile large responses to mass shootings with basic models of optimal policy aimed

exclusively at reducing gun violence. However, mass shootings may have another effect--bringing

attention to the issue of gun violence. Mass shootings could potentially lead to policy changes by

focusing attention on gun violence, even if they do not provide new information regarding effective

policy or change politicians' preferences.

       Political scientists have noted that issues tend to rise and fall in importance within a policy

agenda, creating periods in which specific policies shift very rapidly and other periods in which

they do not change at all (Baumgartner and Jones 1993, Kingdon 1984). In the context of gun

violence, events like the Columbine High School shooting in Colorado have led to calls for new

restrictions on guns as well as vehement responses from groups that oppose such changes and

favor the loosening of gun laws (Goss 2006; Spitzer 2012). More generally, mass shootings may

create "policy windows" during which legislatures become receptive to change--potentially due

to shifts in the attention of the media and constituents. Nonetheless, the extent to which mass

shootings affect policy and the nature of the resulting changes are empirical questions.




                                                  2
       In this paper, we explore the impact of mass shootings on gun policy, constructing a dataset

of all U.S. gun legislation and mass shootings over a period of twenty-five years (1989­2014)--

combining data from a variety of media and government sources. We begin by looking at the extent

of deaths resulting from mass shootings relative to other gun deaths. Overall, there are more than

30,000 gun related fatalities in the United States per year. Approximately 56% of these are suicides

and 40% are homicides. The remaining 4% are accidents or incidents of undetermined intent. Mass

shootings accounted for about 0.13% of all gun deaths and 0.34% of gun murders between 1989

and 2014.

       Because mass shootings are salient and plausibly random occurrences, we are able to

implement a difference-in-differences strategy around the timing of mass shootings to estimate

their causal impact on gun regulation. Specifically, we compare gun laws before and after mass

shootings, in states where mass shootings occur relative to all other states.

       We then present three main findings about the impact of mass shootings on policy. First,

mass shootings evoke large policy responses. A single mass shooting leads to an approximately

15% increase in the number of firearm bills introduced within a state in the year after a mass

shooting. This effect is largest after shootings with the most fatalities and is greatest in the

Republican-controlled legislatures.

       Second, although mass shootings account for a small portion of all gun deaths, they have

an outsized influence relative to other homicides. Our estimates suggest that the per-death impact

of mass shootings on bills introduced is much larger than the impact of gun homicides in non-mass

shooting incidents.

       Third, when looking at enacted laws, the impact of mass shootings depends on the party in

power. A mass shooting roughly doubles the number of laws enacted in a year that loosen gun




                                                  3
restrictions in states with Republican-controlled legislatures. We find no significant effect of mass

shootings on laws enacted when there is a Democrat-controlled legislature. We also find no

significant effect of mass shootings on the number of enacted laws that tighten gun restrictions.

       These findings contribute to the political economy literatures on public attention,

accountability, policymaking, and law. Empirical research on policymaking emphasizes that

factors beyond social welfare--such as ideology, opportunism, and fiscal considerations--

influence policy (Makowsky and Stratmann 2009; Bardhan and Mookherjee 2010). As we show,

mass shootings cause intense legislative activity despite accounting for less than 1% of firearm

deaths, suggesting factors beyond optimal deterrence affect debates concerning gun policy.

       Additionally, our results contribute to the literature on issue selection and salience, which

examines when and why politicians emphasize or downplay elements of their policy platform

(Riker 1996; Petrocik 1996; Dragu and Fan 2016). Our finding that Republican-controlled states

loosen restrictions on firearms following mass shootings is consistent with the literature's

prediction that politicians in the majority tend to focus policymaking on issues they "own"--i.e.

those which they have a reputation for successfully handling in the interests of their constituents.

Using this definition, and at least during our sample period, Republicans do appear to have

"owned" the gun issue (Goss 2006).

       Finally, our results relate to the literature on media and public attention (Eisensee and

Strömberg 2007; Durante and Zhuravskaya 2018). We find that mass shootings receive

considerable media attention and that this attention is correlated with the number of gun bills

introduced following mass shootings, suggesting that increased attention is a plausible mechanism

for the higher levels of legislative activity we observe following mass shootings. This sheds light




                                                 4
on the role of attention and salience in policymaking, and on the interaction between issue salience

and political preferences in shaping the degree and direction of enacted policies.



2. Background and Data

        As described above, of the roughly 30,000 annual gun deaths in the United States, fewer

than 100 occur in mass shootings. For the purpose of this paper, we define a "mass shooting" as

an incident in which 4 or more people, other than the perpetrator(s), are unlawfully killed with a

firearm in a single, continuous incident that is not related to gangs, drugs, or other criminal activity.

This definition closely matches the one used by Krouse and Richardson (2015) and the FBI's

definition of "mass murder" as 4 or more murders "occurring during the same incident, with no

distinctive time period between the murders... typically involv[ing] a single location" (Morton

and Hilts 2008). We further restrict our analysis to cases where at least three of the fatalities were

individuals unrelated to, and not romantically involved with, the shooter(s). We include spree

murders--homicides at multiple locations without a significant pause between incidents --if they

result in four or more deaths.

        We assemble a list of mass shootings since 1989 from a variety of government and media

sources because there is no single, comprehensive government database of mass murders. We first

extract all gun-related mass murders (four or more dead) that are not felony related from the FBI

supplementary homicide reports (SHR). We then verify each incident in the SHR using media

accounts; the SHR may contain errors in which separate homicides in a month are reported as a

single incident, which is why it is necessary to verify the incidents with media coverage.

Participation in the SHR program is voluntary and many law enforcement agencies do not report

detailed data to the FBI. We therefore supplement the FBI data with mass shootings gathered from



                                                   5
media accounts or compiled by other researchers and journalists interested in the topic.

Specifically, we combine the SHR data with data on mass shootings collected by the Mass

Shootings in America (MSA) project at Stanford University (Stanford Geospatial Center and

Stanford Libraries 2015) and a list created by USA Today (2013). For each shooting, we determine

the event location as well as the number of victim fatalities and injuries. We also classify shootings

based on the relationship (if any) between the alleged shooter(s) and victims. Previous work on

mass shootings (Duwe 2007; Krouse and Richardson 2015) distinguishes between public mass

shootings that occur in places frequented by the public, felony-related murders, and familicide.

We categorize shootings by whether they are public events or primarily related to domestic

conflicts, and we focus on incidents in which at least three people not related or romantically

involved with the shooter died. This restriction filters out family-killings in residences as well as

family-related murders in public places.1

       Figure 1 shows the number of incidents and fatalities in mass shootings by year. The data

show a slight upward trend in the number of incidents and fatalities over time, but both incidents

and fatalities vary substantially from year to year. Figure 2 shows a map of the locations of mass

shootings in the United States between 1989 and 2014.


2.2. Gun Legislation
       State governments are the primary regulators of firearms. Federal laws establish a

minimum level of gun control, which is augmented to varying degrees by state and local policies.

The federal government has put some restrictions on firearm commerce, the possession of guns by

potentially dangerous individuals, and ownership of certain types of firearms and ammunition.




1A2006shootingatachurchinLouisianaisoneexample.Amankilledhiswifeandin-lawswhileabducting

herandtheirchildrenfromachurch.Onlythewife'sfamilywaspresentatthechurchduringtheshooting.


                                                  6
States decide a variety of gun policies ranging from who can purchase and possess a gun to what

types of guns are allowed in different situations to how guns should be stored and what types of

training should be undertaken by gun owners. Local ordinances can also restrict firearm possession

and use, but state statutes enacted in the past few decades have limited the importance of local

government in this arena by pre-empting local regulations.

        We create a comprehensive dataset of gun legislation in all fifty states using the bill

tracking reports service from LexisNexis, which includes all bills introduced in state legislatures

since at least 1990 with a synopsis and timeline of each bill's progress. This allows us to determine

whether bills pass the legislature and become law. We identify firearm bills by searching for the

firearm-related terms "firearm", "handgun", "pistol", "revolver", "rifle", "shotgun", "long-gun",

and "assault weapon." We identify 20,409 firearm bills and 3,199 laws between 1990 and 2014.

In other words, there were 20,409 proposals made and 3,199 laws passed in the twenty-five-year

sample period across all fifty states. This includes laws that loosen or tighten gun restrictions, and

many that do neither or both. We exclude resolutions, executive orders, and ballot initiatives from

the analysis.2 Figure 3 shows the total number of bills introduced and laws enacted by year.

        To explore whether gun control is tightened or loosened after mass shootings, we hired

eight people to manually code the summary of bills that became law. Coders were given

instructions explaining how to code legislation, but were otherwise blind to the topic and design

of the study. We presented bill summaries from LexisNexis to coders in randomly chosen groups




2 Our data source--Lexis Advance--includes resolutions, but it's unclear whether it includes all executive

ordersorballotinitiatives.Includingthosewedohavealongwithallresolutionsdoesnotmeaningfullychange
theresults--thecorrelationbetweenourmeasureoflegislationandameasureincludingtheseotheractionsis
0.99.Inaddition,legislatorsinsomestatesfirstsubmitideasforbillsintheformofa"draftrequest"orsimilar
document.Weexcludethesefromouranalysesbecausetheyresultindoublecountingsomelegislation.We
insteadfocusonlyonactualbills.


                                                    7
of 50. Two people coded each summary, and no coder saw the same summary multiple times. For

each summary, coders decided whether the bill was tightening (stricter gun control), loosening

(weaker gun control), uncertain (insufficient information), both tightening and loosening, or

neither tightening nor loosening (neutral). There were therefore five possible labels for bills:

tighten, loosen, both, neutral, or uncertain. Appendix A shows example bill summaries and their

expected labels.

       To cross-validate (and incentivize) the bill coding, we coded a small fraction of bills

ourselves as a baseline comparison point. For this process, we blinded ourselves from any

information about when or where the bill was proposed. We then used our scores to assess the

quality of coders. Specifically, each group of 50 bills given to a coder contained five bills that we

had also coded (they did not know which bills were and weren't coded by us, and did not have

access to any of our assessments of whether a bill was looser or tighter). Coders were paid up to a

50% bonus based on the extent to which their coding matched ours (which we simply told them

was a "gold standard" of known codes).

       Across all five categories, the two coders for each bill agreed with each other 52% of the

time (the agreement rate would be 20% by chance) and agreed with the gold standard 71% of the

time. Coders performed worst on the neutral category, and best on the tighten-only and loosen-

only categories; when a bill tightens gun control (according to the gold standard), the two coders

agree on tightening 67% of the time, and when a bill loosens gun control, they agree on loosening

60% of the time. The fact coders were not able to agree on a category for 48% of laws reduces the

sample available for analysis and is a limitation of our study. In principle, laws might be unclear

for coders either because the law is relatively minor and intended to be window dressing, or

because it was complicated for the coders to read (leading to coder errors or ambiguity). To




                                                 8
explore, we compared 100 random laws that coders disagreed about to 100 they agreed on. We

then classified each as a minor (e.g. convening a committee to study an issue) or major (e.g.

allowing guns in schools) policy change. We find a similar number of minor laws in both samples,

suggesting that coder disagreement likely results from coder inattention rather than laws being

especially likely to be minor policy changes. We do not see differences in the rate of disagreement

among coders about laws enacted in the wake of a mass shooting, relative to laws enacted at other

times. Appendix A includes a breakdown of the coding for all 3,199 laws, further discussion of

coder agreement, and examples of bills that coders found difficult.

       Most importantly for the purposes of our analysis, however, is that when the two coders of

a bill agree with each other on tightening, they also agree with our coding 93% of the time; when

the two coders agree on loosening, they are consistent with our scores 91% of the time. When

analyzing the direction of policy change, we leverage this high degree of reliability by restricting

our analysis to laws that coders agreed were designed to tighten or loosen gun control.3 Because

states can pass either, none, or both types of laws in a year, our dependent variable is the count of

laws in each direction.

       Figure 4 shows mean bills introduced, laws enacted, and tightening and loosening laws by

political control of the state legislature. Republicans enact more laws loosening gun control, and

fewer laws tightening gun control, than do Democrats. Republican, Democratic, and split

legislatures enact a similar number of total gun laws. The coders who classified the legislation

were only given summaries of each bill; they were not provided with the state, year, or any

information on political affiliation.



3Thisis37%ofallenactedlawsinourdata.Asmentioned,nearlyhalfoflawscannotbecategorizedbecause

codersdisagreedontheclassification.Another13%arenotusedbecausecodersagreedtheywereneutralor
uncertain.


                                                 9
2.3. Control Variables
       Our main specification controls for state and year fixed effects, as well as an indicator for

whether the legislature is in a regular session in the given year, and whether it is the first year of a

legislative biennium (since bills are more likely to be enacted then). Specifically, we create two

dummy variables. First, we create a dummy for legislatures that held a regular session in a given

year because not all legislatures meet annually. Legislatures that are not in regular session would

have to rely on special sessions, which can be difficult to call, in order to consider new gun

legislation (though some do this). Second, we control for the first year of each legislative biennium

(a two-year period of law making), which varies by whether states hold elections in odd or even

years. Typically, more bills are introduced during the first year of the biennium, which leads to

alternating years of high and low bill introductions (Figure 3). Building on this main specification,

we then add time varying controls as a robustness check. These include economic and demographic

factors such as unemployment, divorce rates, and rates of military service. We then layer on

controls for the political party in power, since the direction of proposed changes often vary between

Democrats (who generally favor more restrictive gun laws) and Republicans (who generally favor

less restrictive gun laws). Table 1 contains summary statistics for all variables used in the analyses.



3. The Impact of Mass Shootings on Gun Policy

3.1 Identification Strategy
       We implement a difference-in-differences strategy that compares gun laws before and after

mass shootings, in states where mass shootings occur relative to all other states. Our dependent

variables are counts of bills or enacted laws at the state-year level. We study the effect of mass

shootings using Poisson regressions with conditional mean:



                                                  10
          E"$,& '$ , & , $,&./ , $,& 1 = exp6$ + & + $  + $,&./ +  < $,& =

where $,& is a count of bills introduced or laws enacted in state  and year ; $ and & are state

and year fixed effects; the $  are state-specific time trends; $,&./ is either an indicator for

states with a mass shooting or the fatality count in mass shootings, and $,& is a vector of time-

varying political, economic, and demographic factors. We estimate the parameters via maximum

likelihood by conditioning on the sum of $,& within states and including year indicators.4

       Our identification allows us to measure the impact of a mass shooting within that state,

controlling for other changes that are happening at the national level. Because this identification

strategy does not identify national responses to mass shootings (which would be absorbed by our

year effect), our estimates of changes in gun policy may underestimate the total impact of a mass

shooting. We can and do account for potential spillovers into neighboring states, but do not see

significant spillover effects; these results are presented in Appendix B.


3.2 The Effect of Mass Shootings on Gun Bill Introductions
       Table 2 shows that a mass shooting leads to a 15% increase in firearm bills introduced

(column 4). For the average state, this amounts to an additional 2.4 firearm bills introduced in the

year following a mass shooting. Mass shootings with more deaths lead to larger effects. On

average, each additional death in a mass shooting leads to a 2.3% increase in the number of gun

bills introduced (column 8). These results hold for both Republican-controlled and Democrat-

controlled legislatures, for alternative victim thresholds used to define mass shootings, models that



4Itispossiblethatthenumberofbillsintroducedinagivenyearwithinastatewoulddependonthenumber

introducedinrecentyearsinwaysthatwedonotcapturewiththestatefixedeffectsortimetrends.Toallow
forthispossibility,wealsoestimatedanexponentialfeedbackmodelinwhichpastlegislativeactivitycanaffect
currentactivity.Ourresultssuggestpastlegislationdoesnotsubstantivelyaffectcurrentlegislation;statefixed
effectsadequatelycapturetimeseriespersistenceinlegislationandthecoefficientestimatefortheimpactof
massshootingsissimilarintheexponentialfeedbackmodel.


                                                  11
examine the year of the shooting in addition to the previous year, and models that use the log of

fatalities instead of the count.5


3.3 Comparing Mass Shootings and Non-Mass Shootings
        Table 3 shows that fatalities resulting from mass shootings lead to much larger increases

in gun bill introductions than gun homicides in non-mass shooting incidents. We estimate the

models in this table using mass shooting fatalities and ordinary gun homicides per 100,000 people

to facilitate comparison between the two types of murder. Our estimates are imprecise, but suggest

it would take approximately 125 people dying in individual gun homicide incidents to have as

much impact on bills introduced as each person who dies in a mass shooting. There are, however,

a number of caveats to this estimate. First, ordinary gun homicides are less random than mass

shootings and therefore not exogenous in the model. Second, the victims of mass shootings and

ordinary gun homicides have different attributes; the impact of mass shootings is not easily

decomposed into the effect of victim count, media salience, and attributes of the victims. Any

differences in response between ordinary and mass shootings could be driven in part by attributes

of the victims. Our estimates, however, are still suggestive evidence that mass shootings tend to

have a greater impact on legislative activity than changes in the ordinary gun homicide rate.


3.4 The Role of Political Party on Laws Enacted
        As mentioned previously, the two major political parties in the United States differ

dramatically in their stances on how restrictive gun policy should be, with the Republican Party

favoring fewer gun restrictions.6 To look at the impact of political parties on gun policy, we restrict



5 Results by political affiliation are presented in Table 4 and discussed in section 3.4 below. Results using

alternativevictimthresholdsforthedefinitionofmassshooting(e.g.5+,7+,10+deaths)andalternativemodels
areavailablefromtheauthorsuponrequest.
6See,forexample,https://www.gop.com/platform/andhttps://www.democrats.org/party-platform.




                                                     12
our analysis to enacted laws, all of which were coded for whether they loosened or tightened gun

restrictions (see data description for more details).

       Tables 4 and 5 show the effect of mass shootings interacted with Democrat and Republican

control of state legislatures. The results show that Democrats and Republicans respond differently

to mass shootings. Table 4 shows that Republicans introduce 48% more bills and Democrats

introduce 11% more bills following mass shootings than in other years, although the coefficient

for Democrats is not statistically significant.7 The results also indicate that Republican legislatures

enact 32% more laws the year after a mass shooting than in other years, a statistically significant

increase. Democratic legislatures enact 7% more laws the year after a mass shooting, but this

estimate is imprecise and not statistically significant.8

       When there is a Republican-controlled legislature, mass shootings lead to more firearm

laws that loosen gun control (Table 5). Our point estimates indicate that a mass shooting in the

previous year increases the number of enacted laws that loosen gun restrictions by 115% in states

with Republican-controlled legislatures. When there is a Democrat-controlled legislature, mass

shootings lead to a statistically insignificant reduction in laws that loosen gun control. This result

is similar across models using the count of fatalities instead of a shooting indicator, across

alternative victim thresholds, with or without year fixed effects, with or without control variables,

and when we include only a limited set of controls. 9 We find no significant effects of mass

shootings on laws that tighten gun restrictions, but the estimates are imprecise.




7ThedifferencebetweenRepublicansandDemocratsisstatisticallysignificantatthe0.05level.
8ThedifferencebetweenRepublicansandDemocratsintermsofenactedlawsisnotstatisticallysignificant.

Withoutinteractingmassshootingwithpoliticalparty,thereisa9%increaseingunlawsenacted(i.e.billsthat
becomelaw)afteramassshootingrelativetootheryears,butthisestimateisimprecise(AppendixC).
9Availablefromauthorsuponrequest.Thecoefficientstendtobelargerinmagnitudeforshootingsresulting

inmoredeaths(e.g.adummyforshootingsthatcauses6­9deathshasalargercoefficientthanadummyfor
shootingscausing4­5deaths).Theeffectfortighteninglawsisstatisticallysignificantandpositive--forboth


                                                  13
       The finding that Republicans--who typically favor fewer restrictions on gun owners--are

more active in introducing and passing new legislation following mass shootings is consistent with

hypotheses in the literature on how issue salience affects policy decisions (Riker 1996; Petrocik

1996; Dragu and Fan 2016). These models of issue selection suggest that Republican-controlled

legislatures might respond to increased attention to gun policy by introducing new legislation

because Republican voters: (a) tend to be in favor of expanding gun rights and access to guns

(Parker et al. 2017), (b) often argue that such actions reduce gun crime (Parker et al. 2017), and

(c) are more likely than Democratic voters (during our sample period) to mobilize for political

action on this issue (Goss 2006).10 Research suggests that supporters of gun rights are more likely

to advocate for their positions by writing letters or donating money (Schuman and Presser 1981)

and are better-organized than citizens favoring gun control; membership in pro-gun-control

organizations, for example, is less than 10% of the National Rifle Association's membership (Goss

2006).11

       Anecdotally, there are several examples of Republican lawmakers proposing looser gun

laws in response to mass shootings. In the year after the mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman

Douglas High School, Florida passed legislation allowing teachers and volunteers to carry guns in

schools. Republican Rep. Chuck Brannan explained the rationale: "It allows the good guys to stop

the bad. The bad guys will never know when the good guys are there to shoot back."12 Similarly,

Texas expanded its school marshal program, which trains teachers to carry weapons, the year after




DemocratsandRepublicans--onlyforshootingscausing10+deaths.Thisresult,however,isidentifiedfrom
only11state-yearobservationsduetotherarityofmassshootingsthatkill10ormorepeople.
10 Republicans appear more likely than Democrats to enact new gun legislation in the absence of a mass

shooting(seeTable4, = 0.08).
11Goss(2006)furtheranalyzesthereasonswhygunrightsorganizationshavebeenbetterorganizedandmore

successfulthanguncontroladvocates.
12Anderson,Curt."Floridalawmakerspassbillallowingmorearmedteachers."APNews.1May2019.




                                                 14
a shooting at Santa Fe High School. Republican Rep. Tony Tinderholt suggested that "what stops

people with guns is other people with guns."13

       Overall, the observed effects of mass shootings in Republican-controlled states on bill

introductions, laws enacted, and loosening laws suggest that there are relevant changes to gun

policy following mass shootings. However, it is possible that mass shootings also lead to an uptick

in minor proposals as well; legislators may want to signal that they are making changes even if the

new laws have only unsubstantial effects on policy in practice. To further examine this possibility,

we look at the impact of mass shootings on laws our coders agreed where neutral since these tend

to be more minor proposals (e.g. changing the official responsible for storing certain records). As

seen in Appendix D, we do not see statistically significant changes in the number of neutral law

changes, although the point estimate is positive.


3.5 Media Coverage and Mass Shootings
       To explore the potential role of media in increasing the salience of mass shootings, we

assemble a dataset of television news coverage related to guns. We measure the seconds of gun-

related news coverage on the national, evening news programs of the three major television

networks--NBC, ABC and CBS--using data from the Vanderbilt Television News Archive

(VTNA).14 This source has been used in prior research to measure media attention to natural

disasters (Eisensee and Strömberg 2007) and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (Durante and

Zhuravskaya 2018). We exclude cable news networks because data on their news coverage is not

available for our sample period. To calculate total gun-related news coverage, we take all news

segments that mention gun-related words in either the segment title or summary provided by




13Vertuno,Jim."Texasseeksmorearmedschoolpersonnelaftermassshooting."APNews.7May2019.
14TheVanderbiltTelevisionNewsArchiveisaccessibleonlineathttps://tvnews.vanderbilt.edu.




                                                 15
VTNA and exclude segments that include the names of foreign countries. 15 We then sum the

duration of these news stories by day to create a measure of total gun-related news coverage.

       To capture variation in news coverage across shootings, we aggregate news coverage in

the ten days following each mass shooting (including the day of the shooting). The five most

covered mass shootings between 1989 and 2014 are the shootings at Sandy Hook Elementary

School, a Gabrielle Giffords constituent meeting, Virginia Tech, an Aurora movie theater, and

Columbine High School.

       Mass shootings increase gun-related media coverage, and shootings that kill more people

result in more coverage. Figure 5 shows total seconds of evening news coverage devoted to gun-

related stories around the time of mass shootings. Mass shootings resulting in 10 or more fatalities

receive substantially more coverage than shootings resulting 6­9 fatalities, which in turn receive

more coverage than shootings with 4­5 fatalities. Appendix E provides further support for this

relationship in the form of regression results.

       To examine whether the amount of gun-related news coverage following a mass shooting

affects policy, we add the measure of media coverage to our model by totaling the amount of gun-

related news coverage following each shooting within a state during the previous year. The results

in Table 6 show that the coefficient on news coverage is positive and statistically significant,

indicating that more media attention is associated with a greater policy response. One hour of gun-

related news coverage following a mass shooting is associated with a 13 percent increase in the

number of gun-related bills introduced in state legislatures (column 4). This suggests that increased

salience of gun policy after mass shootings is a plausible mechanism for the relationship between

shootings and gun legislation. Media coverage, however, is strongly related to the number of



15Thisfilterremovesnewsstoriesaboutforeignwars.




                                                  16
fatalities (see Figure 5), making it difficult to distinguish the impact of media coverage from other

attributes of the shooting event.

       Unlike other studies of the media's effect on public policy (Eisensee and Strömberg 2007;

Durante and Zhuravskaya 2018), our ability to detect policy responses to gun-related news

coverage is limited by the small number of events and by the delay between when a mass shooting

occurs and when legislatures can act, which is usually not until the next legislative session. The

natural disasters studied by Eisensee and Strömberg (2007) and military attacks studied by Durante

and Zhuravskaya (2018) number in the thousands, whereas we observe 169 mass shootings.

Furthermore, these authors focus on executive actions--whether to provide disaster relief

(Eisensee and Strömberg 2007) or launch a military attack (Durante and Zhuravskaya 2018)--that

can be taken within hours or days of an event and accompanying news story. Legislative action on

the other hand must wait until a legislature is in session and rules allow for the introduction of new

bills. Our results overall, however, show that attention shifts to gun violence following mass

shootings, and shootings that kill more people receive more media attention. These shifts in

attention are a plausible mechanism behind increased legislative activity related to guns in the year

following mass shootings


3.6 Robustness Checks
       In this section, we present four sets of robustness checks. First, we collapse our data into

two-year intervals (e.g. by legislative biennium) to ensure the saw-edge pattern in bill introductions

(see Figure 3) does not drive our results. Second, we provide support for the exogeneity of mass

shootings. Third, we perform a falsification exercise in which we use randomly generated placebo

shootings instead of actual shootings; we show there are no effects using the placebo shootings,

providing support for our identification strategy. Fourth, we individually drop each state from the



                                                 17
sample and re-estimate the models to ensure our effect is not driven by a single state or shooting

event.


3.6.1 Analysis by Legislative Biennium

         Figure 3 shows that bill introductions vary substantially between odd- and even-numbered

years. We believe this pattern is driven by most states starting their two-year legislative biennium

in odd-numbered years, following elections in November of even-numbered years. Many states

allow legislators to "carryover" bills that do not pass in the first year of the biennium for

consideration in the second year. This means the agenda in the second year of each biennium

includes both newly introduced bills and bills introduced the previous year that have been carried

over.16 Our models control for this pattern by including both year fixed effects and an indicator for

the first year of each biennium. To ensure this pattern does not drive our results, however, we

estimate models that collapse the data to two-year intervals and regress the total number of bills

introduced on the mean of mass shootings (e.g. a variable equal to one if both years of the biennium

follow a mass shooting and equal to 0.5 if only one year of the biennium follows a mass shooting).

The results are shown in columns 3 and 7 in Table 2, and column 3 in Tables 3 and 6. The

coefficient estimates are less precise, but remain statistically significant and suggest similar effect

sizes. The estimate in column 3 of Table 2, for example, suggests mass shootings lead to the

introduction of 3.5 more bills for an average state.


3.6.2 Determinants of Mass Shootings

         Our ability to identify the causal impact of mass shootings on policy rests on the

assumption that they are plausibly exogenous to other factors that would drive gun control in a



16Ouranalysescounteachbillonce,includingitonlyintheyearitwasintroduced.Wecountenactedlawsin

theyearofenactment.


                                                  18
given year. Given the erratic nature of mass shootings, this is a plausible assumption. Nonetheless,

one might be concerned that both mass shootings and gun policy are being driven by a third

variable. To provide support for our assumption and interpretation, we regress an indicator for

whether a mass shooting occurs on economic, demographic, and policy variables.

       Consistent with the assumption that mass shootings are exogenous with respect to potential

confounds, the results in Appendix F show that, out of 32 variables we consider, only

unemployment is significantly associated with a higher probability of mass shootings. Because

higher unemployment is also associated with a reduction in gun bill introductions (Table 2), the

potential bias of this would work in the opposite direction of our finding--making it unlikely that

this is driving our results. To further support our interpretation, we control for unemployment in

all models. Importantly, bills introduced, laws enacted, and major gun policies do not predict future

mass shootings (Appendix F).


3.6.3 Placebo Tests

       We perform a falsification exercise based on the insights of Bertrand, Duflo, and

Mullainathan (2004) and Donald and Lang (2007). Specifically, we randomly assign placebo mass

shootings to state-years in which no actual shooting occurred with probability equal to each state's

frequency of shootings, and randomly draw a fatality count from the empirical distribution of

fatalities. Appendix G shows percentiles of the test statistic based on 1,000 repetitions of this

procedure and our actual test statistics from Tables 2 and 5. The results suggest our tests do not

over-reject the null hypothesis that mass shootings have no effect on gun policy.


3.6.4 Excluding Individual States

       To ensure our results are not driven by a single state or shooting, we separately remove

each state from the sample and re-estimate the models. Appendix H presents graphs of the resulting



                                                 19
50 coefficients for the effect of mass shootings on bills and laws, and coefficients for the

Republican and Democrat interaction terms in our analysis of laws that tightened or loosened gun

policy. The results show that dropping individual states has little effect on our estimates.



4. Discussion

       Mass shootings account for a small fraction of gun deaths in the United States, but have a

significant impact on gun policy. More gun laws are proposed in the year following a mass

shooting. Furthermore, mass shootings seem to have much larger effects on policy, per fatality,

than do ordinary gun homicides. These results are broadly consistent with qualitative research that

has hypothesized the possibility of mass shootings precipitating change. For example, Godwin and

Schroedel (1998) argue that the Stockton schoolyard massacre in 1989 led to the enactment of

California's assault weapons ban. We find large sample empirical evidence that sporadic events

such as mass shootings can lead to major policy changes.

       We also find that media coverage related to guns increases following mass shootings and

that Democrat-controlled and Republican-controlled legislatures differ significantly when it comes

to enacting gun laws. Republicans are more likely to loosen gun laws in the year after a mass

shooting than in other years. The effect for Democrats, which tends toward a reduction in the

loosening of gun restrictions after a mass shooting, is statistically insignificant. This result aligns

with the prediction from the political economy literature on issue selection, that political parties

emphasize issues that they have a reputation for successfully handling in the eyes of their

constituents (Riker 1996; Petrocik 1996; Dragu and Fan 2016).

       Our findings raise a number of additional questions, and suggest several directions for

future research. First, future research might directly explore the preferences of politicians.



                                                  20
Republican legislatures could loosen gun restrictions because Republican politicians themselves

prefer looser restrictions (as would be the case in a citizen-candidate model) or due to pressure

from constituents or interest groups. Consistent with this latter possibility, and our findings, survey

evidence suggests that those opposed to increased gun control are more likely than those in favor

of additional restrictions to take actions like writing a letter or donating money to support their

side (Schuman and Presser 1981). If constituent preferences are driving results, we might expect

increased loosening of gun policies in areas with higher rates of gun ownership. To provide

exploratory evidence, Appendix I shows the results from adding a proxy for gun ownership to the

models. Following Cook and Ludwig (2006), we calculate the percentage of suicides that are

firearm related as a proxy for gun ownership and interact this variable with the mass shooting

indicator. The coefficient on this variable is not significant either in isolation or when added to the

specification with all political interactions. This suggests that changes in support for guns (as

proxied by gun ownership) is not the main driver of the policy changes.

       Second, our estimates focus on the impact on policy within the state in which each shooting

took place. Some mass shootings get national media attention and potentially affect policy

nationwide, a result that would not be identified by our fixed effects model. One direction for

future research is to develop strategies to identify national responses. With respect to our findings,

this suggests that the total impact of mass shootings on gun policy may be even larger than our

estimates.

       Third, there is a large literature on the impact of gun policies on crime (Duggan 2001;

Ludwig and Cook 2000; Ludwig and Cook 2003; Abrams 2012; Luca, Malhotra, and Poliquin

2017). While some gun policies have been extensively researched, many have been difficult to

study, which complicates analysis of which policies would be most effective. The relationship we




                                                  21
find between mass shootings and gun policy raises the possibility of using mass shootings as an

instrumental variable to further study the impact of gun laws on gun deaths. Unfortunately, in our

sample, mass shootings are not a sufficiently strong instrument to estimate the effects of gun policy

on gun deaths, due to their relative infrequency. (Appendix J presents results of this analysis.) This

leaves open the possibility of using salient and plausibly random events to instrument for policy

changes in future research.

       Overall, our results show that even random and infrequent events that account for a

relatively small portion of total societal harm (as measured by fatalities in the current study) might

nonetheless be crucial levers for policy consideration and change. This does not imply that

politicians and policy makers are over-reacting; it may be that on issues where there is usually

political deadlock, salient events create opportunities for change that has been sought all along.

Whether these changes reflect appropriate responses to the problem remains an open question.




                                                 22
References

Abrams, David S. 2012. "Estimating the Deterrent Effect of Incarceration Using Sentencing
    Enhancements." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4): 32-56.

Andrews, Donald W. K., Marcelo J. Moreira, and James H. Stock. 2006. "Optimal Two-Sided
    Invariant Similar Tests for Instrumental Variables Regression." Econometrica 74 (3): 715-52.

Bardhan, Pranab, and Dilip Mookherjee. 2010. "Determinants of Redistributive Politics: An
    Empirical Analysis of Land Reforms in West Bengal, India." American Economic Review 100
    (4): 1572­1600.

Baum, Christopher F., Mark E. Schaffer, and Steven Stillman. 2007. "Enhanced Routines for
   Instrumental Variables/generalized Method of Moments Estimation and Testing." The Stata
   Journal 7 (4): 465­506.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "How Much Should We Trust
    Differences-in-Differences Estimates?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1): 249-75.

Baumgartner, Frank R. and Bryan D. Jones. 1993. Agendas and Instability in American Politics.
   Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Bouton, Laurent, Paolo Conconi, Francisco Pino, and Maurizio Zanardi. 2015. "Guns and Votes,"
    working paper.

Cook, Phillip J., and Jens Ludwig. 2006. "The Social Costs of Gun Ownership." Journal of Public
    Economics 90 (1­2): 379­391.

Donald, Stephen G, and Kevin Lang. 2007. "Inference with Difference-in-Differences and Other
   Panel Data." Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (2): 221-33.

Dragu, Tiberiu and Xiaochen Fan. 2016. "An Agenda-Setting Theory of Electoral Competition."
    The Journal of Politics 78 (40): 1170­1182.

Duggan, Mark. 2001. "More Guns, More Crime." Journal of Political Economy 109 (5): 1086-1114.

Durante, Ruben and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2018. "Attack When the World is Not Watching? US
    News and the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict." Journal of Political Economy 126 (3): 1085­1133.

Duwe, Grant, 2007. Mass Murder in the United States. North Carolina: McFarland & Company,
   Inc.

Egan, Patrick J. and Megan Mullin. 2012. "Turning Personal Experience into Political Attitudes:
    The Effect of Local Weather on Americans' Perceptions about Global Warming." The Journal
    of Politics 74 (3): 796­809.

Eisensee, Thomas and David Strömberg. 2007. "News Droughts, News Floods, and U.S. Disaster
     Relief." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (2): 693­728.


                                              23
Finlay, Keith, and Leandro M. Magnusson. 2009. "Implementing Weak-Instrument Robust Tests
     for a General Class of Instrumental-Variables Models." The Stata Journal 9 (3): 398­421.

Fuller, Wayne A. (1977). "Some Properties of a Modification of the Limited Information
     Estimator." Econometrica 45 (4): 939­53.

Godwin, Marcia L., and Jean Reith Schroedel. 1998. "Gun Control Politics in California." In The
   Changing Politics of Gun Control, edited by John M. Bruce and Clyde Wilcox, 88­110.
   Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.

Goss, Kristin A. 2006. Disarmed: The Missing Movement for Gun Control in America. Princeton,
    NJ: Princeton University Press.

Kingdon, John W. 1984. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies. Boston, MA: Little, Brown &
    Company.

Krouse, William and Daniel J. Richardson. 2015. Mass Murder with Firearms: Incidents and
    Victims, 1999-2013 (CRS Report No. 7-5700). Washington, DC: Congressional Research
    Service, 2015. https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R44126.pdf.

Levitt, Steven D. 1996. "The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence from Prison
     Overcrowding Litigation." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2): 319­51.

Luca, Michael, Deepak Malhotra, and Christopher Poliquin. 2017. "Handgun Waiting Periods
    Reduce Gun Deaths." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 (46): 12162­
    12165.

Ludwig, Jens, and Philip J. Cook. 2000. "Homicide and Suicide Rates Associated with
    Implementation of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act." JAMA 284 (5): 585-91.

Ludwig, Jens, and Philip J Cook. 2003. Evaluating Gun Policy Effects on Crime and Violence.
    Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Makowsky, Michael D., and Thomas Stratmann. 2009. "Political Economy at Any Speed: What
   Determines Traffic Citations?" The American Economic Review 99 (1): 509­27.

Moreira, Marcelo J. 2003. "A Conditional Likelihood Ratio Test for Structural Models."
    Econometrica 71 (4): 1027-48.

Morton, Robert J. and Mark A. Hilts, eds. 2008. "Serial Murder: Multi-disciplinary perspectives
   for investigators." Serial Murder Symposium, San Antonio, TX, August 29-September 2, 2005.
   Washington, DC: Federal Bureau of Investigation, http://www.fbi.gov/stats-
   services/publications/serial-murder/serial-murder-july-2008-pdf.

Parker, Kim, Juliana Menasce Horowitz, Ruth Igielnik, J. Baxter Oliphant, and Anna Brown. 2017.
    "America's Complex Relationship with Guns." Pew Research Center. 22 June 2017.
    https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2017/06/22/americas-complex-relationship-with-guns/.



                                               24
Petrocik, John R. 1996. "Issue Ownership in Presidential Elections, with a 1980 Case Study."
    American Journal of Political Science 40 (3): 825­850.

Riker, William H. 1996. The Strategy of Rhetoric. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Schuman, Howard and Stanley Presser. 1981. "The Attitude-Action Connection and the Issue of
    Gun Control." The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 455 (1):
    40­47.

Spitzer, Robert J. 2012. The Politics of Gun Control. 5th Ed. Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers.

Stanford Geospatial Center and Stanford Libraries. 2015. "Stanford Mass Shootings in America,"
    July 31 release, https://library.stanford.edu/projects/mass-shootings-america.

Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo. 2005. "Identification and Inference for Econometric
    Models." In Identification and Inference for Econometric Models, edited by Donald W. K.
    Andrews and James H. Stock, 80­108. New York: Cambridge University Press.

USA Today. 2013. "Behind the Bloodshed: The Untold Story of America's Mass Killings,"
   http://www.gannett-cdn.com/GDContent/mass-killings/index.html.




                                                25
Figures

                                                                                                          Mass Shooting Fataliites
                        80


                        60
  Fatalities




                        40


                        20


                        0
                             1989

                                    1990

                                           1991

                                                  1992

                                                         1993

                                                                1994

                                                                       1995

                                                                              1996

                                                                                     1997

                                                                                            1998

                                                                                                   1999

                                                                                                            2000

                                                                                                                   2001

                                                                                                                          2002

                                                                                                                                 2003

                                                                                                                                        2004

                                                                                                                                               2005

                                                                                                                                                      2006

                                                                                                                                                             2007

                                                                                                                                                                    2008

                                                                                                                                                                           2009

                                                                                                                                                                                  2010

                                                                                                                                                                                         2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                       2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                              2014
                                                                                                          Mass Shooting Incidents
                        12
  Number of Shootings




                        10

                        8

                        6

                        4

                        2
                             1989

                                    1990

                                           1991

                                                  1992

                                                         1993

                                                                1994

                                                                       1995

                                                                              1996

                                                                                     1997

                                                                                            1998

                                                                                                   1999

                                                                                                            2000

                                                                                                                   2001

                                                                                                                          2002

                                                                                                                                 2003

                                                                                                                                        2004

                                                                                                                                               2005

                                                                                                                                                      2006

                                                                                                                                                             2007

                                                                                                                                                                    2008

                                                                                                                                                                           2009

                                                                                                                                                                                  2010

                                                                                                                                                                                         2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                       2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                              2014
                                                                                                                     Year




Figure 1 Mass shooting incidents and fatalities by year, 1989-2014. The upper panel shows the number of fatalities
in mass shootings in which at least 3 people not related or romantically connected to the shooter were killed. The
bottom panel shows the number of these incidents. Washington, D.C. is not included in the sample.




                                                                                                                          26
                                                                                                  Shootings
                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                     1­2
                                                                                                     3­5
                                                                                                     6­9
                                                                                                     10+




Figure 2 Locations of public mass shootings in the United States, 1989­2014. States are shaded based on the total
number of shootings during the sample period. Points represent the locations of events.




                                                        27
Figure 3 Total gun bills introduced and laws enacted by year, 1990­2014.




                                                       28
                                                 Bills Introduced                                Laws Passed
                             22.5
                                                                             3.0

                             20.0
 Mean Legislation per Year




                                                                                                      
                                                                             2.7
                                                        
                             17.5                                                      


                                                                             2.4
                             15.0
                                                                                                                  


                                                                             2.1
                             12.5       




                                    Republican      Democrat        Split          Republican      Democrat      Split



                                                 Tightening Laws                                Loosening Laws
                              1.0                                           0.40


                                                                            0.35
 Mean Legislation per Year




                                                        
                                                                                       
                              0.8
                                                                            0.30


                                                                     
                                                                            0.25
                              0.6                                                                                 


                                                                            0.20                      




                                                                            0.15
                                    Republican      Democrat        Split          Republican      Democrat      Split


Figure 4 Comparison of annual legislation introduced by political party. Points represent the mean and lines are 95%
confidence intervals. Legislature control means one political party includes both chambers of the legislature. The
counts of tightening and loosening laws are based on laws with coder agreement (see section 2.2 of text).




                                                                              29
                                      400
   Average Seconds of News Coverage
                                      300
                                      200
                                      100
                                      0




                                             -16   -14     -12    -10     -8   -6   -4     -2     0      2      4    6   8   10   12   14   16
                                                                                    Days Relative to Mass Shooting


                                      (a) Coverage around time of mass shootings
                                      2000




                                                         4-5 Fatalities
                                                         6-9 Fatalities
   Average Seconds of News Coverage




                                                         10+ Fatalities
                                      1500
                                      1000
                                      500
                                      0




                                             -16   -14     -12    -10     -8   -6   -4     -2     0      2      4    6   8   10   12   14   16
                                                                                    Days Relative to Mass Shooting


                                      (b) Coverage by number of fatalities


Figure 5 Evening news coverage related to guns before and after mass shootings. Panel (a) shows average coverage
around the time of all mass shootings; panel (b) shows coverage around the time of shootings by the number of
fatalities caused. News coverage is measured in seconds.




                                                                                                 30
Tables

Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                     mean         sd         p5      p10        p50        p90         p95
Gun Legislation
  Bills introduced                   16.33    22.04           0         1         10         38          53
  Laws enacted                        2.56      3.35          0         0          1           6          9
  Tightening laws                     0.70      1.29          0         0          0           2          3
  Loosening laws                      0.25      0.62          0         0          0           1          1
Gun Violence and Media
  Mass shooting                       0.12      0.32          0         0          0           1          1
  Fatalities                          0.72      2.40          0         0          0           4          5
  Gun homicide rate                   3.76      2.55       0.72      0.98      3.42        7.40       8.65
  News coverage                       0.06      0.34          0         0          0       0.06       0.29
Political Controls
  Democratic legislature              0.42      0.49          0         0          0           1          1
  Republican legislature              0.34      0.47          0         0          0           1          1
  Republican governor                 0.53      0.50          0         0          1           1          1
Institutional Controls
  Regular session                     0.94      0.24          0         1          1           1          1
  First year of biennium              0.48      0.50          0         0          0           1          1
Demographic Controls
  Elderly (65+) %                     12.9       2.0        9.8      10.7      13.1        15.2       15.7
  Under 25 %                          35.1       2.7       31.4      32.2      34.8        38.0       39.5
  Black %                             10.3       9.5        0.6       0.8        7.4       26.4       30.1
  Hispanic %                           8.3       9.2        0.8       1.2        5.1       20.3       29.9
  Unemployment %                       5.7       1.9        3.1       3.5        5.4        8.1         9.3
  Income per capita                   19.1       3.3       14.1      15.0      18.7        23.3       25.8
  High school %                       85.2       5.2       75.7      78.4      86.1        91.2       92.0
  Veteran %                           11.8       2.4        7.9       8.8      11.8        15.0       16.1
  Divorce %                           11.8       1.8        8.9       9.5      11.8        14.1       14.7
Note: Sample includes 1,250 state-year observations from 1990 to 2014. Bills introduced is the number of bills introduced
in the legislature; Laws enacted is the number of bills that became law. Tightening and Loosening laws are numbers of
enacted laws that tightened and loosened gun control respectively. Mass shooting is an indicator for state-years with a
mass shooting in which three or more people not romantically involved with or related to the shooter(s) were killed.
Fatalities is the total number of deaths in mass shootings in a state-year. The Gun homicide rate is expressed as deaths
per 100,000 residents. News coverage is the hours of nightly news coverage of mass shootings occurring in a state.
Democratic and Republican legislature are indicators for party control of the state legislature. Republican governor is an
indicator for Republican governors. Regular session indicates whether the legislature convened a regular (as opposed to
special) session to consider bills; some state legislatures only meet every other year. First year of biennium is an indicator
for the first year of the two-year legislative biennium (the calendar year immediately following elections). Income per
capita is measured in thousands of 1987 U.S. dollars. Other demographic variables are percentages.




                                                             31
Table 2: The Effect of Mass Shootings on Gun Bill Introductions
 Dependent variable: number of firearm-related bills introduced in state legislature.
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)         (8)
Mass Shooting                 0.145 **     0.153 **     0.198 *      0.143 **
                            (0.071)      (0.070)      (0.101)      (0.069)
Fatalities                                                                       0.023 *** 0.024 *** 0.030 *** 0.023 ***
                                                                               (0.008)     (0.007)   (0.011)     (0.007)
Regular Session               1.581 *** 1.572 *** -0.201 *           1.573 *** 1.596 *** 1.586 *** -0.181          1.580 ***
                            (0.389)      (0.394)      (0.115)      (0.411)     (0.378)     (0.384)   (0.118)     (0.401)
First Year of Biennium        0.464 *** 0.462 *** 0.031              0.462 *** 0.457 *** 0.453 *** 0.051           0.454 ***
                            (0.125)      (0.128)      (0.086)      (0.131)     (0.133)     (0.137)   (0.087)     (0.140)
Democratic Legislature                    -0.130       -0.068       -0.052                  -0.126    -0.057      -0.055
                                         (0.087)      (0.076)      (0.062)                 (0.090)   (0.076)     (0.065)
Republican Legislature                     0.078        0.119        0.030                   0.082     0.134       0.032
                                         (0.075)      (0.535)      (0.042)                 (0.075)   (0.556)     (0.044)
Republican Governor                       -0.025        0.629 *** -0.051                    -0.019     0.630 *** -0.042
                                         (0.066)      (0.222)      (0.057)                 (0.065)   (0.223)     (0.054)
Demographic Controls             No           No           No          Yes          No          No        No         Yes
State Fixed Effects              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
Year Fixed Effects               Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
State-Specific Trends            No           No           No          Yes          No          No        No         Yes
Observations                  1,250        1,250          650        1,250       1,250       1,250       650       1,250
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Stars following coefficients represent p-values less than
.10 (*), .05 (**) and .01 (***). See note to Table 1 for variable definitions.

 Sample collapsed to two-year intervals and year effects replaced with two-year interval fixed effects.




                                                              32
Table 3: Comparing Mass Shootings and Non-Mass Shootings
 Dependent variable: number of firearm-related bills introduced in state legislature.
                                                 (1)              (2)           (3)          (4)
Mass Shooting Fatalities / 100,000            1.339 ***        1.355 ***     1.952 ***    1.427 ***
                                            (0.212)          (0.207)       (0.385)      (0.221)
Ordinary Gun Homicides / 100,000              0.014            0.013         0.012        0.011
                                            (0.031)          (0.035)       (0.037)      (0.048)
Regular Session                               1.559 ***        1.548 ***     0.125        1.541
                                            (0.390)          (0.397)       (0.566)      (0.415)
First Year of Biennium                        0.455 ***        0.452 ***     0.599 ***    0.454 ***
                                            (0.131)          (0.134)       (0.217)      (0.136)
Democratic Legislature                                        -0.119        -0.177       -0.049
                                                             (0.090)       (0.116)      (0.063)
Republican Legislature                                         0.084         0.052        0.030 ***
                                                             (0.071)       (0.082)      (0.041)
Republican Governor                                           -0.016        -0.056       -0.032
                                                             (0.066)       (0.077)      (0.050)
Demographic Controls                             No               No            No          Yes
State Fixed Effects                             Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects                              Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes
State-Specific Trends                            No               No            No          Yes
Observations                                  1,250            1,250           650        1,250
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Stars following coefficients represent p-values less than
.10 (*), .05 (**) and .01 (***). Mass Shooting Fatalities / 100,000 is the number of deaths in mass shootings per 100,000 state
residents. Ordinary Gun Homicides / 100,000 is the number of gun homicides not in mass shootings per 100,000 state
residents. See note to Table 1 for other variable definitions.

 Sample collapsed to two-year intervals and year effects replaced with two-year interval fixed effects.




                                                               33
 Table 4: Mass Shootings, Bills, and Laws by Political Party
 Dependent variable: number of firearm-related bills introduced or laws passed in state.
                                             Bills Introduced                        Laws Passed
                                                (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)
 Dem. Leg. × Shooting                        0.116              0.104              0.079              0.073
                                           (0.080)            (0.080)            (0.101)            (0.109)
 Rep. Leg. × Shooting                        0.393 ***          0.402 ***          0.307 ***          0.283 ***
                                           (0.147)            (0.130)            (0.100)            (0.100)
 Split Leg. × Shooting                       0.026              0.007             -0.120             -0.112
                                           (0.072)            (0.063)            (0.099)            (0.097)
 Democratic Legislature                     -0.149             -0.070             -0.064             -0.022
                                           (0.095)            (0.067)            (0.086)            (0.104)
 Republican Legislature                      0.021             -0.031              0.190 **           0.155 *
                                           (0.080)            (0.054)            (0.094)            (0.092)
 Republican Governor                        -0.026             -0.049              0.016             -0.049
                                           (0.065)            (0.054)            (0.046)            (0.051)
 Regular Session                             1.614 ***          1.626 ***          3.424 ***          3.474 ***
                                           (0.372)            (0.387)            (0.792)            (0.781)
 First Year of Biennium                      0.468 ***          0.468 ***          0.040              0.032
                                           (0.124)            (0.127)            (0.056)            (0.053)
 Demographic Controls                           No                 Yes                No               Yes
 State Fixed Effects                            Yes                Yes                Yes              Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                             Yes                Yes                Yes              Yes
 State-Specific Trends                          No                 Yes                No               Yes
 Observations                                1,250              1,250              1,250             1,250
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Stars following coefficients represent p-values less than
.10 (*), .05 (**) and .01 (***). The omitted group in all models is states without a mass shooting. See note to Table 1 for all
variable definitions.




                                                              34
Table 5: Mass Shootings and Enacted Laws
Dependent variable: number of firearm-related laws enacted (i.e. bills that became law).
                                           Tightening Laws                                     Loosening Laws
                                (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
Mass Shooting               -0.057      -0.050                                  0.282 *      0.258
                           (0.100)     (0.103)                                (0.171)      (0.171)
Dem. Leg. × Shooting                                 -0.014        0.007                                -0.213       -0.245
                                                    (0.134)      (0.141)                               (0.371)      (0.389)
Rep. Leg. × Shooting                                 -0.003        0.002                                 0.853 ***    0.800 ***
                                                    (0.240)      (0.236)                               (0.261)      (0.259)
Split Leg. × Shooting                                -0.223       -0.247                                 0.098        0.137
                                                    (0.256)      (0.261)                               (0.341)      (0.339)
Democratic Legislature 0.066             0.102        0.034        0.063       -0.232       -0.293      -0.191       -0.233
                           (0.141)     (0.148)      (0.162)      (0.170)      (0.195)      (0.202)     (0.225)      (0.226)
Republican Legislature       0.193       0.157        0.161        0.120        0.497 ***    0.497 ***   0.384 *      0.391 *
                           (0.147)     (0.136)      (0.155)      (0.145)      (0.189)      (0.187)     (0.212)      (0.213)
Republican Governor         -0.024      -0.050       -0.023       -0.050       -0.118       -0.098      -0.101       -0.079
                           (0.081)     (0.084)      (0.080)      (0.083)      (0.167)      (0.171)     (0.163)      (0.167)
Regular Session              3.231 ***   3.221 ***    3.237 ***    3.226 *** 16.615 *** 16.248 *** 16.290 *** 15.550 ***
                           (0.770)     (0.778)      (0.771)      (0.779)      (0.457)      (0.462)     (0.454)      (0.466)
First Year of Biennium       0.016       0.032        0.021        0.037        0.421 ***    0.414 ***   0.463 ***    0.455 ***
                           (0.109)     (0.112)      (0.110)      (0.112)      (0.132)      (0.136)     (0.175)      (0.175)
Demographic Controls            No         Yes           No          Yes           No          Yes          No          Yes
State Fixed Effects            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Observations                 1,250       1,250        1,250        1,250        1,175        1,175       1,175        1,175
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Stars following coefficients represent p-values less than
.10 (*), .05 (**) and .01 (***). Models 3-4 and 7-8 show the effect of mass shootings in Republican, Democratic, and split
legislatures; the omitted group in these models is states without a mass shooting. See note to Table 1 for all variable
definitions.




                                                           35
Table 6: News Coverage and Bill Introductions
 Dependent variable: number of firearm-related bills introduced in state legislature.
                                               (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)
Mass Shooting × News Coverage               0.125 ***     0.126 ***      0.069 *        0.127 **
                                          (0.041)       (0.040)        (0.037)        (0.054)
Mass Shooting                               0.070         0.078          0.128          0.067
                                          (0.078)       (0.077)        (0.119)        (0.076)
Regular Session                             1.582 ***     1.573 ***      0.135          1.570 ***
                                          (0.385)       (0.390)        (0.538)        (0.406)
First Year of Biennium                      0.456 ***     0.453 ***      0.621 ***      0.454 ***
                                          (0.129)       (0.132)        (0.218)        (0.135)
Democratic Legislature                                   -0.129         -0.196 *       -0.055
                                                        (0.089)        (0.117)        (0.064)
Republican Legislature                                    0.080          0.035          0.030
                                                        (0.075)        (0.087)        (0.043)
Republican Governor                                      -0.020         -0.062         -0.042
                                                        (0.066)        (0.076)        (0.056)
Demographic Controls                           No            No              No           Yes
State Fixed Effects                           Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
Year Fixed Effects                            Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
State-Specific Trends                          No            No              No           Yes
Observations                                1,250         1,250            650          1,250
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Stars following coefficients represent p-values less than
.10 (*), .05 (**) and .01 (***). News Coverage does not appear by itself in the model because we only have data from the
national nightly news; the coefficient is therefore absorbed by the year fixed effects. See note to Table 1 for variable
definitions.

 Sample collapsed to two-year intervals and year effects replaced with two-year interval fixed effects.





                                                           36
                                     Appendix A: Coding Gun Laws

       This appendix provides examples of coding bills and further investigates coder agreement with

our gold standard when deciding whether bills tighten or loosen gun control. As explained in the text,

a law can be one of the following five types:

           ·   Tightening (stricter gun control)
           ·   Loosening (weaker gun control)
           ·   Uncertain (insufficient information)
           ·   Both tightening and loosening
           ·   Neutral (neither tightening nor loosening)

Table A1 presents examples of each type and illustrates how coders assigned laws to each category.

Table A2 shows the categorization of the gun laws in our sample based on the above coding scheme.

Coders agree on the type of law about 52 percent of the time; about half of these laws tighten restrictions

on guns and about 20 percent loosen restrictions on guns. The remainder are uncertain, neutral, or both

tightened and loosened gun policy.

       Table A3 shows the frequency of coder responses for bills we classified as tightening or

loosening in the gold standard. The most common response is both coders agreeing with the gold

standard. When coders to not agree with the gold standard, it is common for at least one coder to supply

the right answer and the other coder to be either uncertain or think the bill both tightens and loosens

gun control.

       The following is an example of a law that tighten gun control, which coders got wrong:

               "Increases the penalties for carrying a concealed deadly weapon, when the weapon is

               a firearm, by reclassifying what is currently a class G felony as a class D violent felony;

               deletes a penalty provision that is unnecessary and duplicative, since any person

               previously convicted of a violation of section 1442 is also a person prohibited under

               section 1448 of Title 11."




                                                    37
       Coders may have seen "deletes a penalty provision" and assumed the law also loosened gun

control because they did not read that the provision was "unnecessary and duplicative." The following

is an example of a law loosening gun control, which coders got wrong:

               "Bars a county or municipality from filing a lawsuit against the manufacturer of

               firearms or ammunition under certain circumstances; reserves an exclusive right for the

               State to maintain such an action; repeals conflicting laws."

       Some coders made the mistake of thinking this bill both loosened and tightened gun control,

perhaps because "bars" sounds like it relates to tightening and "repeals" sounds like it relates to

loosening. Both of these are fairly long synopses; however, the share of coder pairs that supply the right

answer is not correlated with the length of the synopsis.




                                                   38
Table A1: Example of Coding Gun Laws
   id    summary                                                                tighten        loosen       uncertain
         Creates a new felony for firing a gun within
   1                                                                                 1             0              0
         1,000 feet of an educational facility.
         Reduces the age limit for purchase of a handgun
   2                                                                                 0             1              0
         from 21 to 18.
         Allows parole officers to carry a loaded
   3                                                                                 0             0              0
         firearm while commuting to and from work.
         Relates to the use of firearms in state parks
   4                                                                                 0             0              1
         and campgrounds.
         Requires a license to operate a gun show.
         Eliminates the waiting period for firearm sales
   5                                                                                 1             1              0
         if the purchaser has a valid permit to carry a
         concealed weapon.
Note: Table shows examples of coding gun laws based on bill summaries. Coders were given a full manual to explain the
meaning of "tighten", "loosen", "neutral," and "uncertain" along with the following examples. This table mimics the
appearance of the Excel workbooks used by the coders. The first bill creates a new crime related to firearms. It tightens
restrictions on firearms. The second bill makes it easier for people to acquire guns; it loosens restrictions on firearms. The
third bill is exclusively about parole officers; it is neutral because it does not affect the general public. The fourth bill is
uncertain because the summary is a generic description that does not specify whether the law tightens or loosens
restrictions on firearms. The fifth bill both tightens and loosens; it regulates gun shows, but also eliminates a restriction
on firearm purchasers.




Table A2: Results of Coding Gun Laws
 Category                          Total Laws        Percent of Total
 Coders agree
   Tightening                             872                      27.3
   Loosening                              312                       9.8
   Uncertain                              245                       7.7
   Both (Tighten and Loosen)               79                       2.5
   Neutral                                173                       5.4
 Coders disagree                        1,518                      47.5
 Total                                  3,199                   100.0




                                                              39
Table A3: Coder Agreement with Tightening/Loosening Gold Standard
                           Neutral          Tighten            Loosen           Both        Uncertain
 Tighten
  Neutral                        6              39                 2               2                5
  Tighten                                      460                11              53               61
  Loosen                                                           0               2                0
  Both                                                                            13                2
  Uncertain                                                                                        30

 Loosen
   Neutral                        0               3                15                2                5
   Tighten                                       12                45                7               15
   Loosen                                                        337                72               29
   Both                                                                             10                2
   Uncertain                                                                                          8
Note: Gold Standard--either tightening or loosening--in bold. Cell values represent the frequency of two coder
responses across all unique pairs of coders who saw a given law.




                                                          40
                           Appendix B: Effect of Shootings in Neighboring States


Table B1: Mass Shootings in Neighboring States, Bills and Laws
Dependent variable: number of firearm-related bills introduced or laws enacted in state.
                                       Bills Introduced                                  Laws Enacted
                                (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
Mass Shooting                0.142 **     0.146 *                              0.087       0.077
                           (0.071)      (0.079)                              (0.073)     (0.086)
Neighbor Shooting           -0.049                                             0.050
                           (0.051)                                           (0.056)
Cen. Division Shooting                   -0.005                                            0.021
                                        (0.041)                                          (0.054)
Fatalities                                            0.023 *** 0.018 **                                0.013         0.008
                                                    (0.007)      (0.009)                              (0.008)       (0.009)
Neighbor Fatalities                                  -0.001                                             0.002
                                                    (0.004)                                           (0.004)
Cen. Division Fatalities                                           0.007                                              0.006
                                                                 (0.005)                                            (0.005)
Institutional Controls          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
Political Controls              Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
Demographic Controls            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
State Fixed Effects             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
Year Fixed Effects              Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
State-Specific Trends           Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
Observations                 1,250       1,250        1,250        1,250       1,250       1,250        1,250         1,250
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Stars following coefficients represent p-values less than
.10 (*), .05 (**) and .01 (***). Neighbor variables refer to states with a shared border; Cen. Division refers to states within
the same Census division. See note to Table 1 for other variable definitions.




                                                              41
Table B2: Mass Shootings in Neighboring States and Directions of Policy Change
Dependent variable: number of firearm-related laws enacted.
                                              Tightening Laws                   Loosening Laws
                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
Dem. Leg. × Shooting                          0.037          -0.005          -0.287          -0.181
                                            (0.136)         (0.134)         (0.364)         (0.399)
Rep. Leg. × Shooting                          0.007          -0.080           0.794 ***       0.894 ***
                                            (0.223)         (0.256)         (0.263)         (0.287)
Split Leg. × Shooting                        -0.275          -0.092           0.136           0.080
                                            (0.247)         (0.229)         (0.329)         (0.379)
Dem. Leg. × Neighbor Shooting                 0.208                          -0.061
                                            (0.139)                         (0.242)
Rep. Leg. × Neighbor Shooting                -0.266 **                        0.356
                                            (0.120)                         (0.244)
Split Leg. × Neighbor Shooting               -0.163                          -0.118
                                            (0.207)                         (0.227)
Dem. Leg. × Cen. Division Shooting                            0.157                          -0.186
                                                            (0.158)                         (0.238)
Rep. Leg. × Cen. Division Shooting                            0.015                          -0.118
                                                            (0.108)                         (0.174)
Split Leg. × Cen. Division Shooting                          -0.254                           0.101
                                                            (0.169)                         (0.254)
Political Controls                               Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Institutional Controls                           Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Demographic Controls                             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
State Fixed Effects                              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Year Fixed Effects                               Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Observations                                   1,250          1,250           1,175           1,175
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Stars following coefficients represent p-values less than
.10 (*), .05 (**) and .01 (***). Models show the effect of mass shootings in Republican, Democratic, and split legislatures;
the omitted group in these models is states without a mass shooting. Neighbor variables refer to states with a shared
border; Cen. Division refers to states within the same Census division. See note to Table 1 for other variable definitions.




                                                            42
                                                Appendix C: Laws Enacted


Table C1: Laws Enacted and Mass Shootings
 Dependent variable: number of firearm-related laws enacted in state.
                             (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
Mass Shooting             0.078        0.099       0.112        0.089
                        (0.079)      (0.074)     (0.089)      (0.075)
Fatalities                                                                        0.011        0.014       0.005        0.013
                                                                                (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.014)      (0.008)
Regular Session               3.399 *** 3.392 *** 0.388              3.444 *** 3.401 *** 3.393 *** 0.373                3.443 ***
                            (0.766)      (0.777)       (0.716)     (0.763)      (0.772)      (0.784)     (0.715)      (0.769)
First Year of Biennium        0.037        0.028         0.203       0.022        0.028        0.017       0.178        0.012
                            (0.051)      (0.051)       (0.290)     (0.050)      (0.051)      (0.051)     (0.298)      (0.051)
Democratic Legislature                    -0.026        -0.107       0.012                    -0.022      -0.103        0.011
                                         (0.079)       (0.093)     (0.097)                   (0.082)     (0.088)      (0.098)
Republican Legislature                     0.260 *** 0.168           0.218 ***                 0.266 *** 0.167 *        0.223 ***
                                         (0.090)       (0.103)     (0.083)                   (0.091)     (0.100)      (0.085)
Republican Governor                        0.010        -0.039      -0.055                     0.012      -0.040       -0.053
                                         (0.048)       (0.050)     (0.051)                   (0.048)     (0.053)      (0.050)
Demographic Controls             No           No            No          Yes           No          No          No          Yes
State Fixed Effects             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects              Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
State-Specific Trends            No           No            No          Yes           No          No          No          Yes
Observations                  1,250        1,250           650       1,250        1,250        1,250         650        1,250
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Stars following coefficients represent p-values less than .10
(*), .05 (**) and .01 (***). Variables are identical to those in Table 2, except for the dependent variable, which is the number
of firearm-related laws enacted instead of the number of bills introduced. See note to Table 1 for variable definitions.

 Sample collapsed to two-year intervals and year effects replaced with two-year interval fixed effects.




                                                                43
                                 Appendix D: Mass Shootings and Neutral Laws


Table D1. Neutral Laws Enacted
Dependent variable: number of neutral firearm-related laws enacted.
                                           (1)               (2)
Mass Shooting                           0.114
                                      (0.195)
Dem. Leg. × Shooting                                      0.042
                                                        (0.299)
Rep. Leg. × Shooting                                      0.206
                                                        (0.381)
Split Leg. × Shooting                                     0.142
                                                        (0.322)
Political Controls                        Yes               Yes
Institutional Controls                    Yes               Yes
Demographic Controls                      Yes               Yes
State Fixed Effects                       Yes               Yes
Year Fixed Effects                        Yes               Yes
Observations                            1,050             1,050
Note: Sample size differs from other tables due to states with all zero observations (i.e. no years with neutral laws
enacted).




                                                            44
                           Appendix E: Media Coverage and Mass Shootings

        This appendix presents regression results showing that mass shootings are associated with large

increases in gun-related news coverage and that increased news coverage is associated with greater

legislative activity in the form of firearm-related bills introduced in state legislatures.

        Table E1 shows results from regressing the log of each day's total seconds of gun-related news

coverage on an indicator for the occurrence of a mass shooting and 10 lags of that indicator. The results

suggest that media attention to guns increases roughly 300 percent immediately following a mass

shooting and that coverage remains elevated from pre-shooting levels for at least a week following the

event. Table E2 presents similar results using the count of mass shooting fatalities as the independent

variable instead of a mass shooting indicator variable.17




17Additionally,weestimatedmodelswith10leadsofeachindicatorvariable(notshowntoconservespace)and

noneoftheleadsarestatisticallysignificantatconventionallevels.Thissuggeststhatgun-relatedmediacoverage
doesnotpresagemassshootings(aswouldbethecaseifmediareportsaboutfirearmscausedshootingsorreflected
othercontemporaryeventsassociatedwithmassshootings).


                                                     45
Table E1: Mass Shootings and News Coverage
Dependent variable: Log(1 + Seconds of News Coverage)
                                    (1)                (2)           (3)           (4)
Mass Shooting                    1.509 ***          1.510 ***     1.497 ***     1.443 ***
                               (0.218)            (0.220)       (0.218)       (0.214)
Lags of Mass Shooting (Days):
   L1                            1.667 ***          1.656 ***     1.638 ***     1.584 ***
                               (0.226)            (0.227)       (0.226)       (0.222)
   L2                                               0.735 ***     0.729 ***     0.685 ***
                                                  (0.225)       (0.224)       (0.223)
   L3                                               0.728 ***     0.726 ***     0.684 ***
                                                  (0.214)       (0.213)       (0.204)
   L4                                               0.422 **      0.426 **      0.384 *
                                                  (0.214)       (0.213)       (0.207)
   L5                                               0.844 ***     0.869 ***     0.832 ***
                                                  (0.214)       (0.214)       (0.209)
   L6                                               0.610 ***     0.620 ***     0.582 ***
                                                  (0.206)       (0.206)       (0.194)
   L7                                               0.466 **      0.453 **      0.419 **
                                                  (0.208)       (0.207)       (0.202)
   L8                                               0.255         0.237         0.194
                                                  (0.196)       (0.195)       (0.185)
   L9                                               0.260         0.254         0.212
                                                  (0.197)       (0.197)       (0.187)
   L10                                              0.302         0.300         0.258
                                                  (0.194)       (0.195)       (0.185)
Constant                         1.544 ***          1.463 ***     1.136 ***     0.897 ***
                               (0.025)            (0.027)       (0.060)       (0.151)
Fixed Effects
   Day-of-week                      No                 No          Yes           Yes
   Month                            No                 No           No           Yes
   Year                             No                 No           No           Yes
Observations (Days)              9,496              9,487        9,487         9,487




                                                        46
Table E2: Mass Shooting Fatalities and News Coverage
Dependent variable: Log(1 + Seconds of News Coverage)
                                     (1)                (2)           (3)           (4)
Mass Shooting Fatalities          0.282 ***          0.284 ***     0.280 ***     0.273 ***
                                (0.028)            (0.028)       (0.027)       (0.026)
Lags of Fatalities (Days):
   L1                             0.307 ***          0.308 ***     0.306 ***     0.299 ***
                                (0.030)            (0.030)       (0.030)       (0.029)
   L2                                                0.175 ***     0.175 ***     0.169 ***
                                                   (0.029)       (0.029)       (0.028)
   L3                                                0.167 ***     0.166 ***     0.160 ***
                                                   (0.028)       (0.028)       (0.026)
   L4                                                0.118 ***     0.119 ***     0.114 ***
                                                   (0.033)       (0.033)       (0.031)
   L5                                                0.142 ***     0.146 ***     0.141 ***
                                                   (0.032)       (0.032)       (0.031)
   L6                                                0.119 ***     0.120 ***     0.115 ***
                                                   (0.031)       (0.031)       (0.028)
   L7                                                0.120 ***     0.117 ***     0.112 ***
                                                   (0.028)       (0.028)       (0.028)
   L8                                                0.082 ***     0.079 ***     0.073 ***
                                                   (0.028)       (0.029)       (0.027)
   L9                                                0.053         0.053         0.047
                                                   (0.034)       (0.035)       (0.031)
   L10                                               0.065 **      0.064 *       0.058 *
                                                   (0.033)       (0.033)       (0.031)
Constant                          1.543 ***          1.440 ***     1.120 ***     0.905 ***
                                (0.025)            (0.026)       (0.060)       (0.150)
Fixed Effects
   Day-of-week                       No                 No          Yes           Yes
   Month                             No                 No           No           Yes
   Year                              No                 No           No           Yes
Observations (Days)               9,496              9,487        9,487         9,487




                                                         47
                                     Appendix F: Predicting Mass Shootings

Table F1: Linear Probability Model for Mass Shooting using Control Variables
Dependent variable: indicator for state-year with a mass shooting.
                                    (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
Lag Bills Introduced                                           -0.000
                                                              (0.001)
Lag Laws Enacted                                                               -0.002
                                                                              (0.006)
Lag Tightening Laws                                                                         -0.002
                                                                                           (0.010)
Lag Loosening Laws                                                                                        0.009
                                                                                                        (0.015)
Dem. Legislature                                 0.006             0.004        0.005        0.005        0.006
                                               (0.044)           (0.046)      (0.046)      (0.045)      (0.045)
Rep. Legislature                                -0.030            -0.029       -0.028       -0.028       -0.029
                                               (0.036)           (0.038)      (0.037)      (0.037)      (0.038)
Rep. Governor                                   -0.012            -0.011       -0.011       -0.011       -0.011
                                               (0.020)           (0.022)      (0.022)      (0.022)      (0.022)
Log Population                  -0.191          -0.131            -0.200       -0.192       -0.196       -0.199
                               (0.279)         (0.265)           (0.291)      (0.290)      (0.288)      (0.290)
Elderly (65+) %                  0.001          -0.001             0.004        0.004        0.004        0.004
                               (0.025)         (0.024)           (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.024)
Under 25 %                      -0.002           0.001             0.003        0.002        0.002        0.002
                               (0.020)         (0.019)           (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.019)      (0.020)
Black %                         -0.009          -0.009            -0.002       -0.001       -0.001        0.000
                               (0.015)         (0.015)           (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)
Hispanic %                      -0.001          -0.003            -0.002       -0.003       -0.003       -0.003
                               (0.015)         (0.015)           (0.016)      (0.016)      (0.016)      (0.016)
Unemployment %                   0.025 **        0.025 **          0.024 **     0.024 **     0.024 **     0.024 **
                               (0.011)         (0.011)           (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)
Income per capita                0.013           0.012             0.011        0.012        0.012        0.011
                               (0.013)         (0.013)           (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.014)
High School %                   -0.004          -0.003            -0.003       -0.003       -0.003       -0.003
                               (0.006)         (0.006)           (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)
Veteran %                       -0.003          -0.001            -0.005       -0.005       -0.005       -0.004
                               (0.012)         (0.012)           (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.012)      (0.012)
Divorced %                      -0.004          -0.003            -0.001       -0.001       -0.001       -0.001
                               (0.010)         (0.010)           (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)
State FE                           Yes             Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Year FE                            Yes             Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations                     1,250           1,250             1,200        1,200        1,200        1,200




                                                            48
Table F2: Linear Probability Model for Mass Shooting using Policy Variables
Dependent variable: indicator for state-year with a mass shooting.
                                                       (1)               (2)
Handgun Waiting Period (days)                       0.002             0.002
                                                  (0.005)           (0.005)
Long-gun Waiting Period (days)                     -0.005            -0.005
                                                  (0.019)           (0.020)
Age 18+ for Transaction                             0.031             0.026
                                                  (0.026)           (0.028)
Age 21+ for Transaction                            -0.067            -0.080
                                                  (0.057)           (0.056)
Handgun Permit System                              -0.137            -0.136
                                                  (0.094)           (0.100)
Background Check, All Handgun Sales                -0.066            -0.066
                                                  (0.080)           (0.085)
Background Check, All Firearm Sales                 0.019            -0.005
                                                  (0.116)           (0.127)
Assault Weapons Ban                                 0.042             0.050
                                                  (0.051)           (0.053)
Shall Issue Concealed Carry                        -0.010            -0.006
                                                  (0.038)           (0.039)
No Permit Needed Concealed Carry                    0.162             0.181
                                                  (0.188)           (0.184)
Log Population                                     -0.494            -0.445
                                                  (0.325)           (0.310)
Political Controls                                     No               Yes
Demographic Controls                                  Yes               Yes
State FE                                              Yes               Yes
Year FE                                               Yes               Yes
Observations                                        1,250             1,250
Note: Handgun Waiting Period is the number of days purchasers must wait before accepting delivery of a handgun. Long-
gun Waiting Period is similarly defined for long-guns (e.g. rifles and shotguns). Age 18+ Transaction is an indicator for laws
that prevent vendors from selling handguns to minors or prevent minors from purchasing handguns. Age 21+ Transaction
is defined the same way for persons under 21. Handgun Permit System is an indicator for states that require permits to
purchase a handgun. Background Check, All Handgun Sales is an indicator for requiring a background check for all handgun
transactions (including private sales). Background Check, All Firearm Sales is an indicator for requiring a background check
for all firearm transactions (including private sales). Assault Weapons Ban is an indicator for states that ban some types
of assault rifles or pistols. Shall Issue Concealed Carry is an indicator for states that require the permitting authority to
grant a license to anyone meeting the minimum statutory qualifications (i.e. do not permit law enforcement discretion in
issuing permits). No Permit Needed Concealed Carry is an indicator for states that allow concealed carry without a permit.




                                                             49
                                  Appendix G: Placebo Mass Shooting Analyses


Table G1: Placebo Analysis for Bill Introductions (Mirrors Table 2)
                                                                  Percentiles of Placebo Test Statistic
                                                        st
                                      Actual          1             5th        10th        90th           95th     99th
Shooting Indicator (model 4)            2.07        -3.98         -2.89      -2.47        0.55        0.87        1.59
Shooting Fatalities (model 8)           3.29        -3.81         -2.87      -2.45        0.71        1.10        1.93



Table G2: Placebo Analysis for Enacted Laws (Mirrors Table 5)
                                                                  Percentiles of Placebo Test Statistic
                                      Actual          1st           5th       10th        90th            95th    99th
Tightening Laws (models 2, 4)
   Pooled Shooting                     -0.49       -2.19        -1.43         -1.07       1.83        2.25         3.10
   Dem. Leg. × Shooting                 0.05       -2.43        -1.61         -1.35       1.48        1.96         2.84
   Rep. Leg. × Shooting                 0.01       -2.89        -1.71         -1.23       1.62        2.24         3.41
   Split Leg. × Shooting               -0.95       -2.57        -1.49         -1.01       2.07        2.56         3.95
Loosening Laws (models 6, 8)
   Pooled Shooting                      1.51       -3.21        -2.26         -1.88       0.82        1.24         2.03
   Dem. Leg. × Shooting                -0.63       -2.64        -1.85         -1.41       1.23        1.60         2.97
   Rep. Leg. × Shooting                 3.09       -3.02        -2.27         -1.98       0.71        1.09         1.73
   Split Leg. × Shooting                0.40       -2.93        -2.02         -1.59       1.34        1.79         2.72
Notes: We randomly assign placebo mass shootings to state-years in which no actual shooting occurred with probability
equal to each state's frequency of shootings, and randomly draw a fatality count from the empirical distribution of
fatalities. We then re-run the models and calculate the test statistic for the placebo shooting and fatality coefficients. The
above percentiles are based on 1,000 replications. The "Pooled" rows in Table G2 mirror models 2 and 6 of Table 5 (the
models without interaction effects). The legislature effects mirror models 4 and 8 for tightening and loosening laws
respectively.




                                                             50
                               Appendix H: Dropping Individual States

       These analyses exclude each state, one at a time, from our sample. Each graph plots the resulting

50 regression coefficients (from smallest to largest) along with a 95% confidence interval and estimates

using the full sample of all states. The state abbreviations in the figures indicate the state that was

dropped from the sample and mark the resulting point estimate. The vertical bars represent 95%

confidence intervals. The solid, horizontal line indicates the point estimate from the complete sample

(presented in the text and tables). The dotted, horizontal lines represent the lower and upper bounds of

the 95% confidence interval for the full sample coefficient estimate.

       The results show that removing individual states has little effect on the coefficient estimates,

supporting the claim that the effect of mass shootings on gun policy is not driven by an individual state

or shooting.




                                                   51
Figure H1 Effect of Mass Shooting on Bill Introductions.




Figure H2 Effect of Mass Shooting on Laws (of Any Type) Enacted.




                                                 52
Figure H3 Effect of Republican Legislature Mass Shooting on Loosening Laws Enacted.




Figure H4 Effect of Democratic Legislature Mass Shooting on Loosening Laws Enacted.




                                               53
Figure H5 Effect of Republican Legislature Mass Shooting on Tightening Laws Enacted.




Figure H6 Effect of Democratic Legislature Mass Shooting on Tightening Laws Enacted.




                                                54
                       Appendix I: Gun Ownership, Mass Shootings and Enacted Laws


Table I1: Effects of Mass Shootings, with Gun Ownership Proxy

Dependent variable: number of firearm-related laws enacted (i.e. bills that became law).
                                          Tightening Laws                                Loosening Laws
                                       (1)                (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
Dem. Leg. × Shooting                0.016              0.006                      -0.192          0.414
                                  (0.141)           (0.452)                      (0.417)        (0.690)
Rep. Leg. × Shooting                0.003             -0.008                       0.787 ***      1.439 *
                                  (0.233)           (0.575)                      (0.265)        (0.807)
Split Leg. × Shooting              -0.240             -0.250                       0.157          0.763
                                  (0.259)           (0.581)                      (0.345)        (0.776)
Gun Suicide Pct. × Shooting                            0.000       -0.001                        -0.011           0.005
                                                    (0.009)       (0.002)                       (0.013)         (0.003)
Gun Suicide Pct.                      0.039            0.039        0.039          0.107 *        0.110 *         0.113 *
                                    (0.027)         (0.028)       (0.027)        (0.060)        (0.061)         (0.059)
Democratic Legislature                0.054            0.054        0.094         -0.237         -0.245          -0.291
                                    (0.171)         (0.171)       (0.150)        (0.227)        (0.222)         (0.199)
Republican Legislature                0.131            0.131        0.167          0.412 *        0.402 *         0.517 ***
                                    (0.141)         (0.142)       (0.132)        (0.216)        (0.217)         (0.190)
Republican Governor                  -0.042           -0.042       -0.041         -0.077         -0.068          -0.102
                                    (0.084)         (0.085)       (0.085)        (0.164)        (0.163)         (0.167)
Regular Session                       3.225 ***        3.225 ***    3.220 ***    17.931 ***      17.934 ***     16.262 ***
                                    (0.780)         (0.779)       (0.778)        (0.460)        (0.460)         (0.454)
First Year of Biennium                0.037            0.037        0.032          0.443 ***      0.439 **        0.403 ***
                                    (0.112)         (0.110)       (0.110)        (0.168)        (0.171)         (0.129)
Demographic Controls                    Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
State Fixed Effects                     Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Year Fixed Effects                      Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Observations                          1,250            1,250        1,250          1,250          1,175           1,175
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Stars following coefficients represent p-values less than
.10 (*), .05 (**) and .01 (***). Gun Suicide Pct. is the 5-year moving average of the percentage of suicides that are firearm-
related and is used to proxy for gun ownership (Cook and Ludwig 2006). Models 1 and 4 show that the main results do
not change when adding this control variable; the other models suggest that the response of Republican legislatures
cannot be explained by rates of gun ownership. See note to Table 1 for other variable definitions.




                                                             55
                     Appendix J: Mass Shootings as an Instrument for Gun Policy

       In this appendix we use mass shootings as an instrumental variable to study the impact of gun

laws on gun deaths. We start with the following model:

                         ln($& ) = $ + & + $& +  < $& + $&

where $& is non-mass shooting gun deaths per 100,000 people in state  and year , $ and & are state

and year effects, $& is an index representing the strictness of gun policy, and $& is a vector

of controls ­demographic, political, and economic factors--that potentially affect gun deaths. We use

the same variables as Levitt (1996) as controls, but also include dummies for Republican and

Democratic trifectas or legislatures, and a dummy for Republican governors.

       We do not directly observe $& ; instead, we observe the enactment of new laws that

change gun policy. Therefore, we estimate the equation in first differences:

                         ln($& ) = & + $& + $&  + $&

where$& = $& is negative for laws that loosen gun control and positive

for laws that increase gun control (according to our coders, see data description). Based on our main

results, we instrument for gun laws using the first lags of mass shooting fatalities and the interaction of

lagged mass shooting fatalities with Republican control of state government. The former should be

positively correlated with new laws and the latter negatively correlated with new laws.

       We estimate the model using Fuller's (1977) modified LIML with  = 1 (Baum, Schaffer, and

Stillman 2007). First stage results suggest the instruments are weak despite being jointly significant

( = 5.98) with the expected sign (Stock and Yogo 2005). The coefficients on the exogenous

instruments in the reduced form equation for firearm deaths are not significant, but also have the

expected signs (negative for lagged mass shooting fatalities and positive for the interaction of lagged

fatalities with Republican control of government). Our estimate [ is -0.016 with standard error 0.013.



                                                    56
A conditional likelihood ratio test (Moreira 2003; Andrews, Moreira, and Stock 2004; Finlay and

Magnusson 2009) cannot reject the null hypothesis that  = 0( = 0.24). We also estimated models

that include proxies for gun ownership. Including the percentage of suicides committed with a gun

(Cook and Ludwig 2006) does not change our inference.




                                               57
