                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE NATURAL LEVEL OF CAPITAL FLOWS

                                        John D. Burger
                                      Francis E. Warnock
                                   Veronica Cacdac Warnock

                                      Working Paper 26184
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26184


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 2019, Revised November 2020




The authors thank McKinsey Global Institute for data on total financial assets by country and
Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti and Philip Lane for providing early access to their External Wealth of
Nations update. We are also grateful for helpful comments from Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi, Mick
Devereux, Andrew Glover, James Hamilton, Özer Karagedikli, Anton Korinek, Chris Lundblad,
Enrique Mendoza, Dan Murphy, Paolo Pesenti, James Yetman, participants at the 4th
International Finance and Macroeconomics Conference at HKIMR and in seminars at Asia
School of Business, Bank of Japan, De Nederlandsche Bank, Federal Reserve Board, Haverford
College, Japan's Ministry of Finance, Korea University, Monetary Authority Singapore,
SEACEN, Seoul National University, UT Austin, UVA-Darden, Villanova and Williams College.
Francis and Veronica Warnock thank HKIMR for support through its Visiting Research
Fellowship program, and Francis Warnock thanks the International Finance Division of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System for its ongoing hospitality. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John D. Burger, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Natural Level of Capital Flows
John D. Burger, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 26184
August 2019, Revised November 2020
JEL No. F3,F4

                                         ABSTRACT

We put forward a theory-based time-varying supply-side measure of the natural level of capital
flows, KF*. Out-of-sample empirical features of KF* are impressive. For countries that have
quarterly time series data of capital flows, we show that KF* is a level to which flows converge
in the medium term; greatly improves our ability to model notoriously volatile capital flows; and
performs well against out-of-sample and in-sample filtering techniques. The gap between actual
inflows and KF* also helps predict both 6-quarters ahead sudden stop episodes and medium-term
equity returns. We close with how KF* and lessons from the global financial crisis help us think
about capital flows during the Covid-19 shock.


John D. Burger                                  Veronica Cacdac Warnock
Loyola University Maryland                      Darden Business School
4501 N. Charles Street                          University of Virginia
Baltimore MD 21210-2699                         Box 6550
jburger@loyola.edu                              Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
                                                vwarnock@virginia.edu
Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu
1. Introduction

        Unobservable trends in the normal, natural or desired level of key economic indicators--so-

called stars--help policymakers see through the noise of period-to-period fluctuations (McDermott

2017; Powell 2018). For example, the natural rate of interest (r*), the natural rate of unemployment

(u*), core inflation (*) and the level of potential GDP (y*) all guide policy. Each of these stars is

an unobserved, estimated construct with definitions that vary across researchers. Nonetheless, by

providing a real-time measure against which related macroeconomic variables can be assessed, each

aids in our understanding of the economy. Likewise, in the case of volatile asset prices such as

equities and exchange rates, market participants frequently turn to slower moving, fundamentally

grounded reference points as a way to assess current market conditions and potentially predict

future returns.1

        Capital flows lack such a reference point and are notoriously volatile. See, as examples, the

quarterly gross portfolio inflows received by Japan, United Kingdom, Canada, South Africa, Brazil,

and Indonesia over the past two decades (Figure 1). The volatility makes it difficult to ascertain

whether the current level of flows are likely to persist in the future. Relatedly, the empirical literature

that attempts to model the quarter-to-quarter variation in capital flows has had strikingly little

success (Cerutti, Claessens and Rose 2019). When there are material events such as index inclusion

(Raddatz, Schmukler and Williams 2017) or an international cross-listing (Edison and Warnock

2004), the effect on flows is noticeable. But as Chari, Dilts Stedman and Lundblad (forthcoming)

show, even for well-identified shocks an effect on flows can be difficult to discern.




1For example, the literatures on exchange rates and equity prices have made progress by distinguishing
between transitory shocks that are associated with deviations from fundamentals and longer-term reversion;
see, among many others, Mark (1995), Hong and Stein (1999), Froot and Ramadorai (2005, 2008), and Koijen
and Yogo (2019).

                                                     1
       A better understanding of the variation in flows matters for policymakers, firms and market

participants. Cross-border financial flows impact the cost of borrowing for firms and governments,

especially in emerging economies (Mendoza and Terrones 2012, Pandolfi and Williams 2019). And,

with policymakers increasingly wary of the implications of volatile international capital flows on

domestic conditions, uncertainties about the salient drivers of capital flows may contribute to

countries' newfound propensity to institute capital controls. Firms' cost of capital decreases with the

removal of capital controls (Bekaert and Harvey 2000, Edison and Warnock 2003) and increases

with their reinstatement (Alfaro, Chari, and Kanczuk 2017). If segmentation has costs (Bekaert et al.

2011, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad 2011) and capital controls might miss their intended mark

(Forbes et al. 2015), a measure that improves our understanding of capital flows might help avoid

policy mistakes.

       In this paper we introduce such a measure: the natural level of capital flows. We argue that

the natural level of capital flows, which we denote KF*, provides a benchmark that helps gauge the

amount of gross portfolio inflows countries can expect to receive. The precursors to our KF*

measure include Tille and van Wincoop (2010) and Devereux and Sutherland (2011), both of which

built out the underlying theory (but did not broadly apply it to portfolio flows). The nearest

neighbor to this paper is Burger, Warnock and Warnock (2018), which applied the underlying theory

to create a benchmark for portfolio flows for 47 countries and showed, using annual data, that there

is a significant in-sample long-run relationship between actual flows and the benchmark and that the

benchmark helps predict the direction of one-period-ahead changes in inflows. In this paper we

broaden the analysis along a number of dimensions. We create a quarterly version (important

because few have the luxury of waiting for annual data to be released) and do so for many more

countries (184). Our empirical focus is on its out-of-sample medium-term (i.e., 4-8 quarters ahead)




                                                   2
forecasting ability. We compare KF* to various out-of-sample and in-sample filtering methods, and

also use it to predict extreme capital episodes (i.e., sudden stops and surges), and equity returns.2

        KF* is an easy-to-construct, theory-based, slow-moving supply-side measure that helps

gauge the amount of gross portfolio inflows countries can expect to receive by approximating the level

one might expect flows to converge to over a medium-term horizon. KF* is a supply-side measure

in that it is derived from the supply of rest-of-world savings. The underlying theory is from the Tille

and van Wincoop (2010) and Devereux and Sutherland (2011) incorporation of portfolio choice in

open economy DSGE models, and specifically their notion of zero-order weights and portfolio

growth flows.

        We show that KF*, available for a wide range of countries starting as early as 2000, helps

distinguish between short-run transitory shocks and longer-run reversion. Just as interest rates,

unemployment, inflation, GDP and exchange rates differ from r*, u*, *,y* and PPP, actual

flows deviate from KF*. For the natural level of capital flows to be a useful measure, these

deviations of actual flows from KF* must be informative. And they are. Specifically, out-of-sample

tests following Cogley (2002) indicate that deviations of actual flows from KF* are transitory, as

portfolio inflows, especially for emerging market economies (EMEs) but also for most advanced

economies (AEs), converge to KF* over a 1-to-2-year horizon. Further, we find the reversion of

portfolio flows to KF* can explain roughly 40% of the medium-run variation of flows, which is far

more than what is explained by traditional push and pull factors used in the empirical capital flows

literature. KF* also outperforms various univariate filtering techniques. Finally, the out-of-sample

KF* performs about as well as the in-sample (i.e., one that uses the full time series) Hamilton (2018)

linear projection that was designed explicitly for analysis similar to Cogley (2002).


2 We use the term out of sample because in every application in this paper KF* is predetermined and the time
t deviation between it and actual flows is used to predict future values of variables of interest (usually flows,
but also equity returns and sudden stops and surges).

                                                        3
          The predictive power of the current deviation of flows from KF* extends to sudden stops

and equity returns. In both cases, periods of strong global growth (so that global savings and thus

KF* are increasing) and flows exceeding KF* predict a future downturn. KF* predicts future

sudden stops (4 to 8 quarters ahead): When both the gap of actual flows from KF* and global

growth are one standard deviation above their mean (that is, KF* gap of 3.4% of GDP and global

growth of 4.2%) the probability of a sudden stop in six quarters is 31.8%.3 On equities, mean annual

excess returns in our sample are 11.2%, but if the gap of actual flows from KF* and global growth

are both one standard deviation above their means, equity returns in the next year are predicted to

be nearly 10 percentage points lower. For both sudden stops and future equity returns, KF* acts

similarly to the BIS credit gap predictor of crises (Aldasoro, Borio and Drehmann, 2018). When the

underlying is above the benchmark (for this paper, KF*, for BIS the HP-filtered trend) a downturn

is likely. An added nuance in our analysis is that if the benchmark is also increasing strongly

(specifically, if global growth is increasing) a sharp downturn in flows and equity prices is even more

likely.

          At the time of writing, the world is being buffeted by a global shock--the global Covid-19

pandemic--that is surely impacting global capital flows. Our sample ends on the eve of the global

shock--in 2019Q4--so we cannot speak directly to flows during the pandemic. However, we can

look back to the last large global shock, the GFC, when over 75% of the countries in the Forbes and

Warnock (2012) study were experiencing a sudden stop. Viewing the GFC shock through the lens of

KF*, we show a strong negative relation between the pre-shock gap of actual flows from KF* and

the subsequent change in capital flows during the crisis (all scaled by GDP). That is, countries that

were experiencing flows higher than KF* just prior to the GFC had the largest decreases in flows


3 The relationship between KF* and future extreme capital flow episodes is asymmetric, as countries
experiencing very low inflows relative to KF* are not more likely to experience a future sudden surge in
inflows.

                                                      4
during the GFC. Moreover, the relationship is tight. Extrapolating to the eve of the global

pandemic, we observe very few countries with inflows much greater than KF* suggesting less room

to fall (relative to decreases during the GFC) and that for most countries any crisis-related fall in

flows is likely to be transitory as flows can be expected to revert to KF* in the intermediate term.

        Our work is related to the vast empirical literatures on international capital flows (see

Koepcke (2018) for a survey) and international portfolio allocation. In those literatures, analysis is

often couched in terms of recipient-country-specific `pull' factors and origin-countries' `push' factors

(see Griffin, Nardari and Stulz 2003 among many others). In those terms, KF* can be thought of as

a supply-side `push' factor. Within that literature `push' factors are most often indicators such as U.S.

interest rates (starting with Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart 1993, 1996) or the VIX (Rey 2013). Our

focus on the supply of funds, much less prevalent in the literature, shares similarities with the limited

set of papers that focus on funding shocks (see, for example, Jotikasthira, Lundblad and Ramadorai

(2012) and Cerutti, Claessens and Puy (2019)).

        The paper proceeds as follows. The next section briefly discusses various stars in

macroeconomics before Section 3 presents our measure of KF*. Section 4 tests whether flows

converge to KF* over the medium term. Section 5 compares our measure to various out-of-sample

univariate filtering techniques as well as the in-sample Hamilton (2018) linear projection. Section 6

provides two applications: using the gap between actual flows and KF* to predict sudden stops and

equity returns over the medium term. Section 7 applies lessons from the GFC to inform the likely

path of flows during the Covid-19 pandemic. Section 8 concludes. We include graphs of some

countries in the main text; graphs for all 56 countries for which we have quarterly flow data, as well

as some additional design details and information on country coverage, are relegated to appendices.




                                                    5
2. From Macroeconomic Stars to KF*

        An endeavor such as ours has much to learn from the long literatures on famous stars in

macroeconomics such as r*, u*, y* and *. While no star is exactly like another, KF* is not

precisely analogous to any particular star, and most readers already understand these literatures, we

discuss them here because themes from the well-established literatures inform our design decisions.

        The notion of a natural rate of interest, r*, goes back to Wicksell's 1898 Geldzins und

Guterpreise and has taken many forms through the decades. In the English translation, Wicksell's

natural rate of interest on capital is defined as "a certain rate of interest on loans which is neutral in

respect to commodity prices, and tends neither to raise nor to lower them" (Wicksell 1936, page

102). More recently, Williams (2003) defines the natural rate as the real fed funds rate consistent

with real GDP equaling potential GDP in the absence of transitory demand shocks, while Laubach

and Williams (2003) define it as the real short-term interest rate consistent with output equaling its

natural rate and stable inflation.

        Since definitions vary, methods to measure r* vary too. Orphanides and Williams (2002)

note that r* likely varies with trend income growth, fiscal policy and household preferences,

themselves not directly observed. Staiger, Stock, and Watson (1997) stress that because the "true"

model is unknown there is additional uncertainty around natural rate estimates. In practice, one

accepted method (see, for example, Holston, Laubach and Williams 2017) starts from a New

Keynesian framework of a Phillips curve and an intertemporal IS curve to find, using Kalman

filtering, the real rate that is consistent with zero output gap and stable inflation. As with any latent

variable that is a function of other unobservable factors, there are many ways to estimate r* and

estimates vary across researchers.

        Exact definitions of the natural rate of unemployment (u*) also vary. It can be understood

in deceptively simple terms: it is frictional plus structural unemployment, or the actual

                                                     6
unemployment rate stripped of cyclical unemployment. It is also often defined as the unemployment

rate that, absent supply shocks, is consistent with stable inflation. Efforts to estimate the natural rate

of unemployment have used detailed labor market data (see among many others Blanchard and

Diamond (1989) and Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2013)); reduced-form macro models

(Staiger, Stock, and Watson (1997); and DSGE models (e.g., Gali, Smets, and Wouters (2012)).

Again, with different definitions and fundamentally different approaches that depend on

unobservables, there are many ways to estimate u*.4

        Another star is potential GDP. While actual GDP is usually measured from the demand side

of the economy by summing up spending, potential GDP (y*)is often estimated from the supply

side by using a production function approach that combines the inputs of production--labor and

capital--along with total factor productivity. For example, the CBO's estimate of U.S. potential

GDP relies on the Solow growth model, creating potential output by focusing on potential inputs

and their productivity (Shackleton (2018)). Shocks and frictions can push actual GDP away from

potential GDP, but over time actual comes back to potential. A caveat that emerges from the

literature on potential GDP is that most existing measures are overly sensitive to transitory shocks

and thus lose some usefulness as a structural measure (Coibon, Gorodnichenko, and Ulate 2018.).

        The case of core inflation (*) is best understood from the perspective of an inflation

targeting central bank that wishes to extract the persistent level of inflation from its observation of a

volatile headline inflation figure.5 Ideally, the measure of core inflation eliminates temporary price

fluctuations and reveals more fundamental trends in medium-term inflation. There are many ways of

estimating core inflation. Some are mechanical, such as the BLS practice of excluding food and

energy from the CPI. Others, such as the Bryan and Cecchetti (1993) median core and trimmed


4See Crump, Eusepi, Giannoni and Sahin (2019) for an attempt to unify the u* literature.
5Note while McDermott (2017) and others refer to core inflation as *, elsewhere in the literature * refers
to the policymaker's inflation goal or target.

                                                    7
mean measures, build on theoretical models and at the same time remain quite practical. And still

others are purely statistical (for example, the filtering methodology of Cogley (2002) or Stock and

Watson (2016)).

        This brief review of the literature on stars highlights a number of important points that are

relevant for our construction of KF*. First, we think that a star should be simple, intuitive, and

grounded in theory. For example, one can (and many do) use univariate filtering to construct an

estimate of y*. However, Coibion et al. (2018) emphasize the importance of developing an estimate

that is consistent with theory, in part because many statistical measures have a difficult time

distinguishing between shorter-term volatility and more fundamental structural changes (and this

might be especially true toward the end of the sample). We develop a theory-based supply side

(specifically, based on the supply of rest-of-world savings) estimate of the natural level of portfolio

flows that is by construction largely shielded from transitory shocks. Second, the literature stresses

that there is not necessarily one unique theory that is best suited for constructing any particular star.

Stars are often derived from competing theories. We put forward one theory--that of Tille and van

Wincoop (2010) and Devereaux and Sutherland (2011)--to support the construction of our measure

of KF*, but there could be others (an international CAPM, for example). Third, the literature on

core inflation makes the point that headline measures can contain a great deal of high frequency

noise that makes it difficult for policymakers to discern signals. This suggests a star should provide a

time-series reference to pin down low-frequency "fundamental" movements, so that current

deviations from the star help forecast a medium-term path. Similar to headline inflation, capital

flows have a lot of high frequency noise (Figure 1). Indeed, Meng and van Wincoop (2018) note that

"[p]ortfolio flows can be quite volatile at the quarterly frequency, which makes for ugly graphs." The

volatility of quarterly flows makes not only for ugly graphs; it makes it difficult to discern what level




                                                    8
of flows will likely persist going forward. For our KF* to be successful, deviations from it should

help forecast flows over the medium-term.



3. KF*

3.1 Construction of KF*

         Our measure of the time t natural level of portfolio inflows for a destination country d is

                                      1
                          
                          , =             5
                                          =1 ,,- ,                                                       (1)
                                      5

where ROW,d,t is the weight of destination country d in rest-of-the-world (ROW) portfolios, defined

as ROW holdings of country d bonds and equities divided by ROW financial wealth, and , is

the flow of ROW private savings.

         Portfolio weights in (1) are formed using Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2018) data on ROW

holdings of the destination country's equities and bonds (in BOP-speak, the country's portfolio

equity and portfolio debt liabilities), available annually for over 100 countries starting in roughly

1995, and scaling these investment positions by ROW total financial assets (Davies, Lluberas, and

Shorrocks (2018)).6 Savings, from the IMF WEO dataset, is private savings (that is, national savings

less fiscal savings or "General government net lending/borrowing" in IMF WEO terms). ROW

savings is just world savings minus the recipient country's savings and ROW wealth is world wealth

minus the recipient country's wealth. Throughout, our ROW savings and weights (and flows) are




6 The Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2018) data start earlier than 1995, but prior to 1995 there is dramatically
reduced country coverage (in particular for portfolio debt liabilities). Davies et al. (2018) provides a measure
of household wealth, built wherever possible from household balance sheet data or household survey data
(or, if those sources are not available, by estimation), for 212 countries at year end from 2000 to 2017 with
mid-year estimates for 2018 and 2019; we average the last two mid-year estimates to form year-end 2018
estimate. For the period 1995-1999 we splice the Davies et al. (2018) data with total financial assets (TFA)
data from McKinsey Global Institute (MGI); see McKinsey Global Institute (2018) for a description of the
data. For years both measures are available (2000-2016), the correlation is 0.985.

                                                        9
"exChina" because over the past two decades there has a substantial disconnect between China's

savings (sizeable) and its outward portfolio investment (miniscule); see Appendix A for details.

        KF* is theory-based: it is derived from the DSGE open economy models with portfolio

choice of Tille and van Wincoop (2010) and Devereux and Sutherland (2011). The model, with

finitely lived agents, is of two countries, although Meng and van Wincoop (2020) show that the

insights extend to a multi-country world. The model is simple in many respects, with production

driven by an exogenous AR(1) productivity process (which is the only shock in the model), output

being paid out as dividends and labor income, consumption home bias, and incomplete financial

markets (there are iceberg costs to investing in foreign equity). The model produces a home bias in

portfolios, and the only choice agents must make is how to allocate their wealth between home and

foreign equities in order to maximize wealth. In forming their optimal portfolio, investors equalize

the expected discounted return on each asset.

        The model leads to two types of flows. Portfolio growth flows are simply the gross flows

that would occur if new funds are allocated according to zero-order portfolio weights. A positive

productivity shock leads to increased savings that are deployed mostly at home (there is a portfolio

home bias) but also abroad. If the productivity shock is persistent, these so-called portfolio growth

flows are also persistent. The other type of flows are reallocation flows due to time variation in

expected returns and risk. Time variation in expected returns impacts cross-border flows only

through the effect of savings, as new home savings is invested mainly at home, pushing up home

asset prices and requiring a decrease in expected returns (and, thus, capital outflows) to clear the

asset markets. Time variation in second moments (risk) impact optimal portfolio weights through

changes in two hedge components: the covariance between excess returns (of home relative to

foreign equities) and the real exchange rate and the covariance between excess returns and future

expected portfolio returns. It is the change in these covariances that generate reallocation flows so,


                                                   10
after a potentially large initial shock, the impact on flows quickly dissipates as future changes

become a function of the persistent AR(1) process.

        Zero-order portfolio growth flows, essentially the flows that would occur when the volatility

of shocks becomes arbitrarily small, are persistent, getting their persistence from the persistence of

underlying real-side shocks and hence savings. Reallocation flows can be substantial (and volatile)

but, arising primarily from time variation in second moments, ephemeral.

        The notion of portfolio growth flows is intuitively appealing, as the flow of new savings is

precisely the amount of new funds available for foreign (or home) investment. Put another way, new

savings is an important source of funds that would be potentially invested, some at home and some

abroad. Portfolio growth flows are simply the gross flows that would occur if those new funds are

allocated according to zero-order portfolio weights.

        As indicated in equation (1), we operationalize zero-order portfolio weights as a trailing 5-

year moving average of past portfolio weights. That is an ad-hoc decision, but one that we are

comfortable with for a number of reasons. An alternative of using a theory such as CAPM to

construct zero-order portfolio weights is possible but runs into the practical limitation that there is a

sizeable home bias in actual data. And modeling higher frequency fluctuations in portfolio weights

as in Koijen and Yogo (2019, 2020) would run counter to our focus on the longer-run natural level

of flows. We therefore employ a smoothed portfolio weight that abstracts from volatile transitory

demand shocks. Finally, filtering a weight has precedence in another `star', potential GDP: the CBO

applies a filter to the capital share so the volatility in the capital-share series does not create volatile




                                                     11
estimates of potential GDP (Shackleton 2018). Similarly, in our setting asset price movements

produce period-to-period volatility in portfolio weights; a filter dampens that volatility.7,8

        We made these decisions after careful consideration, but other choices are possible. Some

choices might naturally be revisited in time as data quality improves (e.g., bilateral holdings data

might improve so that a bilateral approach becomes a plausible alternative).9 Others, such as what

theory to use, are more philosophical and so of course other researchers might make different

choices. That others will make different choices to construct a measure of the natural level of capital

flows makes KF* much like stars such as u*, y*, *, and r*.

        We construct KF* for the period 2000 to 2019. The number of countries for which we can

do so is limited primarily by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2018) data on portfolio liabilities; if a country

has portfolio liabilities data, we can create its KF* even if the country does not publish flow data.10

Ninety-one countries have portfolio liabilities data starting in 1995; for these we can form a five-year

lagged rest-of-the-world portfolio weight (ROW,d,t) starting in 2000 (i.e., the average weight from

1995 through 1999).11 For another 90 countries we can form KF* beginning later. In all, we create



7 In practice, all of the empirical results in this paper hold whether we use a trailing 5-year moving average of
weights or trailing moving averages of 1, 2, 3 or 4 years.
8 Note that KF* looks very much like a Bartik (1991) instrument, as used in different settings in Nakamura

and Steinsson (2014), among many others. As current ROW savings is exogenous to the recipient country
and the lagged zero-order weights are pre-determined, KF* could prove to be a useful instrument when
assessing the impact of capital flows on various indicators of interest.
9 A bilateral approach that attributes each origin country's savings according to its exposure to each

destination country would be intuitively appealing but requires high quality bilateral portfolio holdings data.
Such data, even if statistical authorities use best practices, is unfortunately confounded by the use of tax
havens and more generally by any country whose residents tend to utilize third-country custodians and/or
invest through third-country vehicles, such as Luxembourg-based mutual funds (Warnock and Cleaver 2003).
Our ROW approach, consistent with BOP capital flows data (which are also ROW) is less sensitive to these
financial center biases. In addition, we consider the euro area as a whole to alleviate, to the extent possible, its
substantial inter-area financial center bias (Felettigh and Monti 2008).
10 KF* can be created even for small countries that do not have savings or wealth data, as long as one is

willing to assume their savings or wealth are negligible relative to global savings or wealth.
11 We also create year 2000 lagged weights for countries for which Lane and Milesi-Ferretti portfolio liabilities

data begin after 1995 but by 1999; for these (the eurozone and five other countries) the weight in the year
2000 uses a shorter lag. We only implement this fix for countries that have year 2000 flow data.

                                                        12
KF* for 184 countries (see Table A1 in the Appendix). We form a quarterly version of KF* by

linearly interpolating between year-end values.12



3.2 Descriptive Analysis

        Annual KF*by region are plotted in Figure 2. In each region KF* increases through 2011 and

especially in the period starting in 2005. Examining the general trends in KF* highlights the

importance of a theory-based measure. Based on the underlying theory, there can be two possible

reasons for this increase in KF* (see equation 1): increased ROW private savings, which is largely

common to all regions, or foreigners' increased (lagged) weights on a region's stocks and bonds,

which can vary substantially across regions. Indeed, global (excluding China) private savings

increased 8.5% per year over the period from 2005 to 2011, so all else equal each region should have

experienced a commensurate increase in KF*. But all else was not equal. In particular, the weight of

foreign bonds and equities in investors' portfolios increased strongly as there was a general increase

in financial globalization (a reduction in home bias). So, for example, EME Asia's KF* increased

34% per year between 2005 and 2011, as the 8.5% annual increase in ROW savings combined with a

tripling of the weight of its equities and bonds in foreigners' portfolios. Other regions did not

experience the same magnitude of change, but all had increased KF* over the 2005-2011 period,

with annual increases of 13% in Latin America, 20% in EME Europe, 23% in Africa, 18% in the

euro area, 11% in the US, and 14% in AE Other.

        After 2011 things changed. Global (excluding China) private savings was essentially flat from

2011-2018, increasing only 0.2% per year--this is due to relatively stagnant global (excluding China)



12We are limited in ways to create quarterly values of our measure. For many countries positions and wealth
data are only available annually, meaning that weights can only be annual. More importantly, quarterly savings
data is available for surprisingly few countries. That said, we are not overly concerned by this linear
interpolation as our measure is slow moving and it is the deviation between it and flows that matters.

                                                      13
GDP rather than changes in savings rates--so for that period any increase in KF* would have to

come from increased foreign weights.13 Foreign weights did continue to increase in all regions except

the euro area (where the weights were flat from 2011 to 2017) and CIS (where the weights fell).

Thus, in all regions annual increases in KF* slowed over the period 2011-2018 (compared to 2005-

2011) because the tailwind of strong increases in ROW savings was removed. Most regions still

experienced increases in KF* because of the continued internationalization of portfolios (i.e., foreign

weights increased), but the increases slowed.

        Quarterly gross portfolio inflows and KF* are plotted in Figure 3 for the same six countries

from Figure 1; see the Appendix Figure A1 for similar graphs for all 56 countries for which we have

quarterly flow data. To be a useful measure, KF*--built, recall, from the supply of ROW funds--

must help us see through the noise of the volatile quarter-to-quarter flows. For many countries, the

graphs clearly show actual flows fluctuating around KF*. There are some persistent deviations, for

example: Brazilian inflows have been below the natural level for the past three years (Figure 3), and

for Switzerland there appears to be a fundamental disconnect between KF* and actual flows (Figure

A1).14 But for most countries KF* appears to be a level around which volatile quarterly flows

fluctuate. We turn next to more formal analysis.


13 After being flat for almost a decade, global (excluding China) private savings increased by a modest 1.6% in
2019.
14 The Switzerland disconnect owes to a stark disconnect in its reported data on positions and flows,

specifically for equities. Reported portfolio equity inflows have been slightly negative over the past two
decades, whereas the reported positions have increased by about $700 billion. While valuation adjustments
can explain part of the difference, using reasonably returns measures (e.g., the MSCI Switzerland index) there
is still a gap of over $200 billion. Careful analysis in Stoffels and Tille (2018) suggests this gap--which in their
paper sums to US$224 billion from 2000 to 2017--is due to unreported flows. While $224 billion in
additional flows would improve our KF* graph for Switzerland, because the gap is due to infrequent
improvements in positions data there is no way to distribute it across particular time periods. Issues with
reported flow data are also evident for Iceland, specifically with respect to the late 2015 resolution of
liabilities from its financial crisis (where some write downs, which should be valuation adjustments, appear to
be recorded as flows) but also before that (there are large discrepancies across different data sources). KF*
should be robust to many data issues, so in our main analysis we keep Switzerland and Iceland in our dataset
as is and just note that disconnects between reported flows and positions will adversely impact the
relationship between KF* and flows (and this affects our AE empirical results in subsequent sections).

                                                        14
4. KF* and Out-of-Sample Forecasts

        The volatility of international capital flows makes it difficult to discern what level of flows

will likely persist going forward. For our KF* to be successful, it should provide a time-series

reference to pin down low-frequency "fundamental" movements. In practical terms, deviations from

KF* should help forecast flows over the medium-term.



4.1 Predicting Flows over the Medium-Term

        Identifying the natural level of portfolio flows is analogous to the objective of an inflation

targeting central bank looking for a way to extract the "true" inflation signal from the noise of

period-to-period inflation fluctuations. Cogley (2002) noted that there are many candidate methods

to reveal the persistent component of inflation, including measures of core inflation formed by

excluding some volatile components and various filtering methods. In each case the goal, as

specified by Bryan and Cecchetti (1994), is to eliminate transient price variation and identify "the

component of price changes that is expected to persist over medium-run horizons of several years."

        In our setting, a policymaker (or market participant) looking at volatile quarterly flows series

might want to gauge the persistent or natural level of flows that the country will receive in the next

periods. For our measure of KF* to be of practical use, it should provide a reasonable

approximation of where one should expect the level of country i's portfolio inflows to converge in

the future:

                
                , = [,+ ]                                                                 (2)



where E[.] is the expectations operator and h is the medium-run horizon over which flows are

expected to converge to their natural level. Subtracting current flows from both sides of (2) yields

                                  
                [,+ ] - , = -(, - , )                                                     (3)

                                                   15
Equation (3), the capital flow equivalent of the Cogley (2002) analysis of inflation, states that if (2)

holds then the difference between expected h-period ahead flows and current flows is the negative

of today's gap between flows and KF*. Following Cogley (2002), to assess whether our estimate of

KF* fulfills the objective in equations (2) and (3) we test the hypothesis that deviations of current

flows from the natural level are inversely related to subsequent changes in flows. That is, we

estimate:

                                    
                ,+ - , = , + , (, - , ) + ,                                                (4)



        Cogley noted that i,h should equal zero, else KF* would be biased, but focused on h. If KF*

satisfies equations (2) and (3), we expect to estimate i,h=-1 in equation (4) for medium-run

horizons. An estimate of i,h=-1 would suggest that the gap between current flows and KF*

represents the transient component of portfolio flows, and flows can be expected to converge to

KF* in h periods. For horizons of 1 to 12 quarters (h=1,...,12), we implement the Cogley (2002) test

by estimating equation (4) separately for each country.15 Finally, note that this analysis is essentially

out of sample, as it uses the period t gap between actual flows and the predetermined KF* to predict

the h-period-ahead change in flows; the closeness of i,h to -1 is in effect a summary measure of its

performance.

        Figure 4 (left column) presents box plots for the estimates of i,h from equation (4) for the

18 AEs and 37 EMEs that have portfolio flows and KF* over the entire 2000Q4-2019Q4 sample.

From left to right the box plots display i,h estimates for horizons of 1 to 12 quarters. The top and

bottom of each box indicate the 75th and 25th percentile estimates of i,h, the line inside a box




 The Cogley (2002) technique is used by some central banks to gauge the informativeness of various
15

measures of core inflation. See, for example, the Kamber and Wong (2016) application on various inflation
measures in New Zealand.

                                                    16
indicates the median, while the whiskers indicate upper/lower adjacent values (within 1.5 times the

length of the box from the upper/lower quartile) and dots indicate outside values. For both the AE

and EME subsamples we find i,h estimates are generally less than one in absolute value for short

time horizons but approach -1 at intermediate horizons. For example, at the 7-quarter horizon the

median value for i,h is -0.88 for AEs and -0.95 for EMEs. Wald tests indicate failure to reject the

null hypothesis of i,h=-1 for 12 of the 18 AEs at a 6-quarter horizon, and more impressively, we fail

to reject the null of i,h=-1 for 33 of the 37 EMEs at a 5-quarter horizon.16

        The tests suggest that, especially for EMEs, our KF* cuts through the noise of volatile

quarterly flows and provides guidance for the level of portfolio inflows a country should expect to

receive in one to two years. To be clear, KF* is also informative for next quarter's flows--for h=1

the median i,h is roughly -0.7 for AEs and -0.8 for EMEs, suggesting deviations from KF* are

typically short lived--but it is most informative for predicting one-to­two-year-ahead flows. The

Cogley tests support the notion that over the medium-term portfolio flows converge to a natural

level that is well approximated by KF*.



4.2 On the Explanatory Power of KF*

        Cerutti, Claessens and Rose (2019) urges the empirical capital flows literature to think about

the amount of variation in flows explained by various measures, rather than just whether a particular

variable is statistically significant, and at the same time notes (as others have) that the literature is not

explaining much of the variation in flows. Indeed, the R2 in a typical quarterly capital flows

regression is quite low (roughly 0.10 and often even lower). On this we note that the gap between

current flows and KF* explains a substantial portion of the variation in subsequent flows. The right


16Wald test results vary somewhat by horizon but we generally fail to reject i,h =-1 for 9-12 of the 18 AEs
and 22-33 of the EMEs over intermediate horizons. Wald tests also fail to reject the null hypothesis of i,h=0
for the vast majority of AEs and EMEs.

                                                      17
  column of Figure 4 displays box plots for the adjusted R2 from equation (6) for the 18 AEs and 37

  EMEs with complete data on KF* and flows. The median R2 peaks at 0.40 for AEs and 0.43 for

  EMEs at a 9-quarter horizon.

          Of course, the literature Cerutti et al. (2019) is speaking to is attempting to model the

  quarter-to-quarter variation in flows. While the goal of creating a measure of the natural level of

  capital flows is to help gauge what the level of flows will be in the medium term, even for a 1-quarter

  horizon the explanatory power of KF* is substantial, with median R2 of 0.4 (for EMEs) and 0.33 (for

  AEs). This is not an artefact of our sample, as we show by conducting a similar exercise without

  KF* but with a few prominent push and pull factors. For push factors we include changes in VIX

  and long-term interest rates (measured as the average yield on long-term government bonds in the

  US, UK, Euro area and Japan), two variables that are commonly used in the empirical capital flows

  literature (Koepcke (2018)). As a pull factor we add local MSCI equity returns.17 To give the push

  and pull factors maximum potential explanatory power we essentially give them perfect foresight,

  allowing them to enter contemporaneously with the change in flows over the estimated horizon as in

  equation (5):

                                                                                               1/
             1           2           3                                               ,+
,+ - , = , + , (+ -  ) + , (+ -  ) + , ([                                                     ]     - 1) + ,
                                                                                      ,


  (5)

          Figure 5 (middle row) displays box plots for the adjusted R2 from regression equation (5)

  estimated across 1 to 12 quarter horizons for the 17 AEs and 20 EMEs that in addition to having

  complete data on KF* and quarterly flows also have complete MSCI data. We find that push and



  17 MSCI equity returns, because they are based on U.S. dollar returns, are a useful summary measure that
  matters to both equity and bond investors. In particular, MSCI equity returns combine a local growth factor
  that should matter to equity investors (local equity returns are likely higher when local GDP growth is
  stronger) and a currency factor that should matter to international bond investors (as global investors' return
  on a local bond is a combination of the currency and bond returns).

                                                         18
pull factors explain much less of the variation in flows, with adjusted R2 peaking at a median of 0.15

for the 6-quarter EME regressions and also at 0.15 for the 8-quarter AE regressions. For this

sample, the R2 in regressions containing just the gap between flows and KF* peaks around 0.40 (top

row of Figure 5). Finally, and not surprisingly, adding push and pull factors to our KF* regressions

increases the R2 but not by much; peak R2 (at 7 quarters) increases to about 0.51 for EMEs and 0.46

for AEs (bottom row of Figure 5). Deviations from our slow-moving structural measure, KF*,

explain much more of the variation in subsequent flows than traditional push and pull factors.



5. Comparison to Other Plausible Natural Levels

        Many choices must be made when forming any star, including KF*, and other researchers

could choose a different method. It is certainly possible, for example, to create another version of

KF* using univariate statistical filtering methods, such as creating a measure based solely on a

moving average of past flows. Along some dimensions such a measure would perform well enough

but would not lend itself well to an explanation of why deviations from it are likely to be transitory.

        There are at least two relevant examples in the literature. Coibion et al. (2018) note that

many measures of potential GDP adjust too quickly to transitory shocks, and thus potentially send

the wrong signal. (In the y* setting, if slow economic growth feeds quickly into downward revisions

of y*, a policymaker might think there is less slack than otherwise.) Williams (2003), in the context

of r*, notes that while "averaging methods tend to work well at estimating the natural rate of

interest when inflation and output growth are relatively stable, they do not work so well during

periods of significant increases or declines in inflation when real interest rates may deviate from the

natural rate for several years." Williams points to the late 1960s and the 1970s when real rates were

low because inflation increased sharply (and hence real rates were below the natural rate for a long

period), but an averaging approach would falsely ascribe the low real rates to a low natural rate.

                                                   19
5.1 Descriptive Comparison

        Similar dynamics play out with capital flows. In Figure 6a we show, for Colombia, Chile and

Norway, quarterly portfolio flows (the most volatile line in each graph), our measure of KF* (the

smoothest line), and a 12-quarter moving average of portfolio flows. The graphs on the left end

early--in 2015q2 for Colombia and Chile, in 2008q2 for Norway--just to highlight a particular

point. Filters like a 12-quarter moving average are sensitive to recent flows and can be misleading.

For example, in mid-2015, for both Colombia and Chile the 12-quarter moving average had

increased substantially, suggesting the then-current flows were normal. In contrast, KF* was quite a

bit lower, suggesting that those flows were abnormally high. The full sample graphs (on the right)

show that flows did indeed come back to KF*. The same dynamics were apparent in Norway in

2008q2, when flows and the 12-quarter moving average were quite high, but KF* suggested they

were abnormally high. And flows did subsequently return to KF* (and beyond, as flows into

Norway have been low the past few years).

        Two current examples are included Figure 6b. In the case of Mexico, a moving average

proxy for the natural rate of flows would have likely overreacted to the transitory boom in capital

flows experienced from 2011 to 2014. And more recently, the depressed inflows experienced by

euro area and Mexico bring the moving average measure down rather quickly. In contrast, our

measure of KF* makes it clear that 2018-19 inflows into both are well below the natural rate (and

thus are expected to bounce back). Indeed, Figure 6b (and 6a) looks strikingly similar to Figure 4 in

Laubach and Williams (2003), which depicts their measure of r* along with an actual real interest

rate and measures based on univariate filtering.18


18 More generally, our construction of KF* indicates that capital flows to many countries have faced
headwinds since 2011 because global savings have not increased much since then (because global GDP
growth has slowed), thus holding back the growth in KF*. Yes, in many countries (especially those AEs that
have implemented UMP) flows have slowed even more than the slowing of KF*, but some slowing of flows
is natural until more savings are created in the global economy.

                                                     20
5.2 Out-of-Sample Comparisons with Filter-based Measures

        For a more concrete test of alternative statistical proxies for the natural rate of flows we re-

estimate equation (4) replacing KF* with two univariate filters: a twelve-quarter moving average of

portfolio flows and a one-sided HP filter of portfolio flows. Both are arguably out-of-sample

measures and so relevant comparators to our out-of-sample KF*. For this comparison we include

the 32 EMEs and 16 AEs that have complete flows data from 1998Q1 (which allows construction

of the moving average and HP filter to match the KF* sample beginning in 2000Q4). Results are in

Figure 7, with mean absolute deviation from i,h=-1 in the left column, mean R2 in the right column,

and samples varying from top to bottom (EMEs, AEs, and EMEs + non-UMP AEs, respectively).

In each graph KF* is the thick blue line, moving average is the thin yellow line, and HP filter is the

dashed line.

        Recall that estimates of i,h are expected to be -1 if deviations from the natural rate are

transitory. For EMEs the mean absolute deviation bottoms out at 0.13 for KF* at the 9-quarter

horizon and KF* outperforms the filters over 8-12 quarter horizons. For EMEs KF* also has the

highest mean R2 across all forecast horizons, peaking at 0.42 for the 7-quarter horizon.

        For AEs, KF* performs less well, with larger deviations from i,h=-1 relative to univariate

filters. But even where KF* does not perform as well is instructive. KF* performs well for almost all

countries in our sample, but the notable exception is in recent years for the AEs that have

implemented unconventional monetary policies (or UMP, defined here as QE or negative policy

rates). For example, for the 32 EMEs and 10 non-UMP AEs, mean absolute beta deviations from -1

bottom out at 0.14 for the 9-quarter horizon and KF* outperforms in terms of mean R2 across all

horizons (peaking at 0.42). In contrast, KF* performs less well for the 6 UMP AEs: the mean

absolute deviation of i,h from -1 over intermediate horizons is approximately 0.3 and R2 averages

0.34. Filtering methods, which by nature adjust to substantial changes in actual flows, perform better


                                                     21
for UMP countries, but KF* points more definitively to a reason behind the deviation: The large

deviations of actual flows from KF* in UMP countries are due primarily to their much lower than

benchmark bond inflows, suggesting a beggar-thy-neighbor aspect of UMP.

        Overall, KF* performs quite well--by some measures, best--against plausible out-of-sample

alternatives. A useful characteristic of KF* is that being structural and not constructed as a filter,

deviations from it are informative.



5.3 KF* and Hamilton (2018)

        Hamilton (2018) argues forcefully against the use of an HP filter and proposes a simple

alternative that seems tailor made for Cogley-like regressions. Hamilton, when forming his measure,

asks (Hamilton p. 836): "How different is the value at date t+h from the value we would have

expected to see based on its behavior through date t?" That is precisely, in a univariate setting, what

the Cogley analysis is designed to ascertain. Hamilton's alternative uses an OLS regression of a

variable at date t on a constant and the four most recent values as of date t-h in order to isolate the

structural and cyclical components. Hamilton recommends a medium-run horizon of 8 quarters,

which in our case implies a regression of current quarterly flows on flows in periods t-8, t-9, t-10,

and t-11. The fitted values from this regression become an estimate of trend flows and the residual is

the gap, which we will use in Cogley regressions. Note that in our application of Hamilton's

technique we use the entire time series (starting in 1998q1) and so the exercise should be considered

in sample, not out of sample.19

        Figure 8, similar in layout to Figure 7, shows the performance of KF* (which is by design

out of sample) and the Hamilton (2018) linear projection (dashed line). For EMEs (top row), the



19Hamilton notes that the linear projection will converge to an out of sample estimate in the limit as the
sample size gets large.

                                                      22
performance of KF* and Hamilton (2018) is nearly indistinguishable. For the mean absolute

deviation from i,h=-1 the Hamilton linear projection performs slightly better at shorter horizons and

KF* performs slightly better at longer horizons, but for every horizon the differences are very small.

For EMEs the R2 of KF* is for every horizon higher than that of the Hamilton projection, but again

the differences are not large; the largest difference is 0.42 versus 0.39 for a horizon of 8 quarters.

For AEs (middle row), Hamilton dominates KF*, as MA12 and the HP filter did. For EMEs plus

non-UMP AEs (bottom row), the performance of KF* and the Hamilton method is similar, with

Hamilton having slightly smaller mean absolute deviations from i,h=-1 and KF* having a slightly

higher mean R2. Overall, the Hamilton method (like MA12 and the HP filter) is better for AEs that

have implemented UMPs, but for EMEs and non-UMP AEs the performance of the out-of-sample

KF* and the in-sample Hamilton method is similar.



6. Applications: Predicting Extreme Capital Flow Episodes and Equity Returns Using KF*

        In the previous sections we established that KF* helps identify the component in gross

portfolio flows that is expected to persist over medium-run horizons. Given the boom-bust nature

of international flows, the KF* benchmark might be particularly useful when trying to identify

whether the current level of portfolio inflows is sustainable or whether a dramatic change in flows is

imminent. In this section we test whether KF* helps forecast extreme capital flow episodes at a

medium-run horizon. We then proceed to determine whether deviations from KF* help predict

equity returns.




                                                    23
6.1 Predicting Sudden Stops

        We test whether portfolio flows that are well above (below) KF* predict an upcoming sharp

decline (increase) in flows, focusing on the Forbes and Warnock (2012, 2020) extreme capital flow

episodes. That is, does the gap between actual flows and KF* help predict sudden stops and surges?

        For sudden stops we estimate models of the form:



        (,+ = 1) = (  , ,   ,  , )                                                            (6)



where ,+ is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if country i is experiencing a

sudden stop in capital flows at time t+h and   , is the gap (scaled by GDP) between current

flows and KF*, averaged over the last 4 quarters. Everything is as in Forbes and Warnock (2020)

with two exceptions: our forecast horizon is medium term, whereas Forbes and Warnock (2020)

focus on one-quarter-ahead episodes, and we include   . Global factors include global risk

(measured using the year-over-year change in VXO), global liquidity (measured as the year-over-year

percentage growth in the `global' broad money supply, where global is the sum for the euro area, US,

UK and Japan), global monetary policy (measured as the year-over-year change in the average

shadow short rate for the US, UK, euro area and Japan), global growth (measured as year-over-year

global GDP growth from the IMF's World Economic Outlook dataset), and the year-over-year

percentage change in oil prices. Local factors are, as in Forbes and Warnock (2020), limited to local

year-over-year real GDP growth and a regional contagion measure (an indicator equal to one if

another country in the region has an episode). Because extreme capital flow episodes are rare,

following Forbes and Warnock (2020) we estimate equation (6) using the complementary

logarithmic framework, which assumes F() is the cumulative distribution function of the extreme

value distribution. An analogous model is estimated for surges.

                                                  24
        Results from panel estimation of equation (6) at a 6-quarter forecast horizon are presented in

Table 1.20 Merging our KF* dataset with the Forbes and Warnock (2020) capital flows episodes

leaves us with a sample of 30 countries (14 AEs and 16 EMEs) and 2038 quarterly observations. The

results in panel A of Table 1 indicate flows above KF*, strong global growth, and rising global risk

are each associated with an increased likelihood of a sudden stop in capital inflows in 6 quarters.21

        To get a sense for economic magnitudes we calculate the model's estimated probability of a

future stop when KF*gap is at its mean (zero) and one and two standard deviations above its mean

(3.4% and 7.8% of GDP), holding all other variables at their means. When KF*gap is zero--that is,

current flows are equal to KF*--there is an 8.8% probability of experiencing a stop episode six

quarters in the future. But when KF*gap is one or two standard deviations above its mean the

probability of a stop increases to 13.5% and 20.3%, respectively. We also find evidence that the

combination of strong global growth and a large positive KF*gap is a particularly powerful predictor

of a coming sudden stop: When KF*gap and global growth are each one standard deviation above

their means, the probability of a future stop climbs to 31.8%.

        The story that emerges is similar to the `gap' analysis that the BIS uses to predict banking

crises; see Aldasoro, Borio and Drehmann (2018). For example, the BIS uses two `gaps' as

predictors, each defined as an underlying--corporate debt-to-GDP or debt-service ratio--growing

faster than trend, where trend for the BIS credit gap is estimated by an HP-filter and for the debt-

service ratio is a 20-year moving average. The BIS indicators are not based on whether debt levels or

debt servicing burdens are high, but whether they are growing faster than in the past.



20 As a robustness check we also estimate equation (6) at 4- and 8-quarter forecast horizons. KF* gap is the
only variable with statistically significant predictive power across all forecast horizons.
21 In column (2) we present results for surge episodes and find that they are difficult to predict at a six-quarter

horizon; only local GDP growth is strongly significant. Although KF* provides an early warning indicator for
stops, it provides less information about the likelihood of a future surge, suggesting that stops are often
preceded by periods of booming flows but surges do not necessarily begin from periods of depressed flows.

                                                        25
         A similar `gaps' analysis seems at work with predicting sudden stops. When KF* is growing

(because global growth and hence global savings are growing) and actual flows are growing even

faster (i.e., both global growth and KF*gap are above their sample means), a sudden stop is likely in

6 quarters. One difference from the BIS indicators: Our `trend' is not a mechanical trend but KF*.



6.2 Predicting Equity Returns

         The gap between actual flows and KF* helps predict sudden stops (but not surges) over the

medium term. A natural next question is whether the gap also helps predict equity returns. For this

analysis, we operationalize `medium term' by using an annual (year-end) dataset.

         In Table 2 we present results from a panel fixed effects regression of annual MSCI returns

(in U.S. dollars, in excess of the U.S. 3-month Treasury bill rate) for 39 countries (16 AEs and 23

EMEs) on a set of lagged explanatory variables.22 Specifically, we evaluate the extent to which

deviations from KF* during year t-1 impact annual equity returns in year t. Deviations of actual

flows from KF* are scaled by GDP and then averaged over the year. Control variables, guided by

Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2007) and data availability, include the lagged dependent variable,

lagged global variables (world GDP growth and VXO), and lagged local variables (dividend yield,

returns volatility measured as the standard deviation of 12 months of returns, and local GDP

growth).

         The results in Table 2 indicate that annual equity returns are negatively serially correlated

(that is, the lagged dependent variable is negative and significant); periods of strong global growth




22There is a long literature on equity returns predictability. Within that literature, our analysis in this section is
most similar to studies that focus on a set of countries rather than just one (see, among others, Bekaert,
Harvey and Lundblad 2007) and, within that set, those that examine long-run predictability (see, for example,
the output gap analysis in Cooper and Priestley (2009)).

                                                         26
and increased risk appetite (as measured by a low level of VXO) are followed by lower returns; and

the gap between actual flows and KF* helps predict future equity returns.23

        For KF*, the results are again statistically and economically significant. The coefficient on

KF*Gap/GDP is negative and highly statistically significant, indicating that a year in which flows

exceed KF* tends to be followed by lower equity returns in the following year. The impact is

quantitatively significant; a one standard deviation gap in flows from KF* is associated with a 4.7

percentage point reduction in annual equity returns. And, consistent with the sudden stops analysis,

the combination of strong global growth and flows above KF* predicts future trouble. In this case a

country that is experiencing KF* gap/GDP that is one standard deviation above average during a

year of strong global growth (also one standard deviation above average) is predicted to experience a

subsequent annual decline in equity returns of nearly 10 percentage points.



7. Application: From the GFC to Covid

        In previous sections we demonstrated that deviations from KF* have predictive power for

medium-run portfolio flows, sudden stops, and equity returns. In the context of the current covid-

19 health crisis one might be curious whether KF* provides useful information about future

portfolio flows in the face of a sudden large global shock. With the covid-19 crisis ongoing we lack

data for formal analysis of the current episode, so instead we turn back to the last sudden large

global shock--the GFC--to see what lessons might be applicable.

        If KF* represents the natural level of portfolio flows, we predict countries receiving flows

well above KF* are most likely to experience a sharp reduction in flows in response to an external

global shock. We use data from the GFC to test this hypothesis. First, for each country, we calculate



23As a robustness check, we also measure returns in local currency, and the results (not reported) are very
similar.

                                                      27
the average KF* gap/GDP over the four quarters of 2007 as a measure of pre-GFC vulnerability.

Then we calculate the GFC-impact of the crisis on flows as average flows/GDP during the GFC

period (2008Q4-2009Q3) minus flows/GDP during 2007.

        Figure 9 provides visual evidence in support of the hypothesis that countries with large

deviations from KF* during 2007 subsequently suffered the largest (scaled by GDP) reductions in

flows during the crisis. The top left panel includes the full sample of 51 countries, of which Hong

Kong is an outlier that happens to fit the hypothesis perfectly. During 2007 Hong Kong received

massive financial inflows that then evaporated during the GFC. In the top right panel we drop Hong

Kong from the sample and still see a clear relationship for the remaining countries. Countries with

flows well above KF* in 2007 subsequently experienced a sharp drop in flows while countries that

entered the crisis with flows closer to the natural level tended to experience more moderate changes

in flows. The bottom left panel demonstrates that the relationship becomes even stronger after

dropping countries that conducted unconventional monetary policy (consistent with our earlier

stronger results when this group is excluded) and in the bottom right panel we see that the

relationship also holds for a sample of 33 EMEs. Finally, Table 3 provides the linear regression

results corresponding to scatter plots provided in Figure 9. For each sample the relationship

between the KF* gap in 2007 and subsequent change in flows during the GFC is highly statistically

significant.

        The pre-GFC gap between actual flows and KF* was a very strong predictor of the

magnitude of the decrease in flows during the GFC. To apply that insight to the current pandemic

we plot, in Figure 10, the pre-pandemic (i.e., 2019) deviation of portfolio flows from KF* (scaled by

GDP). Notably, most countries in our sample were experiencing flows below KF* during 2019,

suggesting they are less vulnerable to a dramatic decline in flows during the current covid-19 crisis.

The few countries that experienced flows significantly above KF* during 2019--Ecuador, Chile, and


                                                   28
Ukraine each had positive gaps on the order of 2% of GDP--seem more susceptible to a large

correction in portfolio flows during 2020.

        Overall, applying what we learned from the GFC to the current crisis suggests (i) flows have

less room to fall as many countries were below KF* at the eve of the current global shock, (ii) for

most countries any drop in flows experienced during the crisis is likely to be temporary as a rebound

toward KF* should be expected in the intermediate term, and (iii) a few countries (Ecuador, Chile,

and Ukraine) seem more vulnerable than others.



8. Conclusion

        Capital flows are quite volatile, plotting them does not seem to offer insights further than

their gyrations, and yet researchers try to model them and policymakers must try to discern the

signal hidden amongst the noise. We put forward a theoretically motivated candidate for the natural

level of capital flows, KF*. In the DSGE model of Tille and van Wincoop (2010), savings provides a

persistent source of gross portfolio flows allocated according to steady state portfolio weights. These

portfolio growth flows provide an intuitive foundation for KF*. Although high frequency flows will

be influenced by shocks to risk (i.e., time varying second moments), flows should return to their

natural level over time.

        Empirically, KF* performs well. Quarterly flows, which are quite volatile, oscillate around

KF*; deviations of actual flows from their natural level (approximated by KF*) are transitory; with

portfolio flows (especially for EMEs and non-UMP AEs) reverting to KF* over a 1-to-2-year

horizon. This tendency of the transitory element in quarterly portfolio flows to dissipate over time

grants KF* significant explanatory power for the change in flows over the medium-run; the

reversion of portfolio flows to KF* can explain roughly 40% of the medium-run variation, while

contemporaneous push and pull factors have far less explanatory power. Moreover, a positive gap

                                                  29
between actual flows and KF* is a strong predictor of sudden stops and negative equity returns,

especially when coupled with above-average global growth. Specifically, when strong global growth

(and, hence, global savings) drives an acceleration of KF*, if actual flows are growing even faster

than KF*, then a subsequent sudden stop and negative equity returns are likely.

        While empirical tests suggest KF* is a useful construct which helps identify the underlying

persistent component in gross portfolio inflows by differentiating between longer-term structural

flows and short-term cyclical noise, another useful characteristic is that it is structural and not based

on the filtering of actual flows. Since KF* is constructed from underlying fundamentals, we can do

better than saying flows are lower than (a potentially dynamic) trend and instead understand root

drivers. For example, KF* highlights that capital flows all over the world faced headwinds from

2011 to 2017 because global private savings was flat. And even where KF* does not perform as well

is instructive. It performs less well for AEs that have implemented unconventional monetary

policies, but this is just a realization of one intent of such policies: to greatly reduce the amount of

bond inflows so the domestic currency depreciates.

        Finally, we note that KF* is a potentially useful tool for understanding the outlook for

capital flows in the aftermath of the covid-19 crisis. As of end-2019 most countries in our sample

experienced flows that were below KF* which suggests any decline in flows during the crisis is likely

to be temporary and a rebound toward KF* should be expected in the intermediate term. And the

long-run outlook for flows depends crucially on a post-crisis rebound in global growth (and hence

global savings) which, along with steady-state portfolio weights, are the underlying fundamentals of

KF*.




                                                    30
                                                 References
Aldasoro, Iñaki, Claudio Borio and Mathias Drehmann, 2018. Early warning indicators of banking crises:
    expanding the family. BIS Quarterly Review March: 29-45.
Alfaro, Laura, Anusha Chari and Fabio Kanczuk, 2017. The Real Effects of Capital Controls: Firm-Level
    Evidence from a Policy Experiment. Journal of International Economics 108(C): 191-210.
Bartik, Timothy J., 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? Kalamazoo,
    MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 2000. Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets. Journal of
   Finance 55: 565-613.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2007. Liquidity and Expected Returns:
   Lessons from Emerging Markets. Review of Financial Studies 20(6): 1783-1831.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2011. Financial Openness and Productivity.
   World Development 39(1): 1-19.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, Christian T. Lundblad and Stephan Siegel, 2011. What Segments Equity
   Markets? Review of Financial Studies 24(12): 3847-3890.
Blanchard, O. J., Diamond, P., 1989. The Beveridge curve. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 20, 1-76.
Bryan, Michael F., and Stephen G. Cecchetti, 1993. The Consumer Price Index as a Measure of Inflation.
    Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review (December), 15­24.
------, 1994. `Measuring Core Inflation.' (pp. 195­215), in N. Gregory Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Burger, J., F. Warnock, and V. Warnock, 2018. Benchmarking Portfolio Flows. IMF Economic Review 66(3):
   527­563.
Calvo, Guillermo, Leiderman, Leonardo, Reinhart, Carmen, 1993. Capital inflows and real exchange rate
    appreciation in Latin America: the role of external factors. IMF Staff Papers 40(1): 108­151.
Calvo, Guillermo, Leiderman, Leonardo, Reinhart, Carmen, 1996. Inflows of capital to developing countries
    in the 1990s. Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(2): 123­139.
Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens and Damien Puy, 2019. Push factors and capital flows to emerging markets:
    why knowing your lender matters more than fundamentals. Journal of International Economics 119: 133-149.
Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens and Andrew K. Rose, 2019. How Important is the Global Financial Cycle?
    Evidence from Capital Flows. IMF Economic Review 67: 24-60.
Chari, Anusha, Karlye Dilts Stedman and Christian Lundblad, forthcoming. Taper Tantrums: Quantitative
   Easing, Its Aftermath, and Emerging Market Capital Flows. Review of Financial Studies.
Cogley, Timothy, 2002. A simple adaptive measure of core inflation. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 34(1):
   94-113.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Mauricio Ulate, 2018. The Cyclical Sensitivity in Estimates of
    Potential Output. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall) 343-434.
Cooper, Ilan, and Richard Priestley, 2009. Time-Varying Risk Premiums and the Output Gap. Review of
   Financial Studies 22(7): 2801-2833.
Crump, Richard K., Stefano Eusepi, Marc Giannoni, and Ayegül ahin, 2019. A Unified Approach to
   Measuring u*. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2019(1): 143-238.

                                                       31
Davies, Jim, Rodrigo Lluberas, and Anthony Shorrocks, 2018. Global Wealth Databook. Credit Suisse Research
   Institute.
Davis, S., Faberman, R. J., Haltiwanger, J., 2013. The establishment-level behavior of vacancies and hiring.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 26, 3-26.
Devereux, Michael B., and Alan Sutherland, 2011. Country Portfolios in Open Economy Macro-Models.
   Journal of the European Economic Association 9(2): 337-369.
Edison, Hali, and Francis E. Warnock, 2003. A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital Controls. Journal of
    Empirical Finance 10(1/2): 81-103.
Edison, Hali, and Francis E. Warnock, 2004. U.S. Investors' Emerging Market Equity Portfolios: A Security-
    Level Analysis, Review of Economics and Statistics 86: 691 - 704.
Felettigh, Alberto, and Paola Monti, 2008. How to interpret the CPIS data on the distribution of foreign
    portfolio assets in the presence of sizeable cross-border positions in mutual funds. Evidence for Italy and
    the main euro-area countries. Banca d'Italia Occasional Paper Series No. 16.
Forbes, Kristin, and Francis E. Warnock, 2012. Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight and Retrenchment.
   Journal of International Economics 88(2): 235-251.
Forbes, Kristin J., Francis E. Warnock, 2020. Capital Flow Waves--or Ripples? Extreme Capital Flow
   Movements since the Crisis. NBER Working Paper 26851.
Forbes, Kristin J., Marcel Fratzscher, Thomas Kostka, and Roland Straub, 2015. Capital Flow Management
   Measures: What are They Good For? Journal of International Economics 96(1): S76-S97.
Froot, K. A., and Tarun Ramadorai, 2005. Currency Returns, Intrinsic Value, and Institutional-Investor
   Flows. Journal of Finance 60(3): 1535-1566.
Froot, K. A., and Tarun Ramadorai, 2008. Institutional portfolio flows and international investments. Review
   of Financial Studies 21(2): 937-971.
Gali, J., Smets, F., Wouters, R., 2012. Unemployment in an estimated new Keynesian model. In: Acemoglu,
    D., Woodford, M. (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011, MIT Press, vol. 26, pp. 329-360.
Griffin, J., Nardari, F., Stulz, R., 2004. Are daily cross-border flows pushed or pulled? Review of Economics and
    Statistics 86(3): 641­657.
Hamilton, James, 2018. Why You Should Never Use the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. Review of Economics and
   Statistics 100: 831-843.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams, 2017. Measuring the natural rate of interest:
   International trends and determinants. Journal of International Economics 108: S59-S75.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999. A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading and
   Overreaction in Asset Markets. Journal of Finance 54(6): 2143-2184.
Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Lundblad, Christian, Ramadorai, Tarun, 2012. Asset fire sales and purchases and the
     international transmission of funding shocks. Journal of Finance 67 (6), 2015­2050.
Kamber, Günes, and Benjamin Wong, 2016. Testing an Interpretation of Core Inflation Measures in New
   Zealand. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note Series AN2016/06.
Koepcke, R., 2018. What drives capital flows to emerging markets? A survey of the empirical literature. Journal
   of Economic Surveys.
Koijen, Ralph, and Motohiro Yogo, 2019. A Demand System Approach to Asset Pricing. Journal of Political
    Economy 127(4): 1475­1515.

                                                        32
Koijen, Ralph, and Motohiro Yogo, 2020. Exchange Rates and Asset Prices in a Global Demand System.
    NBER Working Paper 27342.
Lane, Philip, and Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2018. The External Wealth of Nations Revisited: International
   Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis. IMF Economic Review 66:189­222.
Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams, 2003. Measuring the natural rate of interest. Review of Economic
   Statistics 85(4): 1063-1070.
Mark, Nelson C., 1995. Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-Horizon Predictability.
   American Economic Review 85(1): 201-218.
McDermott, John, 2017. Looking at the stars. Reserve Bank of New Zealand speech (Auckland, 26 July
  2017).
McKinsey Global Institute, 2018. Rising corporate debt: Peril or promise? MGI Discussion Paper.
Mendoza, Enrique, and Marco Terrones, 2012. An Anatomy of Credit Booms and their Demise. NBER
   Working Paper 18379.
Meng, G., and Eric van Wincoop, 2020. A Decomposition of International Capital Flows. IMF Economic
   Review 68(2): 362-389.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson, 2014. Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from U.S. Regions.
   American Economic Review 104(3): 753­792.
Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams, 2002. Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural
   Rates. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 63-145.
Pandolfi, Lorenzo , and Tomas Williams, 2019. Capital Flows and Sovereign Debt Markets: Evidence from
   Index Rebalancings, Journal of Financial Economics 132(2): 384-403.
Powell, Jerome, 2018. Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy. Speech at "Changing Market Structure and
   Implications for Monetary Policy" (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming).
Raddatz, Claudio, Sergio Schmukler and Tomas Williams, 2017. International Asset Allocations and Capital
   Flows: The Benchmark Effect. Journal of International Economics 108:413-430.
Rey, Hélène, 2013. Dilemma not Trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy independence.
    Proceedings of the 2013 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium at Jackson Hole,
    pp. 285­333.
Shackleton, Robert, 2018. Estimating and Projecting Potential Output Using CBO's Forecasting Growth
    Model. Congressional Budget Office Working Paper 2018-03.
Staiger, Douglas, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson, 1997. How Precise are Estimates of the Natural Rate
     of Unemployment?" (pp. 195­246), in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer (Eds.), Reducing Inflation:
     Motivation and Strategy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997).
Stock, J., and M. Watson, 2016. Core inflation and trend inflation. Review of Economics and Statistics 98: 770-784.
Stoffels, Nicolas, and Cédric Tille, 2018. Do Swiss foreign assets hedge the business cycle? Aussenwirtschaft,
    University of St. Gallen, School of Economics and Political Science, Swiss Institute for International
    Economics and Applied Economics Research, vol. 69(01), pages 1-40, December.
Tille, Cedric, and Eric van Wincoop, 2010. International Capital Flows. Journal of International Economics 80(2):
     157-175.
Warnock, Francis E. and Chad Cleaver, 2003. Financial Centers and the Geography of Capital Flows.
   International Finance 6(1): 27-59.

                                                        33
Wicksell, K., 1936. Interest and Prices. (R.F. Kahn, Trans.) New York: Sentry Press. (Original work published in
   1898 as Geldzins und Güterpreise.)
Williams, J.C., 2003. The natural rate of interest. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2003-32,
    October 31, 2003.




                                                         34
Figure 1. Gross Portfolio Inflows (2000q4-2019q4, billions of USD)




                                                       35
Figure 2. KF* by Region (annual data, $US billions)
Note that only countries with KF* for the entire sample are included in the below graphs.

A. Emerging Market Economies




                                                          36
Figure 2. KF* by Region (cont.)

B. Advanced Economies




                                  37
Figure 3. KF* and Gross Portfolio Inflows (2000q4-2019q4, billions of USD)




                                                      38
Figure 4. Cogley Results
The graphs summarize estimates of i,h (left column) and the adjusted R2 (right column) from country-level regressions
of eq. (4) for the 18 AEs and 37 EMEs that have KF* and flows data for the entire sample starting 2000q4. In each
graph, going from left to right the horizon increases (starting at 1-quarter ahead and ending with 12-quarters ahead).
The top and bottom of each box indicate the 75th and 25th percentile estimates (of i,h or the adjusted R2), the line
inside a box indicates the median, while the whiskers indicate upper/lower adjacent values (within 1.5 times the length
of the box from the upper/lower quartile) and dots indicate outside values.




       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
           Forecast horizon (quarters)                                   Forecast horizon (quarters)




        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
            Forecast horizon (quarters)                                 Forecast horizon (quarters)




                                                           39
Figure 5. Cogley R2 Comparison
The graphs summarize the adjusted R2 from individual country regressions for the 17 AEs and 20 EMEs that have
KF*, flows, and MSCI equity returns for the entire sample. The top row of graphs include only KF*, as in eq. (4); the
middle row includes only push and pull factors, as in eq. (5); and the bottom row includes both. See note to Figure 4 for
details on how to interpret the box and whisker graphs.




       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
           Forecast horizon (quarters)                                 Forecast horizon (quarters)




       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
           Forecast horizon (quarters)                                  Forecast horizon (quarters)




       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
           Forecast horizon (quarters)                                 Forecast horizon (quarters)


                                                           40
Figure 6a.KF* and a Moving Average Measure
In this figure, the smooth line is KF*, the most volatile is actual portfolio inflows, and the other line is a 12-quarter
moving average of portfolio inflows. Graphs on the right side include the full sample through 2019q4; graphs on the
left side end in 2015q2 (for Colombia and Chile) and 2008q2 (for Norway). All series are quarterly and in billions of
USD.




                                                             41
Figure 6b. KF* and a Moving Average Measure
In this figure, the smooth line is KF*, the most volatile is actual portfolio inflows, and the other line is a 12-quarter
moving average of portfolio inflows. All series are quarterly and in billions of USD.




                                                             42
Figure 7. Out-of-Sample Predictive Power of KF*, HP Filter and MA12
The figure presents the absolute value of mean average deviation (left column) of beta from negative 1 and the mean R2
(right column) for a sample of 32 EMEs and 16 AEs for forecast horizons (plotted on the horizontal axes) of 1 to 12
quarters. The forecast periods are 2000Q4-2018Q1 (so that the last forecast period is 2019Q4). MA (thin yellow line) is
a 12-quarter moving average and HP (dashed line) is a one-sided HP filter. UMP is defined here as quantitative easing
and/or negative policy rates.




                                                          43
Figure 8. Predictive Power of KF* and Linear Projections
The figure presents the absolute value of mean average deviation (left column) of beta from negative 1 and the mean R2
(right column) for a sample of 32 EMEs and 16 AEs for forecast horizons (plotted on the horizontal axes) of 1 to 12
quarters. The forecast periods are 2000Q4-2018Q1 (so that the last forecast period is 2019Q4). The Hamilton (2018)
linear projection (dashed line) is described in the text. UMP is defined as quantitative easing and/or negative policy
rates.




                                                         44
Figure 9. KF* and Portfolio flows during the Global Financial Crisis
The figure presents scatterplots for the relationship between the average 2007 KF*gap/GDP (the deviation of actual
flows from KF*, expressed as a share of GDP) and the subsequent change in portfolio flows during the GFC. The
change in flows is calculated as average flows/GDP during the GFC period (2008Q4-2009Q3) minus flows/GDP
during 2007. UMP is defined here as quantitative easing and/or negative policy rates.




                                                         45
Figure 10. KF* Gap on the Eve of the Global Pandemic
The figure presents the average 2019 KF*gap/GDP (that is, the deviation of actual flows from KF*, expressed as a
share of GDP).




                                                         46
Table 1. KF* and Extreme Capital Flow Episodes
Panel A presents regressions of period t+6 sudden stops and surges on period t KF*gap/GDP (the deviation of actual
flows from KF*, expressed as a share of GDP) and global and local variables. Global variables include global GDP
growth (year-over-year), risk (measured as the change in the VIX), liquidity (measured as the year-over-year percentage
growth in the `global' broad money supply, where global is the sum for the US, UK, euro area and Japan), monetary
policy (measured as the year-over-year change in the average shadow short rate for the US, UK, euro area and Japan),
and the year-over-year percentage change in oil prices. Local factors are local year-over-year real GDP growth and a
regional contagion measure (an indicator equal to one if another country in the region has an episode). Panel B shows,
using marginal effects from those regressions, the probability of a period t+6 sudden stop when (i) KF*gap/GDP is at
its mean (0%) and 1 and 2 standard deviations above its mean (3.4% and 6.8%), holding all other variables at their
means, and (ii) both KF*gap/GDP and global GDP growth are 1 standard deviations above their means.
                                                                                      Prob(Surge) t+ 6
                  Panel A                   Prob(Stop) t+ 6 quarters                       quarters

              KF* gap/GDP                    13.328**                                     0.887
                                              (5.763)                                    (2.357)
            Global Variables
           Global GDP Growth                 0.605***                                    -0.173*
                                              (0.200)                                    (0.101)
                   Risk                      0.072***                                     -0.002
                                              (0.020)                                    (0.076)
                Liquidity                       0.091                                     -0.000
                                              (0.069)                                    (0.039)
                Oil Prices                     -0.003                                      0.005
                                              (0.003)                                    (0.004)
            Monetary Policy                     0.225                                     0.241*
                                              (0.173)                                    (0.133)
     Local and Contagion Variables
           Local GDP Growth                     0.012                                   0.062***
                                              (0.027)                                    (0.024)
           Regional Contagion                  -0.132                                     0.200
                                              (0.154)                                    (0.155)

              Observations                     2038                                       2038
               Countries                        30                                         30


                Panel B                    Prob (Stop) t+6 quarters
           KF* gap/GDP = 0%                   8.8%
          KF* gap/GDP = 3.4%                 13.5%
          KF* gap/GDP = 6.8%                 20.3%

         KF* gap/GDP = 3.8% &
         Global growth = 4.2%                 31.8%


                                                           47
Table 2. KF* and Equity Returns
Panel fixed effects regressions of annual period t MSCI equity returns on period t-1 explanatory variables. Explanatory
variables include the lagged dependent variable, lagged KF*gap/GDP (the deviation of actual flows from KF*,
expressed as a share of GDP), lagged global variables (global GDP growth, VXO) and lagged local variables (dividend
yield, 12-month returns volatility, local GDP growth). Sample period is 2002-2019. Robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses.




      Lagged Dependent Variable                -0.105*
                                                (0.052)
             KF* Gap / GDP                    -1.150***
                                                (0.273)
            Global Variables
           Global GDP Growth                  -3.729***
                                                (1.350)
                  VXO                         -0.794***
                                                (0.260)
             Local Variables
             Dividend Yield                      1.338
                                                (1.371)
            Returns Volatility                   0.786
                                                (0.260)
           Local GDP Growth                      0.505
                                                (0.781)


          Country Fixed Effect                   YES
              Within R2                         0.141
             Observations                        712
              Countries                          39




                                                          48
Table 3. KF* and Portfolio Flows during the Global Financial Crisis
The table presents simple bivariate regression results for the relationship between the average 2007 KF*gap/GDP (the
deviation of actual flows from KF*, expressed as a share of GDP) and the subsequent change in portfolio flows during
the GFC. The change in flows is calculated as average flows/GDP during the GFC period (2008Q4-2009Q3) minus
flows/GDP during 2007. UMP is defined here as quantitative easing and/or negative policy rates.



                        Full Sample            Drop HK         Drop HK + UMP             EMEs

   KF* Gap/GDP           -1.023***            -0.810***           -1.094***            -1.000***
      (2007)               (0.103)              (0.159)             (0.083)              (0.214)

        R2                  0.661               0.336                0.540               0.395
     Countries               51                  50                   43                  33




                                                          49
                                   Appendix A: The exChina Adjustment


        One limitation of the ROW approach is that it assumes that all ROW savings are allocated in the same

way across countries--specifically, according to ROW portfolio weights. China however differs in that while

it creates a large portion of world savings (27% in 2015) it has comparatively little outbound international

portfolio investment. This disconnect between the importance of China in world savings and its (limited)

propensity to invest internationally suggests a three-step adjustment.

        First, we exclude China from ROW savings.

        Second, we make flows consistent with excluding China. For the seven reserve currency countries

identified in IMF COFER data (US, UK, Eurozone, Japan, Switzerland, Australia, and Canada), we remove

China's bond flows. There is no direct measure of China's official bilateral flows (or its positions)--that is,

the People's Bank of China does not publish the details of its international portfolio--so we must estimate

these. We assume China's reserve holdings are distributed across countries as global reserves are distributed

across currencies in the IMF COFER data (and we then equate countries with currencies). To construct

implied China bond flows we then multiply this period's reserve accumulation by China by last period's IMF

COFER currency weights.

        Third, ROW portfolio weights must be consistent with excluding China's holdings. This follows from

our bond flows adjustment: implied China bond holdings are simply the stock of China's reserves multiplied

by the COFER currency weights.

        We can construct this exChina adjustment for our entire annual sample; for quarterly data the

adjustment can be done starting in 2005 (when China began to report quarterly flow data, including reserve

accumulation, to the IMF).




                                                        50
Table A1. Country Coverage for KF*
Countries are listed in alphabetical order within regions, which are primarily from the IMF's Classification of Countries.
                       Start End     code                             Start End

United States          2000 2019          Sub-Saharan Africa
                                      614 Angola                      2003   2019
Euro Area              2000 2019      638 Benin                       2000   2019
                                      616 Botswana                    2000   2019
Other Advanced Economies              748 Burkina Faso                2005   2019
Australia              2000   2019    618 Burundi                     2002   2019
Canada                 2000   2019    662 Cote d'Ivoire               2000   2019
China,P.R.:Macao       2000   2019    622 Cameroon                    2002   2019
Czech Republic         2000   2019    624 Cape Verde                  2009   2019
Denmark                2000   2019    626 Central African Rep.        2006   2019
Hong Kong              2000   2019    632 Comoros                     2006   2019
Iceland                2000   2019    636 Congo, Dem. Rep. of         2000   2019
Israel                 2000   2019    634 Congo, Republic of          2000   2019
Japan                  2000   2019    642 Equatorial Guinea           2006   2018
Korea                  2000   2019    643 Eritrea                     2006   2019
New Zealand            2000   2019    644 Ethiopia                    2010   2019
Norway                 2000   2019    646 Gabon                       2006   2019
San Marino             2006   2019    648 Gambia, The                 2003   2019
Singapore              2000   2019    652 Ghana                       2000   2019
Sweden                 2000   2019    656 Guinea                      2000   2019
Switzerland            2000   2019    654 Guinea-Bissau               2006   2019
Taiwan                 2000   2019    664 Kenya                       2000   2019
United Kingdom         2000   2019    666 Lesotho                     2000   2019
                                      668 Liberia                     2006   2019
Commonwealth of Independent States    674 Madagascar                  2006   2019
Armenia               2000 2019       676 Malawi                      2007   2019
Azerbaijan            2000 2019       678 Mali                        2000   2019
Belarus               2000 2019       684 Mauritius                   2000   2019
Georgia               2004 2019       688 Mozambique                  2009   2019
Kazakhstan            2000 2019       728 Namibia                     2005   2019
Kyrgyz Republic       2000 2019       692 Niger                       2000   2019
Moldova               2000 2019       694 Nigeria                     2009   2019
Russia                2000 2019       714 Rwanda                      2003   2019
Tajikistan            2003 2019       722 Senegal                     2000   2019
Turkmenistan          2006 2019       718 Seychelles                  2009   2019
Ukraine               2000 2019       724 Sierra Leone                2006   2019
Uzbekistan            2006 2019       199 South Africa                2000   2019
                                      734 Swaziland                   2009   2019
Emerging and Developing Europe        738 Tanzania                    2000   2019
Albania                 2002 2019     742 Togo                        2004   2019
Bosnia and Herzegovina 2003 2019      746 Uganda                      2004   2019
Bulgaria                2000 2019     754 Zambia                      2011   2019
Croatia                 2000 2019     698 Zimbabwe                    2000   2019
Hungary                 2000 2019
Kosovo                  2009 2019         Latin American and the Caribbean
Macedonia               2003 2019     311 Antigua and Barbuda      2006 2019
Poland                  2000 2019     213 Argentina                2000 2019
Romania                 2000 2019     314 Aruba                    2000 2018
Serbia                  2004 2019     313 Bahamas, The             2005 2019
Turkey                  2000 2019     316 Barbados                 2000 2019
                                      339 Belize                   2000 2019
                                      218 Bolivia                  2000 2019


                                                                 51
Table A1. Country Coverage for KF* (cont.)

code                                Start End           code                         Start End

           Latin American and the Caribbean (cont.)             Emerging and Developing Asia
       223 Brazil                   2000 2019               513 Bangladesh             2000 2019
       228 Chile                    2000 2019               514 Bhutan                 2013 2019
       233 Colombia                 2000 2019               516 Brunei Darussalam      2002 2019
       238 Costa Rica               2000 2019               522 Cambodia               2000 2019
       321 Dominica                 2000 2019               924 China,P.R.: Mainland   2000 2019
       243 Dominican Republic       2000 2019               819 Fiji                   2010 2019
       248 Ecuador                  2000 2019               534 India                  2000 2019
       253 El Salvador              2000 2019               536 Indonesia              2000 2019
       328 Grenada                  2000 2019               826 Kiribati               2012 2019
       258 Guatemala                2000 2019               544 Lao People's Dem.Rep 2002 2019
       336 Guyana                   2000 2019               548 Malaysia               2000 2019
       263 Haiti                    2003 2019               556 Maldives               2000 2019
       268 Honduras                 2000 2019               868 Micronesia             2000 2019
       343 Jamaica                  2000 2019               948 Mongolia               2008 2019
       273 Mexico                   2000 2019               518 Myanmar                2006 2019
       278 Nicaragua                2002 2019               836 Nauru                  2013 2019
       283 Panama                   2000 2019               558 Nepal                  2006 2019
       288 Paraguay                 2000 2019               565 Palau                  2006 2019
       293 Peru                     2000 2019               853 Papua New Guinea       2000 2019
       361 St. Kitts and Nevis      2006 2019               566 Philippines            2000 2019
       362 St. Lucia                2007 2019               862 Samoa                  2006 2019
       364 St. Vincent & Grens.     2006 2019               813 Solomon Islands        2011 2019
       366 Suriname                 2002 2019               524 Sri Lanka              2000 2019
       369 Trinidad and Tobago      2000 2019               578 Thailand               2000 2019
       298 Uruguay                  2000 2019               537 Timor-Leste            2015 2019
       299 Venezuela, Rep. Bol.     2000 2019               866 Tonga                  2006 2019
                                                            869 Tuvalu                 2006 2019
           Middle East, North Africa Afghanistan and Pakistan
                                                            846 Vanuatu                2007 2019
       512 Afghanistan, I.R. of      2012 2019              582 Vietnam                2002 2019
       612 Algeria                   2000 2019
       419 Bahrain                   2000 2019                  Financial centers nec
       611 Djibouti                  2008 2019              319 Bermuda                2006 2019
       469 Egypt                     2000 2019              379 British Virgin Islands 2005 2019
       429 Iran, Islamic Republic of 2000 2019              377 Cayman Islands         2006 2019
       433 Iraq                      2010 2019              823 Gibraltar              2006 2019
       439 Jordan                    2000 2019              113 Guernsey               2006 2019
       443 Kuwait                    2000 2019              118 Isle of Man            2006 2019
       446 Lebanon                   2000 2019              117 Jersey                 2006 2019
       672 Libya                     2006 2019              839 New Caledonia          2006 2019
       682 Mauritania                2006 2019
       686 Morocco                   2000 2019                  Other countries nec
       449 Oman                      2007 2019              312 Anguilla               2006 2019
       564 Pakistan                  2000 2019              354 Curacao                2015 2019
       453 Qatar                     2001 2019              887 French Polynesia       2007 2018
       456 Saudi Arabia              2013 2019              147 Liechtenstein          2007 2019
       732 Sudan                     2008 2019              352 Sint Maarten           2015 2019
       463 Syrian Arab Republic      2002 2011              381 Turks and Caicos       2006 2019
       744 Tunisia                   2000 2019              487 West Bank and Gaza     2003 2019
       466 United Arab Emirates      2002 2019
       474 Yemen, Republic of        2003 2019


                                                                    52
Table A2. Country Coverage for Quarterly Flow Data
Countries are listed in alphabetical order within regions, which are primarily from the IMF's Classification of Countries.
All 56 countries that had 20 years of quarterly portfolio inflow data in the IMF's IFS dataset as of September 27 2020
are included.

       Advanced Economies                                           Emerging and Developing Asia
 193   Australia                  1998q1      2019q4          513   Bangladesh               1998q1             2019q4
 156   Canada                     1998q1      2019q4          924   China                    1998q1             2019q4
 935   Czech Republic             1998q1      2019q4          534   India                    1998q1             2019q4
 128   Denmark                    1998q1      2019q4          536   Indonesia                1998q1             2019q4
 163   Eurozone                   1998q1      2019q4          548   Malaysia                 1999q1             2019q4
 532   Hong Kong                  1999q1      2019q4          564   Pakistan                 1998q1             2019q4
 176   Iceland                    1998q1      2019q4          566   Philippines              1998q1             2019q4
 436   Israel                     1998q1      2019q4          524   Sri Lanka                1998q1             2019q4
 158   Japan                      1998q1      2019q4          578   Thailand                 1998q1             2019q4
 196   New Zealand                1998q1      2019q4
 142   Norway                     1998q1      2019q4                Other EMEs
 576   Singapore                  1998q1      2019q4          911   Armenia                       1998q1        2019q4
 542   South Korea                1998q1      2019q4          913   Belarus                       1998q1        2019q4
 144   Sweden                     1998q1      2019q4          918   Bulgaria                      1998q1        2019q4
 146   Switzerland                1999q1      2019q4          960   Croatia                       1998q1        2019q4
 528   Taiwan                     1998q1      2019q4          944   Hungary                       1998q1        2019q4
 112   United Kingdom             1998q1      2019q4          439   Jordan                        1999q1        2019q4
 111   United States              1998q1      2019q4          916   Kazakhstan                    1998q1        2019q4
                                                              962   Macedonia                     1998q1        2019q4
       Latin American and the Caribbean                       684   Mauritius                     2000q1        2019q4
 213   Argentina              1998q1          2019q4          921   Moldova                       1998q1        2019q4
 314   Aruba                  1998q1          2019q4          964   Poland                        2000q1        2019q4
 223   Brazil                 1998q1          2019q4          968   Romania                       1998q1        2019q4
 228   Chile                  1998q1          2019q4          922   Russia                        1998q1        2019q4
 233   Colombia               1998q1          2019q4          199   South Africa                  1998q1        2019q4
 238   Costa Rica             1999q1          2019q4          186   Turkey                        1998q1        2019q4
 248   Ecuador                1998q1          2019q4          926   Ukraine                       1998q1        2019q4
 253   El Salvador            1998q1          2019q4
 258   Guatamala              1998q1          2019q4
 273   Mexico                 1998q1          2019q4
 293   Peru                   1998q1          2019q4
 298   Uruguay                2000q1          2019q4
 299   Venezuela              1998q1          2019q1




                                                            53
Figure A1. KF* and Gross Portfolio Inflows (2000q4-2019q4, billions of USD)
All countries 56 countries for which we have KF* and quarterly flow data for the entire period are presented here
alphabetically within each region.

A. Advanced Economies




                                                          54
Figure A1 (cont.)
A. Advanced Economies (cont.)




                                55
Figure A1 (cont.)

A. Advanced Economies (cont.)




                                56
Figure A1 (cont.)

B. Latin American and the Caribbean




                                      57
Figure A1 (cont.)

B. Latin American and the Caribbean (cont.)




                                              58
Figure A1 (cont.)

B. Latin American and the Caribbean (cont.)




C. Emerging and Developing Asia




                                              59
Figure A1 (cont.)

C. Emerging and Developing Asia (cont.)




                                          60
Figure A1 (cont.)

D. Other EMEs




                    61
Figure A1 (cont.)

D. Other EMEs (cont.)




                        62
Figure A1 (cont.)

D. Other EMEs (cont.)




                        63
