                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               BUSINESS CYCLE DURING STRUCTURAL CHANGE:
          ARTHUR LEWIS' THEORY FROM A NEOCLASSICAL PERSPECTIVE.

                                        Kjetil Storesletten
                                             Bo Zhao
                                        Fabrizio Zilibotti

                                       Working Paper 26181
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26181


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 2019, Revised November 2019




We thank Huihuang Zhu and Pariroo Rattan for excellent research assistance. We also thank
seminar participants at the 2016 Annual Meeting of the Program of Growth and Institutions at
Tsinghua University, 2017 Midwest Macro Conference, 2017 European Economics Association
Annual Meeting, 2019 Annual Conference on Macroeconomics Across Time and Space at the
Federal Reserve of Philadelphia, 2019 Cowles Macroeconomics Conference at Yale University,
2019 ABFER Annual Conference (sessions on Asian Economic Transformation) at Singapore,
Arizona State University, Brown University, Central University of Finance and Economics,
Copenhagen Business School, Danmarks Nationalbank, East China Normal University, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Fudan University, Interamerican Development Bank, Paris School
of Economics, Peking University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai University of
Finance and Economics, University of California at Berkeley, University of California at San
Diego, University of Oslo, University of Pennsylvania, and Yale University. We are especially
indebted to Chaoran Chen and Andrew Glover who acted as discussants of the paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Kjetil Storesletten, Bo Zhao, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Business Cycle during Structural Change: Arthur Lewis' Theory from a Neoclassical Perspective.
Kjetil Storesletten, Bo Zhao, and Fabrizio Zilibotti
NBER Working Paper No. 26181
August 2019, Revised November 2019
JEL No. E32,O11,O13,O14,O41,O53,Q11

                                          ABSTRACT

We document that the nature of business cycles evolves over the process of development and
structural change. In countries with large declining agricultural sectors, aggregate employment is
uncorrelated with GDP. During booms, employment in agriculture declines while labor
productivity increases in agriculture more than in other sectors. We construct a unified theory of
business cycles and structural change consistent with the stylized facts. The focal point of the
theory is the simultaneous decline and modernization of agriculture. As capital accumulates,
agriculture becomes increasingly capital intensive as modern agriculture crowds out traditional
agriculture. Structural change accelerates in booms and slows down in recessions. We estimate
the model and show that it accounts well for both the structural transformation and the business
cycle fluctuations of China.

Kjetil Storesletten                             Fabrizio Zilibotti
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Oslo                              Yale University
P.O. Box 1095 Blindern                          28 Hillhouse Avenue
0317 Oslo                                       New Haven, CT 06520
Norway                                          and NBER
kjetil.storesletten@econ.uio.no                 fabrizio.zilibotti@yale.edu

Bo Zhao
Peking University
National School of Development
Beijing 100871
China
zhaobo@nsd.pku.edu.cn




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26181
1    Introduction
The nature of economic     uctuations di¤ers systematically at di¤erent stages of economic development
(see, e.g., Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1997), Aguiar and Gopinath (2007)). China provides a good exam-
ple. The country has experienced a profound economic transformation with the share of employment in
agriculture falling from about 2/3 in 1980 to about 1/3 today. During this time, structural change has
systematically accelerated during economic booms and stagnated during recessions, implying procycli-
cal employment in nonagriculture and countercyclical employment in agriculture. Aggregate employ-
ment has instead been uncorrelated with GDP, while nonagricultural employment has been strongly
procyclical. The cyclical behavior of labor productivity growth in agriculture is also noteworthy: rela-
tive labor productivity in agriculture has increased in booms when workers have been leaving the rural
sector.
    These features are shared by the majority of countries at a comparable stage of development.
Extending the work of Da Rocha and Restuccia (2006) beyond OECD countries, we show that the
correlation between agricultural employment and aggregate GDP varies systematically with the relative
size of the agricultural sector. While employment is procyclical in industrialized countries, it is acyclical
in economies with a large agricultural sector. In these poorer economies, employment in agriculture
is negatively correlated with employment in the rest of economy, while such a correlation is zero or
even positive in the industrial world. Finally, downswings in agricultural employment are associated
with upswings in the relative productivity and capital intensity of the agricultural sector in developing
countries. No such pattern is observed in mature economies where the agricultural sector is typically
very small and its behavior shows no signi...cant correlation with aggregate GDP. At the aggregate
level, employment is on average more procyclical and volatile in fully industrialized countries than in
developing and emerging countries.
    To explain these observations, we propose a neoclassical theory of growth and structural change
where the economy is subject to stochastic productivity shocks. In our theory, the same technological
forces drive the structural transformation and business cycle    uctuations at di¤erent stages of devel-
opment. The key drivers of growth and structural change are sector-speci...c TFP growth (as in Ngai
and Pissarides (2007)) and endogenous capital accumulation (as in Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008)).
Investments, capital deepening, and TFP growth cause both reallocation from agriculture to nonagri-
culture and modernization of agriculture. To capture modernization, we depart from standard theories
of structural change and assume that the rural sector comprises two subsectors, modern and traditional
agriculture, producing imperfect substitutes with di¤erent technologies. In particular, modern agricul-
ture uses capital which is instead not an input of the traditional sector. Under empirically plausible
assumptions about parameters, agriculture shrinks as a share of total GDP and becomes more produc-
tive ­ not only in an absolute sense but also relative to the rest of the economy. In the long run, the
equilibrium converges to an asymptotic balanced growth path where the agricultural sector is small,
modernized, and highly productive.
   The theory embeds a single exogenous frictions, namely, a time-invarying wedge between agriculture
and nonagriculture that prevents the equalization of wages and keeps agriculture ine¢ ciently too large.


                                                     1
This friction has no bearing on the qualitative predictions but a¤ects the quantitative results for reasons
we explain below. Capital can move freely across sectors, although in an extension we consider sectoral
capital adjustment costs.
     The mechanism in our theory is reminiscent of Lewis (1954), where the existence of a labor-intensive
sector makes the supply of labor to nonagriculture very elastic. In Lewis' theory, labor supply is
in...nitely elastic for as long as the traditional sector exists. In such a model, the elasticity would fall
discretely as soon as the last worker moves out of the traditional sector. In our model, instead, the
elasticity of labor supply declines gradually during the process of modernization of agriculture. A poor
economy behaves like a Lewis economy; then, throughout the development process, it becomes more
and more similar to a standard neoclassical economy.
    Structural change has implications for business cycles. When the agricultural sector is large and
predominantly traditional, the economy responds to sector-speci...c shocks by reallocating workers to-
wards the more productive sectors with limited e¤ects on wages and relative prices. As the agricultural
sector declines, this margin of adjustment becomes progressively muted. Wages and prices respond
more to productivity shocks leading to larger swings in labor supply. We show that these theoreti-
cal predictions are in line with stylized facts about both structural change and business cycles across
countries.
    We estimate the growth model using data from China. The key parameters are the elasticities of
substitution between the output of the agricultural and nonagricultural sector and, within agriculture,
between the two agricultural subsectors. We estimate both elasticities to be signi...cantly larger than
unity. Because a declining agricultural sector is also consistent with nonhomothetic preferences, we
allow preferences to be nonhomothetic using a generalized Stone-Geary speci...cation as in Herrendorf
et al. (2013). The estimated deviation from homothetic preferences is small. While nonhomothetic
preferences are known to be important at the micro level, they do not seem to carry an important role
in explaining macroeconomic dynamics. Our ...ndings are in line with the recent evidence in Alvarez-
Cuadrado and Poschke (2011).1
      Having estimated the deterministic model, we introduce stochastic shocks. We show that our model
...ts quantitatively well salient features of the business of industrializing economies, most notably China.
This step is technically challenging. Because structural change is still ongoing we cannot rely on the
standard approach of approximating the model in the neighborhood of a steady state. The moments
from the model must then be estimated by simulating a large number of trajectories approaching the
steady state, and calculating moments from that.
    Among other things, the model explains why positive TFP shocks in nonagriculture cause a tempo-
rary acceleration of the process of structural change. Such shocks trigger an increase in total investments
and a reallocation of capital and labor out of agriculture. Labor productivity grows, both because of
   1
     Note that our estimates is di¤erent from that obtained by Herrendorf et al. (2013). They estimate a production
function with three sectors, agriculture, manufacturing, and services, and ...nd a low elasticity of substitution close to
Leontief when using value-added data. Their estimate hinges on an assumption of symmetry, namely that the same
elasticity of substitution is imposed across the three sectors. We show that if one relaxes the symmetry assumption the
estimated elasticity of substitution between manufacturing and services is indeed close to zero, whereas the elasticity of
substitution between agricultural and nonagricultural goods is larger than unity.


                                                            2
the increase in average TFP and because the resource reallocation reduces misallocation. Interestingly,
labor productivity increases more in agriculture than in the rest of the economy, as most of the tem-
porary reallocation of labor away of the agriculture is drawn from the traditional sector. Therefore,
agriculture experiences a sharp increase in capital intensity and average labor productivity. Out-of-
sample predictions also con...rm that as structural change progresses the business cycle properties of
the model become increasingly similar to those of advanced economies.
    Our research contributes to the existing literature on structural change pioneered by Baumol (1967)
which includes, among others, Kongsamut et al. (2001), Gollin et al. (2002), Ngai and Pissarides
(2007), Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008), Buera and Kaboski (2009), Alvarez-Cuadrado and Poschke
(2011), Herrendorf et al. (2013), Boppart (2014), Comin et al. (2015), and Alder et al. (2018). In
our model, exogenous TFP growth and capital accumulation induce transition away from agriculture.
The properties of the transition are consistent with Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008), although in their
model there is no traditional sector. The closest theoretical contribution in the literature is the recent
paper by Alvarez-Cuadrado and Poschke (2011). They study the properties of two-sector models where
both sectors use capital and labor as inputs. The elasticity of substitution between capital and labor
is assumed to be constant within each sector but can di¤er across sectors. In contrast, in our model
this elasticity changes over the process of development due to the reallocation between traditional
and modern agriculture.2 While our main focus is on the business cycle implications of the theory,
Alvarez-Cuadrado and Poschke (2011) do not consider economic          uctuations.
    Our paper is also related to the debate on the e¤ects of technological progress and demand fac-
tors on structural change and industrialization. The traditional development literature suggests that
productivity in growth agriculture combined with Engel'    s law released resources from agriculture and
generated industrialization (labor push ), cf. Nurkse (1953) and Rostow (1960) (see Gollin et al. (2002)
for a recent formalization of these ideas). An alternative view ­ the labor pull theory ­ is that fast
productivity growth in manufacturing attracted workers from agriculture to manufacturing (cf. Mokyr
(1976)). Our model can be consistent with either of these two views depending on parameters. Under
the assumption that agricultural and industrial production are gross substitutes, which is the outcome
of our structural estimates for China, it is in line with the labor pull theory. We document that our
result are in line with the common narrative about episodes of business cycles in recent Chinese history.
The ...ndings are also consistent with the recent empirical literature on the Green Revolution that we
review in more detail in Section 6.3 (see, e.g., Foster and Rosenzweig (2004), Bustos et al. (2016),
Jayachandran (2006), and Moscona (2018)). These studies point at the fact that both across countries
and within developing countries exogenous positive productivity shocks in agriculture (such as rainfall
or the introduction of new technologies) slow down industrialization, structural change, and the demise
of the agricultural sector.
   Our work also complements the existing literature on business cycles by adding explicitly the
endogenous structural change. The classical multi-sector model focus on the stable economic structures
   2
     Another di¤erence is that in our speci...cation the labor share in agriculture remains positive, while in the CES
technology proposed by Alvarez-Cuadrado and Poschke (2011) it would fall to zero with development. In the data, we do
not see a vanishing labor share in the farming sector.


                                                          3
or abstract from growth, for example, Benhabib et al. (1991), Horvath (2000), Boldrin et al. (2001),
etc. We extend the standard business cycle model to account for the business cycles properties at
di¤erent stage of development. Related researches on cross-country business cycles di¤erences including
Da Rocha and Restuccia (2006) and Aguiar and Gopinath (2007).3 Recent studies on the properties
of the Chinese business cycle include Yao and Zhu (2018) and Chang et al. (2016). Yao and Zhu
(2018) construct a two-sector model of the Chinese economy in which consumers have non-homothetic
preferences and show that in such a model the size of the agricultural sector a¤ects the nature of
business cycles. Di¤erent from our theory, their model abstracts from capital and investments nor
does it focus on modernization in agriculture. Our structural estimation allows for nonhomothetic
preferences but these appear to have a modest quantitative e¤ect relative to technological factors. The
two approaches are complementary. The process of modernization of agriculture is instead at the core
of the recent papers by Chen (2018) and Boppart et al. (2019), although the focus of their papers is
very di¤erent from ours.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a set of stylized facts about
business cycles and structural change across countries, zooming on China and the US. Section 3 lays out
the model. Section 4 describes the estimation of the growth model. Section 5 performs a quantitative
analysis of the business cycle properties of the model. Section 6 compares the results with additional
international evidence. Section 7 concludes. An appendix includes proofs and additional material
referred in the text. An additional online appendix is available upon request.


2       Evidence on Modernization of Agriculture and Business Cycles
The process of economic development is associated with a signi...cant downsizing of the agricultural
sector. In the US, a third of the workforce was employed at farms in 1900. This employment share fell
below 2% by 2000. Today, the average employment in agriculture is 4.6% in OECD countries, which
compares with 31.6% in non-OECD countries (World Development Indicators 2017). The cross-country
correlation between the employment share of agriculture and log GDP per capita is -0.84.

2.1     Modernization of Agriculture

The relative decline of agriculture is accompanied by a number of economic transformations. First, as
employment in agriculture declines, the capital intensity of this sector rises faster than in the rest of
the economy. Second, labor productivity grows faster in agriculture than in the rest of the economy.
     Relative Capital Deepening. While capital deepening is pervasive over the development process,
it is especially pronounced in agriculture: both the capital-output and the capital-labor ratio grow faster
    3
    In particular, Da Rocha and Restuccia (2006) documents that among OECD countries, economies with larger agri-
cultural sectors have smoother aggregate employment       uctuations and that agricultural employment is less correlated
with aggregate GDP. Relative to their paper we show that this pattern holds up when extending the sample of countries
to include a large number of countries, including very poor countries that are predominantly agrarian. Moreover, we
document several additional salient di¤erences in business cycle properties between poor and rich countries and show that
business cycle properties of China are representative of countries with a similar share of agriculture.



                                                           4
in agriculture than in the nonfarm sector. Figure 1 (panel a) shows the time series of capital-output
(K-Y) ratio in agriculture relative to the aggregate K-Y ratio (henceforth, the relative K-Y ratio ) for
the US. The relative K-Y ratio increased from about 40% in the pre-war period, to about 120% since
the 1980s. Figure 2 (panel a) plots the relative K/Y ratio against the employment share of agriculture
for the period 1995-2016 across countries. The relative K-Y ratio is signi...cantly lower in developing
than in industrialized countries. For example, it is very low in Sub-Saharan African countries, where
agriculture is very labor intensive and employs a large proportion of the labor force. Since there
are concerns about data quality of agricultural capital in very poor countries, in panel (b) we drop
African countries from the sample. This strengthens the results: the regression coe¢ cient becomes
more negative and signi...cant.
   Since data are available over a 22 year panel, we can also study the within-country coevolution of
employment shares in agriculture and relative K-Y ratios. To this aim, we split the sample for each
country into two observations, the average for the period 1995-2005 and the average for the period 2006-
2016, and regress the relative K-Y ratio on the employment share of agriculture and a full set of country
dummies. Panel (a) in appendix Table 7 shows a set of regression results. Since the relationship is
nonlinear, we regress the logarithm of the K-Y ratio on the logarithm of the employment share. We run
both pooled regressions and regressions with country ...xed e¤ects. The results con...rm a negative (in
most cases, highly signi...cant) relationship between employment in agriculture and relative K-Y ratios.
The coe¢ cients of the di¤erent regressions are similar in magnitude, indicating a strong consistency in
the patterns across and within countries.4




    Productivity Gap. Capital deepening and technical change bring about higher labor productivity
in all sectors of the economy. However, productivity grows faster in agriculture than in the rest
of the economy. To show this, de...ne the productivity gap to be the average labor productivity in
nonagriculture relative to agriculture. Figure 1 (panel b) shows that the productivity gap declines
over time in the United States.5 Figure 2 (panel c) shows that a similar pattern holds true across
countries: the productivity gap is especially high in poor countries with a large agricultural sector (a
fact that has been documented by, among others, Restuccia et al. (2008) and Gollin et al. (2014)).
The same pattern emerges from ...xed e¤ect regressions exploiting the within-country variation over
time (see panel b in appendix Table 7.) Panel d shows the same relationship using the cross-country
data in Gollin et al. (2014) which controls for sectoral di¤erences in hours worked and human capital
per worker. The regression coe¢ cient is in both cases signi...cantly positive.
   The behavior of the labor income share in agriculture relative to the aggregate labor-income share
mirrors that of the productivity gap. Figure 1 (panel c) shows that the labor-income share in the farm
   4
     The regressions in column (3) and (4) do not include time dummies and identify the e¤ect of interest out of both
global trends and cross-country deviations. The regressions in columns (5) and (6) include time dummies, ...ltering out
common trends as in standard panel regressions. The magnitude of the coe¢ cients is similar in all speci...cations, although
the statistical signi...cance drops in panels (5)-(6).
   5
     Labor productivity is measured as value added per worker in current prices.


                                                             5
                                         (a) Relative K/Y ratio (farm/total)
             2


           1.5


             1


           0.5


             0
              1930     1940      1950      1960       1970       1980          1990   2000   2010
                                                        Year
                                        (b) Productivity gap (nonfarm/farm)
             4


             3


             2


             1


             0
              1930     1940      1950      1960       1970       1980          1990   2000   2010
                                                        Year
                                 (c) Relative labor-income share (farm/nonfarm)
           1.2

             1

           0.8

           0.6

           0.4

           0.2
              1930     1940      1950      1960       1970       1980          1990   2000   2010
                                                        Year

Figure 1: Panel a plots the farm capital-output ratio divided by the total capital-output ratio in the US. Panel
b plots the Labor productivity gap over time in the US. The labor productivity gap is measured as the nonfarm
value added per worker divided by the farm value added per worker. Panel c plots the ratio of the labor income
share in the farm sector over the labor-income share in the non-farm sector in the US. These labor-income
shares are measured as the compensation of employees divided by the value added excluding proprietors'income.
Sources: Capital stocks by sectors 1929-2015 are from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Fixed Asset
Tables 6.1 "Current-Cost Net Stock of Fixed Assets and Consumer Durable Goods". The value added by sector
come from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) Table 1.3.5. Employment by sector is from
the NIPA Table 6.8A, 6.8B, 6.8C, and 6.8D. Proprietors' income by sectors come from the NIPA Table 1.12.
Compensation of employees by sectors come NIPA Table 6.2A, 6.2B, 6.2C, and 6.2D.

                                                        6
                                                                                       (a) Relative K/Y ratio (agric./total)                                                                             (b) Relative K/Y ratio (agric./total), excl. Africa
                                                                    6       LUX                                                                                                                6       LUX
                                                                                                                           year 1995-2005                                                                                                      year 1995-2005
                                                                                                                           year 2006-2016                                                                                                      year 2006-2016
                                                                    5                                                      Fitted line                                                         5                                               Fitted line
                           Relative K/Y ratio (agriculture/total)




                                                                                                                                                      Relative K/Y ratio (agriculture/total)
                                                                    4                                                                                                                          4



                                                                    3                                                                                                                          3
                                                                            DNK
                                                                             AUT                                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AUT
                                                                             AUT                                         ZWE                                                                            AUT
                                                                                                                      ZWE
                                                                    2     DNK
                                                                            IRL                                                                                                                2     DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                       IRL
                                                                         DEU
                                                                         LUX                                                                                                                        DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LUX
                                                                          CHE
                                                                          ITA
                                                                         DEU
                                                                           NOR            SLV                                                                                                        CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                      NOR            SLV
                                                                           CHE
                                                                           BRB
                                                                         SWEITA
                                                                           HUN                    NAM
                                                                                                    AZE                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                      BRB
                                                                                                                                                                                                    SWEITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                      HUN                      AZE
                                                                          BRB  IRL
                                                                             HUN                                                                                                                     BRB  IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                        HUN
                                                                         NOR
                                                                           ARE
                                                                         SWE     ZAF SLV
                                                                               SVN
                                                                                        POL                       DJI                                                                               NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SWE  SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   POL
                                                                         NLDZAF
                                                                          SVK
                                                                           FIN
                                                                         KWT FINSVN
                                                                                LTU                   GAB                                                                                            SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                    KWT FINSVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           LTU
                                                                         USA
                                                                        GBR
                                                                          AUS SVK    LVA      ROU       FJI
                                                                                                          FJI                                                                                       USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                     AUS SVK    LVA      ROU      FJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FJI
                                                                        USA
                                                                         KWT
                                                                          NLD
                                                                        GBRAUS CRI POL         EGY      PAK
                                                                                                        PAK
                                                                                                        GAB                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   GBRAUS CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                    KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NLD      POL TUR             PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAK
                                                                    1     FRA
                                                                        MLT JPN
                                                                           EST
                                                                           FRA
                                                                             OMN
                                                                              OMNPRT LTU
                                                                                LVA
                                                                               MUS        TURNAM       YEM                                                                                     1     FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MLT JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                        OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OMNPRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                           LVA                   YEM
                                                                        BEL
                                                                          CYP
                                                                           JPN       PAN
                                                                                      MYS     EGY TUR                                                                                                 JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                   BEL            LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MYS          TUR
                                                                         BHS
                                                                         BEL
                                                                        BRNBHS
                                                                             CYP
                                                                            ISL
                                                                           ESP ISL
                                                                              ESP
                                                                                   MYS
                                                                                 CHL
                                                                                 KOR
                                                                                    CHL
                                                                                   PRT
                                                                                      TUN
                                                                                     SYRTUN YEM
                                                                                      PAN
                                                                                                     AGO
                                                                                                 GTMROU
                                                                                                PHL     GNQ DJI
                                                                                                       AZE                      ETH                                                                BRNBHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                    BHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                    BEL   ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ESPESPCHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PRTPAN      YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AZE
                                                                        ARG
                                                                         MLT  ARE
                                                                             KOR
                                                                             NZLNZLGRC
                                                                                   LCA
                                                                                  MUS
                                                                                   BGR   IRQ
                                                                                         BRA  SYR   IDN
                                                                                                   GTM   IDN IND IND  MMRGIN                                                                       ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                    MLT  ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NZLNZLGRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                              LCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                              BGR   IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BRA SYR     ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IDN  IDNIND      MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IND
                                                                         ISR
                                                                         CAN
                                                                        BRN
                                                                        ISR
                                                                        ARGSAU
                                                                         CAN  BGR DOM
                                                                                  URY
                                                                                 URY
                                                                                     CRI
                                                                                    BRA
                                                                                     DOM LCA
                                                                                       MDV IRQ  LKA
                                                                                                  PER
                                                                                                 HND
                                                                                                     PHL
                                                                                                   HNDMAR
                                                                                                     LKA    CIV MMR
                                                                                                           CIV
                                                                                                          MDA
                                                                                                            AGO
                                                                                                          MAR               GIN
                                                                                                                              COD MOZ
                                                                                                                            COD
                                                                                                                            UGA       RWA
                                                                                                                                        BDI
                                                                                                                                        BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   BRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ARGSAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CAN  BGR DOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                             URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                            URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                               BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                DOM LCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MDV IRQ LKA GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PERLKA MDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MMR
                                                                           JORSUR
                                                                               VEN
                                                                              RUS
                                                                             SAU  VEN
                                                                                   LBN
                                                                                     GRC
                                                                                   MDVBIH
                                                                                    LBNUKR
                                                                                         SRB
                                                                                        IRN
                                                                                      BLZ
                                                                                       BIH
                                                                                      COL
                                                                                        BWAIRN
                                                                                             ECU
                                                                                           BWA
                                                                                            BLZECU
                                                                                                 PRY  COG
                                                                                                     COG
                                                                                                      NGAALB GNQ
                                                                                                           BGD  CMR   BGD
                                                                                                                       VNMMLI
                                                                                                                         MLI
                                                                                                                        CMR   ETH
                                                                                                                              MDGMDG
                                                                                                                               RWA                                                                    JORSUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                          VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SAU  VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MDV UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                               LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BLZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COL  IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SRB   ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BLZ  PRY     BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ALB         BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VNM LAO
                                                                              EST
                                                                             MNE    CPV    SRB
                                                                                           TKM
                                                                                          COL   KGZ THA
                                                                                                      KHM  THA
                                                                                                         BFAVNM
                                                                                                              KEN   KEN
                                                                                                                   COM      UGA
                                                                                                                             LAO
                                                                                                                           KHM    TZA
                                                                                                                                MWI
                                                                                                                               MOZ TCD
                                                                                                                                 BFA                                                                     EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MNE           SRB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TKM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COL   KGZ THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KHM  THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VNM
                                                                              SUR
                                                                          JOR DZA
                                                                                 MNEVCT
                                                                                   RUSVCT
                                                                                       MEX
                                                                                      JAM
                                                                                    MEXCPV
                                                                                          UKR
                                                                                            PRY
                                                                                         JAM
                                                                                              PER
                                                                                            TKMMDA
                                                                                               NIC
                                                                                               NIC
                                                                                                  UZB
                                                                                                  CHNARM
                                                                                                   UZBBEN
                                                                                                   TGO
                                                                                                           ALB
                                                                                                            KGZ
                                                                                                           GHA
                                                                                                          BEN
                                                                                                            NGA
                                                                                                             CHN
                                                                                                           LBRHTI
                                                                                                              GEO
                                                                                                              HTI GHA
                                                                                                                   MRT
                                                                                                                  COM ZMB
                                                                                                                      MRT
                                                                                                                       SLE
                                                                                                                    BTNBTN
                                                                                                                           TZA
                                                                                                                             NPL
                                                                                                                           SLEMWI
                                                                                                                            CAF
                                                                                                                             CAF
                                                                                                                           LSO
                                                                                                                             LSO
                                                                                                                                NPL
                                                                                                                                 NER
                                                                                                                                NER
                                                                                                                                    TCD
                                                                                                                                   LAO                                                                   SUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                     JOR MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                            MNEVCT
                                                                                                                                                                                                              RUSVCT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JAMJAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UKR PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TKMMDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CHNARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              UZB    ALBGEO BTN KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HTI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HTI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NPL LAO
                                                                                          DZA      ARM        LBR
                                                                                                               GEO          ZMB                                                                                               ARM        GEO     BTN
                                                                    0                                                                                                                          0
                                                                        0              20          40            60              80         100                                                    0               20         40        60           80          100
                                                                                  Agriculture's share in total employment (%)                                                                                Agriculture's share in total employment (%)




                                                                                     (c) Productivity gap (nonagric./agric.)                                                                           (d) Productivity gap (nonagric./agric.), GLM data
                                                         20                                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                     year 1995-2016                                      BDI                                                                    GLM data                         LSO
                                                         18                          Fitted line                                                                                               8                Fitted line

                                                         16
         Productivity gap (nonagric./agric.)




                                                                                                                                                      Productivity gap (nonagric./agric.)




                                                                                                                          ZMB                                                                  7

                                                         14                                           GAB                                                                                                                                                 MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                         12                                                           ZWE                                                                               CHE             IRQ
                                                                                            BWA                                  MOZ
                                                                                                        AGO                        TCD                                                         5                                                   TZA
                                                                                                      COG                  GIN                                                                                 BWA                               ZMB
                                                         10                                                                      LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ALB
                                                                                                                                   RWA                                                                                                 TJK
                                                                                                                    CMR                                                                        4                                         ZWE                   RWA
                                                                    8                                         GEO             MDG
                                                                                                                              TZA                                                                            SVN
                                                                                                          THA               COD                                                                                                          VNM
                                                                             KWT                         AZE
                                                                                                                            UGA                                                                3                               IDN
                                                                                        POL                                   MWI                                                                             GRC  JAM ROU         FJI
                                                                    6                              PER
                                                                                                    ROU FJI             BTN   NPL                                                                              MEX
                                                                                        LCA          LKA                                                                                                      CHL BRA       HND               UGA
                                                                                        MEX                                     NER                                                                    DEU                 GTM     BGD
                                                                                ARE
                                                                                 IRLPRT           NAM CHN  MAR BGDIND BFA                                                                                       LCA          BOL PAK          LBR
                                                                                   SVN                             VNM                                                                                      LVA          LKA               KEN
                                                                              CHE
                                                                            LUX         PAN
                                                                                        BRA      TUR IDN              MRT MLI                                                                  2            RUS           EGY    ARM CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BTN                   ETH
                                                                    4           AUT
                                                                                 OMN  GRC
                                                                                      LBN JAM        YEM        HTI KEN       ETH
                                                                                                                            CAF                                                                                PAN TUR      PHL              NPL
                                                                               JPN           IRQ
                                                                                           SLV       PHL
                                                                                                     HND                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                            LTU                        GHA
                                                                                     LVA
                                                                                      LTUCOL
                                                                                     CHL    IRN ECU  GTM                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       USA  KOR                               SLE
                                                                             BHS
                                                                             DEU  KOR MDV
                                                                                  ZAF  VCT       EGY MDA    ALB
                                                                                                            BEN
                                                                                                                GHA
                                                                                                              CIV  KHM
                                                                                                                    COM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ESTVEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PRT         SWZ TON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NIC         NGA
                                                                                    RUS
                                                                                   VENDOM
                                                                                    MUS  BIH SRB
                                                                                           UKR          ARM NGA
                                                                                                           PAK                                                                                              BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                          HUN     SLV          KHM
                                                                              NOR
                                                                             DNKFIN
                                                                               ITA
                                                                              BRB        TUN   TKMNIC                                                                                          1         JOR
                                                                    2         FRA
                                                                            BEL
                                                                            GBR
                                                                             SWE
                                                                            USA
                                                                             NLD
                                                                                ESP
                                                                                CYP
                                                                                EST
                                                                                SAU
                                                                                        DZA
                                                                                      CRI
                                                                                        CPV
                                                                                       MYS  BLZ STP
                                                                                                 PRY  UZBKGZ         MMR SLE                                                                           ISR         SYR PRY
                                                                              AUS
                                                                            ISR SVK
                                                                                HUN URY
                                                                                    BGR
                                                                                  NZL
                                                                                    BLR                TGO                                                                                             NLD
                                                                             CAN
                                                                              JOR
                                                                            MLT
                                                                            BRN  ISL        SYR
                                                                                  MNE
                                                                                  SUR                          LBR
                                                                    0                                                                                                                          0
                                                                        0              20          40            60              80         100                                                    0               20         40        60           80          100
                                                                                  Agriculture's share in total employment (%)                                                                                Agriculture's share in total employment (%)


Figure 2: Panel a and b plot the relative capital-output ratio (agriculture vs. total) K G =Y G = (K=Y ) against
the average agricultural employment share across countries. Each country has two observations: the average for
the period 1995-2005 and the average for the period 2006-2016. Panel b excludes African countries. Panel c plots
labor productivity gap across countries. The labor productivity gap is measured as the nonagriculture value
added per worker divided by the agriculture value added per worker. The horizontal axis shows the average
employment share of agriculture over the sample period for each country. Panel d shows the same relationship
using the data in Gollin et al. (2014) who control for sectoral di¤erences in hours worked and human capital per
worker. Source: FAO (K G is measured by the net capital stock; Y G is value added, both at current prices) and
Penn World Table (capital stock and real GDP at current national prices from detailed Penn World Table 9.1).
Agriculture's employment share comes from ILO modeled estimates. Agriculture'         s value added output share
comes from FAO extracted UNSD AMA data.



                                                                                                                                                  7
sector relative to that of the nonfarm sector fell over time in the US since the end of World War II.
Unfortunately, it is di¢ cult to ...nd comparable data across a large number of countries since the labor
income share in agriculture is often poorly measured.

2.2    Business Cycles

Consider, next, economic   uctuations. Panels a and b in Figure 3 compare the business cycle of China
with that of the US. While aggregate employment is volatile and highly procyclical in the US, aggregate
employment is acyclical and relatively smooth in China.6
    Interestingly, aggregate  uctuations in employment are systematically associated with the process
of structural change. Consider panel c in Figure 3. Until 1960, NBER recessions in the US were
associated with a slowdown and at occasion even a reversal of the industrialization process. Namely,
the employment share of agriculture used to fall in booms and increase in downturns. The cyclicality of
employment in agriculture declines over time and ceases to be noticeable after 1960. China today looks
similar to the US of the earlier days. Panel d in Figure 3 shows that structural change ­measured by
the decline in agricultural employment ­accelerates during periods of high growth and slows down or
halts during periods of low growth in China.
    Panel b of Figure 4 documents that agricultural employment is volatile and countercyclical in China.
There is no such pattern in the contemporary data for the US, where the correlation is positive rather
than negative. In contrast, the cyclical pattern of nonagricultural employment is similar in the US and
in China: Panels c and d of Figure 4 shows that nonagricultural employment is highly procyclical and
roughly as volatile as GDP in both China and the US. It follows that agricultural and nonagricultural
employment are strongly negatively correlated in China.
    The stylized facts documented above are consistent with international data.7 Panel (a) in Figure 5
shows that the time-series correlation of the HP-...ltered employment in agriculture and nonagriculture
is positive (on average) for countries with a small agricultural sector like the US and negative for
countries with a large agricultural sector like China. The volatility of employment relative to GDP is
also negatively correlated with the employment share of agriculture (see appendix Figure 13), consistent
with the time series evidence for the US ­see appendix Figure 14.8 Panel (c) in Figure 5 shows that the
correlation between aggregate employment and GDP declines strongly with the employment share of
agriculture, being large and positive for industrialized countries like the US and negative for countries
with a large agricultural sector. This is in line with the US-China contrast discussed above.
    Next, we highlight the dynamics of the productivity gap. We have already shown that the produc-
tivity gap falls throughout structural change, (see panel b of Figures 1-2). Panel c in Figure 5 shows
a similar pattern at business-cycle frequencies. Namely, in countries with large agricultural sectors,
   6
     Appendix Figure 14 shows that the volatility of employment relative to the volatility of output in the US has increased
over time. Before 1980, employment was signi...cantly less volatile than output, while after 2000 employment has been
more volatile than output.
   7
     We use sector-level employment data from the International Labor Organization (ILO) (see Appendix A).
   8
     This relationship is not statistically signi...cant. If we weight countries by size, the relationship is negative and
signi...cant.



                                                             8
Figure 3: Panel a and b plot the volatility of total employment and real GDP in the US (1929-2015) and China
(1978-2012). The ...gure shows the time evolution in the US (left panel) and China (right panel) of HP-...ltered
employment and GDP. The HP-...ltered use smoothing parameter 6.25 (Ravn and Uhlig 2002). The aggregate
employment data in China is from the Statistic Year Book by the China National Bureau of Statistics, Table
"Number of employed persons at year-end by three strata of industry". We incorporate a correction proposed
by (Holz 2006). The correction takes care of the reclassi...cation of employed workers that was made by the
NBS in 1990. Panel c and d plot the agriculture' s share in total employment over the business cycles. The left
panel plots the farm employment share over the business cycle in the US. Grey ranges denote period classi...ed as
recessions by the NBER. The right panel plots the agriculture employment share over the business cycle. Grey
ranges denote recessions of the Chinese economy, where the recession is de...ned as the period of which the real
GDP growth rate is below 9.7 percent (the average real GDP growth rate in China during 1978-2012)
                                                       9
                                (a) USA                                                                  (b) China
            0.1                                                             0.05
                                        Real GDP                                                                  Real GDP
          0.08                          Agricultural employment             0.04                                  Agricultural employment

          0.06                                                              0.03

          0.04                                                              0.02

          0.02                                                              0.01
Percent




                                                                  Percent
             0                                                                 0

          -0.02                                                             -0.01

          -0.04                                                             -0.02

          -0.06                                                             -0.03

          -0.08                                                             -0.04

           -0.1                                                             -0.05
                  1940   1960           1980         2000                           1980   1985   1990     1995      2000    2005     2010
                                 Year                                                                      Year




                                (c) USA                                                                  (d) China
            0.1                                                             0.05
                                   Real GDP                                                                  Real GDP
          0.08                     Nonagricultural employment               0.04                             Nonagricultural employment

          0.06                                                              0.03

          0.04                                                              0.02

          0.02                                                              0.01
Percent




                                                                  Percent




             0                                                                 0

          -0.02                                                             -0.01

          -0.04                                                             -0.02

          -0.06                                                             -0.03

          -0.08                                                             -0.04

           -0.1                                                             -0.05
                  1940   1960           1980         2000                           1980   1985   1990     1995      2000    2005     2010
                                 Year                                                                      Year

Figure 4: Panel a and b plot the HP-...ltered log agricultural employment vs HP-...ltered log real GDP in the
US 1929-2015 and in China 1978-2012. Panel c and d plot the HP-...ltered log nonagricultural employment vs
HP-...ltered log real GDP in the US and in China. We use a smoothing parameter 6.25 for the HP ...lter (Ravn and
Uhlig 2002). Source: The US employment by sectors is from the NIPA Table 6.8A, 6.8B, 6.8C, and 6.8D. The
sectoral employment data in China is from the Statistic Year Book by the China National Bureau of Statistics,
Table "Number of employed persons at year-end by three strata of industry". The number is calculated based
on the households survey on both urban and rural households in China. The nonagriculture employment is the
sum of both employment in the secondary industry and the employment in the tertiary industry. We incorporate
                                                      10 care of the reclassi...cation of employed workers that
a correction proposed by (Holz 2006). The correction takes
was made by the NBS in 1990.
                                                                     (a) Corr. btw. total employment and GDP                                                                                                        (b) Corr. btw. agr. and. nonagr. employment
                                                          1                  LVA                                                                                                                           1
                                                                      EST ESP                                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                    USA                                                  Fitted line                                                                                                                               Fitted line




                                                                                                                                                 Corr. btw. agr. and nonagr. employment
                                                                     CYP
                                                                      AUS
                                                                        ISL
   Corr. btw. total employment and GDP


                                                                     CAN
                                                                      SVK
                                                        0.8               BGR LTU
                                                                           FIN                                                                                                                                             IRL
                                                                           RUS GRC KOR
                                                                   GBRBRB
                                                                      DNK      POL                                                                                                                                     SVK
                                                                    SWE        CHL                                                                                                                                         FIN
                                                                    PRIHUNNZL
                                                                         JPN                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                     CZE                                                                                                                                                AUT
                                                        0.6          BHS
                                                                   BEL         DOM                                                                                                                                   ISR              PRY                              MMR
                                                                      NOR
                                                                       FRA IRL     MYS                                                                                                                               USABGR
                                                                         ZAF               EGY
                                                                    DEU
                                                                    NLD SVN
                                                                   MLT            JAM         AZE                                                                                                                         EST CHL
                                                                         ITA
                                                                          TTO PRT                                                                                                                                     AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GBR  ITA
                                                                             VENMEXSLV                                                                                                                              MLT           GRC
                                                        0.4                        CRI
                                                                                    BRA                                                                                                                               CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NOR RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ESPPRT
                                                                    ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HUN LVA JAM
                                                                                 PAN            ROU                                                                                                                   CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BEL ZAF     POL
                                                                    CHE
                                                                     AUT                                           THA                                                                                     0          BRB     LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ISLSVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         JPN   DOM                 PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PRI
                                                        0.2                                           IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DNK     PAN            HND
                                                                                                 MDA PHL PAK                  ALB                                                                                             MYS            MDA
                                                                   LUX                                                                                                                                               CHE    MEX             ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BHS      CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KOR
                                                                                                 HND                                                                                                                           SLV
                                                          0                               PRY                                                                                                                       LUX   VEN
                                                                                 CUB                                                                                                                 -0.5                       BRA                 IDNPAK
                                                                                                                             MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EGY                  THA
                                                                                                             CHN
                                                        -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CUB                                    ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHN
                                                        -0.4                                                                                                                                               -1
                                                               0                20               40                 60                 80                                                                       0             20              40               60                80
                                                                   Agriculture's share in total employment (%)                                                                                                      Agriculture's share in total employment (%)




                                                        (c) Corr. btw. productivity gap and nonagr. employment                                                                                                            (d) Relative consumption volatility
   Corr. btw. productivity gap and nonagr. employment




                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                        0.2               LVA                    MDA                     Fitted line                                                                                                                               Fitted line
                                                                   GBR
                                                                   MLT BGR
                                                                      IRL
                                                                     ISL
                                                                     ESP
                                                                                                                                                              Consumption volatility relative to output




                                                                        NZL                                                                                                                                                      SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PAK

                                                                      DNK                                                                                                                                  2
                                                          0          CZEJPN
                                                                                 MYS                                                                                                                                                   KAZ
                                                                   BEL RUSPOL
                                                                       AUT CHL
                                                                       NOR
                                                                     CYP                  ROU                                                                                                                        BHSZAF    UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CRI
                                                                     AUS
                                                                   DEU
                                                                     BRB TTO      BRA                                                                                                                                CYP
                                                                       HUN                                                                                                                                             ISL
                                                                      SVK GRC   JAM                                                                                                                                   HUN                   ROU
                                                                    PRI SVN      CRI                                                                                                                                                MYS       AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MDA                        ALB
                                                        -0.2          ITA
                                                                       EST                                                                                                                                1.5                       PAN
                                                                           PRT                                                                                                                                          NOR                         CHN
                                                                    SWE ZAF           PRY                                                                                                                                  BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RUS
                                                                    USAFIN
                                                                    NLD          PAN                                                                                                                                   DNK DOM  CHL CUB
                                                                             DOM SLV       HND IDN                                                                                                                         NZL LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LVA GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KOR
                                                        -0.4                LTU                                                                                                                                           ITA ESPMEX                    THA
                                                                    CHE                            CHN                                                                                                              GBR EST
                                                                     BHS                                                                                                                                                      VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL BRA PRY
                                                                       FRA       KOR                                                                                                                                  PRI         PRT
                                                                   LUX     VENMEX                                                                                                                          1        ISRAUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      USA                 EGYHND
                                                                                                       PHL                                                                                                            NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SVK FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          JPN                     IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MLT
                                                        -0.6                                                                                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CANAUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LUX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CZESVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BEL    IRL
                                                                                 CUB       EGYAZE                  THA
                                                                                                             PAK                                                                                          0.5       DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHE                            PHL
                                                        -0.8                                                                  ALB



                                                          -1                                                                                                                                               0
                                                               0                20               40                 60                 80                                                                       0             20              40               60                80
                                                                   Agriculture's share in total employment (%)                                                                                                      Agriculture's share in total employment (%)

Figure 5: The ...gure is a cross-country scatter plot of several business cycle statistics. The sample period is
1970-2015 and some countries have fewer observations. We keep the countries that have at least more than
15 years of consecutive observations in order to calculate the business cycle statistics. Panel a plots the time
series correlation of HP-...ltered log nonagricultural employment and HP-...ltered log agricultural employment
in a sample of 66 countries. Panel b shows the correlation between the HP-...ltered log total employment and
HP-...ltered log real GDP in a sample of 66 countries. Panel c plots the time series correlation of the HP-...ltered
log productivity gap and the HP-...ltered log nonagricultural employment in a sample of 63 countries. Panel
d shows the volatility of consumption relative to the volatility of GDP in a sample of 64 countries. We use a
smoothing parameter 6.25 for the HP ...lter (Ravn and Uhlig 2002). The x-axis denotes the mean agriculture'        s
share in total employment over the sample period for each country. Appendix A describe how we constructed
the data.
                                                                                                                                            11
the productivity gap is negatively correlated with employment in nonagriculture, while this correlation
is close to zero in countries with a small agricultural sector. For instance the correlation is 0:54
for China. We conclude that relative productivity and relative employment (in agriculture) move in
opposite directions. This happens both during the process of structural change and over the business
cycle in countries that are undergoing structural change away from agriculture.
   Finally, panel d shows that consumption volatility relative to GDP volatility declines over the
process of development, consistent with the evidence in Aguiar and Gopinath (2007).
    In summary, the characteristics of the business cycles change systematically across di¤erent stages
of the process of structural change. In countries with a large agricultural sector, we observe:

    1. Aggregate employment is less correlated with GDP and less volatile;

    2. Employment in agriculture is countercyclical;

    3. The labor productivity gap is negatively correlated with employment in nonagriculture;

    4. Consumption is highly volatile relative to GDP.

    These observations (especially, point 3) suggest a systematic relationship between business cycles
and the drivers of structural change. In developing and emerging economies, recessions are times of
slowdown and even reversal of structural change: People stop leaving farms or even move back to rural
areas, and recessions have a sullying e¤ect on the productivity of agriculture. This pattern has been
documents in a recent empirical study for China. Using a unique panel data set, Zhang et al. (2001)
document that farm employment increases during recessions and increases in booms. They conclude
the agricultural sector contributed to stabilizing total employment in China.


3       A Model of Business Cycle with Structural Change
In this section, we present a dynamic general equilibrium model close in spirit to Acemoglu and Guerrieri
(2008) which describes the process of growth and structural change in an economy with a declining
agriculture. We ...rst derive an analytical characterization of the equilibrium.9 Then, in the following
section, we estimate the key structural parameters of the deterministic version of the model using data
for China. Finally, we introduce uncertainty and productivity shocks, and show that the stochastic
version of the estimated model is consistent with salient business cycle features of China.
    9
    In the text, we summarize the main ...ndings. The technical analysis including proofs of all propositions and lemmas
are provided in Appendix B.




                                                          12
3.1      Environment
3.1.1      Production

The consumption good, assumed to be the numeraire, is a CES aggregate of two goods,
                                                                                                             "
                                                                      " 1                           " 1     " 1
                                         G     M              G        "                      M      "
                          Y = F Y ;Y               =      Y                 + (1        ) Y                       :   (1)

We label the sectors producing the two goods agriculture (superscript G) and nonagriculture (super-
script M, as in "manufacturing"), respectively. We denote by " > 0 the elasticity of substitution
between the two goods.10
       The technology of nonagriculture is described by the following Cobb Douglas production function
                                                              1
                                              Y M = KM                       ZM HM        ;                           (2)

where H M = hN M is the labor input. N M denotes the number of workers and h denotes the number
of hours worked by each of them. K M denotes capital and Z M is a productivity parameter (henceforth,
TFP).
    Agriculture is a CES aggregate of two subsectors producing imperfect substitutes with an elasticity
of substitution ! > 0: More formally,
                                                                                                   !
                                                        ! 1                             ! 1       ! 1
                                     G             AM    !                          S    !
                                 Y       = & Y                + (1           &) Y                       ;             (3)

where & 2 (0; 1). Modern agriculture (superscript AM) uses a Cobb-Douglas technology with capital
and labor (in the quantitative section we also introduce land in agriculture):
                                                                  1
                                             Y AM = K AM                    Z AM H AM         :                       (4)

Traditional agriculture (superscript S, as in "subsistence") does not use any capital:

                                                        Y S = ZSHS:                                                   (5)

Note that the presence of a traditional sector implies a variable elasticity of substitution between capital
and labor in agriculture. When ! > 1; the elasticity of substitution is larger than unity and declines
as the economy develops. For large K AM , the elasticity of substitution approaches unity.
    We assume the TFPs Z M ; Z AM ; and Z S to grow at the exponential rates g M ; g AM ; and g S ,
respectively (we later introduce stochastic disturbances). All goods are produced competitively. Both
capital and labor are perfectly mobile across sectors. Capital depreciates at the rate :
  10
    The technology parameters and " can alternatively be interpreted as preference parameters, re    ecting the relative
weight and the elasticity of substitution between goods produced by the agricultural and nonagricultural sector.




                                                                  13
3.1.2    Households

Agent's preferences are described by a logarithmic utility function.
                               Z    1
                                                                            (   n)t
                          U=            ( log c + (1   ) log (1   h))   e             dt:            (6)
                                0
           Here, c    C=N denotes the consumption per capita; 1 h is leisure, and is the time
discount rate. Population grows at the exogenous rate n < : In the analytical section, for simplicity,
we assume an inelastic labor supply by setting = 1 (hence, H i = N i ). We introduce an endogenous
labor-leisure choice below where we estimate the model and study economic       uctuations. When we
introduce uncertainty, (6) is replaced by an expected utility function with unit relative risk aversion.
We suppress time indexes when it is not a source of confusion.
    The representative household maximizes expected utility subject to a set of period budget con-
               _ = W N + RK + T r, where K = K M + K AM and N = N M + N AM + N S denote
straints N c + K
the aggregate capital stock and number of workers, respectively. W denotes the after-tax wage that is
equalized across sectors in equilibrium; R denotes the equilibrium (gross) interest rate.
    Since in the data we see persistent labor wage di¤erences across agriculture and nonagriculture
(see, e.g., Gollin et al. (2014)), we introduce an exogenous wedge by assuming that the government
taxes wages in nonagriculture at the rate . The government runs a balanced budget each period
and rebates the tax proceeds to the representative household as lump-sum transfers, denoted by T r.
Thus, T r = W M H M ; where W M denotes the nonagriculture pre-tax wage. In equilibrium, W AM =
W S = (1      ) W M = W: Note that the wedge distorts resource allocation preventing the equalization
of the marginal product of labor across sectors. Misallocation increases employment in agriculture and
reduces the equilibrium after-tax wage W . The wedge is a stand-in for a variety of frictions leading
to rural overpopulation.

3.2     Competitive Equilibrium

Since the wedge is the only distortion, we can characterize the recursive competitive equilibrium as
the solution to a distorted planning problem. More formally, the planner maximizes (6) subject to the
resource constraint
                              K_ = F Y G; Y M    K C        W N M + T r;                          (7)

and to the technological constraints implied by Equations (1)­(5). Here, W denotes the marginal
                                               M
product of labor in manufacturing, i.e., W = W . The distortion arises from the planner taking W
as parametric when she solves the maximization problem.
   It is useful to introduce some normalizations.




                                                       14
Notation 1 De...ne:
                                         C           K
                             c             ;           ;
                                         N           N
                                         KM      M         NM           AM            N AM             S        NS
                                             ;                ;                            ;
                                          K                N                           N                        N
                                                                      ! 1
                                                     & Y AM            !

                                                     ! 1                              ! 1      :
                                         & (Y AM )    !    + (1        & ) (Y S )      !



      is the aggregate capital-labor ratio, the key endogenous state variable of the economy. is the
share of the aggregate capital stock used in nonagriculture. Since the traditional sector does not use
capital, 1     is the corresponding share in modern agriculture. i N i =N denotes the employment
share in sector i 2 fAM; M; S g. measures the GDP share of modern agriculture in total agriculture.
    We characterize equilibrium in two stages. First, we solve the static problem de...ned the maximized
current output per capita subject to the wedge and a given aggregate stock of capital per worker
   and the TFP levels: Then, we solve the dynamic equilibrium involving capital accumulation and
technical progress.

3.2.1   Static Equilibrium

Let x       ;   S ; AM ; M       : Then, the competitive equilibrium maximizes the distorted output per
worker y
                          y ( ) = max f y G (x; ) ; y M (x; )                                      W   M
                                                                                                            + T r:                     (8)
                                          x
subject to the technology constraint
                                                                                                                                  "
                                                                            " 1                                         " 1      " 1
                   G             M                         G                 "                              M            "
                f y (x; ) ; y        (x; ) =               y (x; )                + (1               ) y        (x; )                  (9)

where
                                     0                                                                           ! 1    1 !! 1
                                                                                  1                               !
                                &             Z AM              ((1         ) )                        AM
                  y G (x; ) = @                                                               ! 1
                                                                                                                        A        ;
                                                           + (1        &)    ZS S              !


                 y M (x; ) =             ZM          (     )1               M
                                                                                          ;

and to the resource constraints          2 [0; 1] and       M    +     AM     +       S       = 1:
   The static allocation attains constrained production e¢ ciency, conditional on the wedge : This
requires the equalization of the marginal product capital across nonagriculture and modern agriculture
and of the marginal product of labor across the three sectors.

Proposition 1 Given and Z = Z M ; Z AM ; Z S ; a static competitive equilibrium is characterized by
a set of policy functions = ( ; Z ) ; = ( ; Z ), M ( ( ; Z ) ; ( ; Z )) ; AM ( ( ; Z ) ; ( ; Z )) ;


                                                                 15
and S ( ( ; Z ) ; ( ; Z )) satisfying the First Order Conditions of the program (8) ­ see Equations
(22), (23), (24), (25) Appendix B ­ and the technology constraint (9).

    Next, we characterize the properties of the equilibrium functions ( ; Z ) and ( ; Z ). Once these
functions are known, it is straightforward to determine the allocation of labor across the three sectors
using the FOCs. Here, we focus on the case " > 1 (which will be consistent with our estimates) but
return to the general case in the long-run convergence analysis. We study ...rst the role of capital
deepening and then the role of TFP growth.
    Capital deepening: In the general case, the comparative statics of and with respect to changes
in are involved and possibly nonmonotonic. However, we can establish sharp results for the special
case in which the two elasticities, ! and ", are close to each other. In this case, capital deepening
triggers a relative decline of agriculture (i.e., increasing ) and modernization (i.e., increasing ) at
all stages of economic transition. The analysis of the ...rst-order conditions of the program (8) (see
Appendix B) leads to the result that

                    @ ln ( ; Z )                         (" 1) (      ) (1       )
                                          =                             M)           S
                                                                                                   ;        (10)
                        @ ln       ! ="       1 + ("   1) ((     )(          +           (1   ))

which is a generalization of a result in Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008). If " > 1 and                   >   ; this

derivative is necessarily positive (note, in particular that > )           M > 0; since nonagriculture is

the capital-intensive sector.) Building on this result, we establish the following lemma.

Lemma 1 Suppose       > ; and " > 1: Then, there exists x > 0 such that, if k! "k < x; then,
both ( ; Z ) and ( ; Z ) are monotone increasing in . Moreover, M ; M = AM , and AM = S are
monotone increasing in while S is monotone decreasing in .

   After deriving Equation (10), the lemma is easily established by exploiting the fact that the capital
labor ratio in modern agriculture is proportional to that in nonagriculture. More formally, the First
Order Conditions imply that
                                                 1      1
                                         M
                                             =            AM
                                                             ;                                     (11)
                                                 1
which in turn implies that capital accumulation triggers capital deepening in both sectors. Since,
by Equation (10), @ =@ > 0; (11) implies that @ M = AM =@ > 0: Moreover, capital deepening
in agriculture implies that modern agriculture accounts for a growing share of the total agricultural
production, i.e., @ =@ > 0. Finally, employment in the traditional sector must fall (@ S =@ > 0),
since, on the one hand, capital deepening increases the productivity of modern agriculture and, on the
other hand, modern and traditional agriculture are substitutes (! > 1).

    TFP di¤erences: Next, we study the comparative statics of the sectoral TFPs. First, we note
that a proportional increase in all TFPs leaves  and     una¤ected, i.e., ( ; Z ) = ( ; Z ) and
  ( ; Z ) = ( ; Z ) for any > 0: Thus, what matters are the relative TFPs in the three sectors. With


                                                        16
some abuse of notation, we express the problem in terms of relative TFPs:                                         ( ; Z) =             ; z AM ; z S
and ( ; Z ) =      ; z AM ; z S where z AM                      Z AM           = ZM              and z S     ZS= ZM            . The following
lemma provides a complete characterization.

Lemma 2 Suppose > and " > 1. Then,                   ; z AM ; z S is decreasing in z AM and increasing in
z S ; whereas   ; z AM ; z S is increasing in z AM and decreasing in z S . Moreover, AM , AM = S and
  AM = M are increasing in z AM and decreasing in z S .


   Lemma 2 establishes two intuitive results. First, an increase in TFP in nonagriculture relative
to modern agriculture (with constant Z S ) induces a reallocation of both capital and labor towards
nonagriculture. Second, an increase in TFP in modern relative to traditional agriculture (with constant
Z M ) triggers more modernization of agriculture.

3.2.2   Dynamic Equilibrium

In this section, we characterize the dynamic equilibrium. We continue to exploit the equivalence
between the distorted planning solution and the competitive equilibrium. Thus, we can write:
                                                                Z       1
                                                                                             (    n)t
                                         max 1 U =                          log (c)     e               dt
                                    [ct ;xt ;   t ]t=0              0

subject to the resource constraint

                              _ = f y G (x; ) ; y M (x; )                               + n + gM             c;

where f y G ; y M is given by (9), to the exogenous law of motion of TFPs, Z  _t              _ AM =Z AM =
                                                                               M =Z M = g M ; Z
                                                                                    t           t      t
           _t
g AM ; and Z S =Z S = g S . The problem is subject to a vector of initial conditions ( ; Z ) =
                 t                                                                     0   0       0 ; Z 0 :
   Using the set of static equilibrium conditions allows us to write the present-value Hamiltonian

                                                (    n)t
                  H (ct ;   t; Z t; t)   =e                log (ct ) +          t (y ( t ; Z t )        ( + n)    t   ct ) ;                   (12)

where ct is a control variable, ( t ; Z t ) is the state vector, and t is a dynamic Lagrange multiplier. The
production function y ( t ; Z ) subject to productive e¢ ciency (static equilibrium) can be expressed as

             y ( ; Z ) = ( ( ; Z ) ; ( ; Z ))                   (           ( ; Z ))1            M
                                                                                                     ( ( ; Z ) ; ( ; Z ))          ;           (13)

where                                                                                                                    "
                                                                "          1             1         ( ; Z)   1           " 1
                 ( ( ; Z ) ; ( ; Z )) = (1                 )   " 1      1+                                                     :               (14)
                                                                           1                     ( ; Z)   ( ; Z)
Note that ( ; Z ) ; M ( ; Z ) ; and ( ; Z ) are the policy function consistent with the static equilib-
rium. Thus, Equation (13) yields the technology constraint subject to the static equilibrium conditions.
   Appendix B (Proposition 3 and Corollary 1) provides a complete characterization of the dynamic
equilibrium in terms of a system of ordinary di¤erential equations, a set of initial conditions, and a ter-
minal (transversality) condition. We prove that the equilibrium can be represented by an autonomous

                                                                        17
system of ordinary di¤erential equations (Equations (36)­     (39) in the appendix) in the endogenous vari-
ables ct ; t ; t ; and t ; and the exogenous law of motion Z   _ M =Z M = g M ; where the initial conditions
                                                                 t    t
are given by 0 (i.e., the initial capital stock), the initial state of technology, and 0 and 0 such that
they satis...es the static equilibrium conditions at time zero, i.e., 0 = ( 0 ; Z 0 ) and 0 = ( 0 ; Z 0 ) : A
standard transversality condition pins down the (unique) optimal choice of the control variable c0 : This
dynamic system fully characterizes the unique equilibrium trajectories of all variables in the economy,
thereby providing a full description of the process of structural change. Note, in particular, that the
static equilibrium conditions will be satis...ed for all t 0:
   Finally, we discuss the long-term properties of the model. We provide conditions under which
the economy converges to an asymptotic balanced growth path (ABGP) where the agriculture is fully
modernized and the share of nonagriculture in total GDP is unity.

Proposition 2 Let k M =         and k AM = (1              ) : Then, there exists an Asymptotic Balanced Growth
Path (ABGP) such that

                      c
                      _t       _t         k_M
                           =         =        = gM ;
                      ct         t        kM
                                M             _t   _t
                           =             = 1;    =    = 0;
                                                 t    t
                    k_M            k_ AM
                           = g M ; AM = g M (" 1) g M g AM ;
                    kM             k
                    _M
                    N             _ AM
                                  N
                           = n;          = n (" 1) g M g AM ;
                    NM            N AM
                    N_S      N _ AM
                           =            (! 1) g AM g S + (1 ) gM                     g AM   :
                    NS       N AM
Along the ABGP,

                                     c               gM + +
                                             =                         gM + + n ;                          (15)
                                                       1
                                                               "           !1
                                                     (1     ) " 1 (1   )
                                             =                                  :                          (16)
                               ZM                          M
                                                          g + +

If " > 1; ! > 1; and g M g AM g S ; then, the ABGP is asymptotically stable, i.e., given a vector of
initial conditions 0 =Z0  M;
                              0 ; 0 close to the ABGP, the economy converges to the ABGP. The same
is true if, instead, " < 1; ! > 1; and g AM g M g S .

    The ABGP features a vanishing agriculture. Su¢ cient conditions for this to happen are that either
the elasticity of substitution between nonagriculture and agriculture be larger than unity and technical
progress be faster in nonagriculture than in agriculture or that, alternatively, " < 1 and g AM     gM :
Note that as long as " is not too large, is not too large and the TFP growth gap between nonagriculture
and modern agriculture is not too high, capital accumulation in modern agriculture remains positive
in the ABGP (i.e., k AM grows at a positive rate). In addition, the ABGP features modernization

                                                            18
of agriculture: the traditional sector vanishes both as a share of value added and as a share of total
agricultural employment. This is due to the combination of a high elasticity of substitution (! > 1)
and technical progress being faster in modern than in traditional agriculture.
    Our theory bears predictions about the labor income shares and the productivity gap. To highlight
them, we move from the planner'       s allocation to its decentralized counterpart. Denote by LIS j
W j H j =P j Y j for j 2 fG; M g the labor income share in sector j . The labor share in nonagriculture is
constant, owing to the Cobb-Douglas production function. The labor share in agriculture declines as
long as the (labor-intensive) traditional sector shrinks, consistent with Figure 1 above. More precisely,
LIS G =         +1      , implying that the labor share in agriculture declines from unity ­ when capital
is very low and the agriculture is dominated by the traditional sector ­ to           when agriculture is
fully modernized.    11  The theory also predicts a declining productivity gap in line with the data in
Figures 1 and 2. The two predictions are two sides of the same coin. More formally, AP LM =AP LA =
                              1
 (1      ) LIS M =LIS A         :

3.3    Equilibrium in the Lewis Model

A particular case for which a global characterization of the equilibrium dynamics is available is when
the output of traditional and modern agriculture are perfect substitutes (! ! 1). This model is
interesting for its close resemblance with the seminal contribution of Lewis (1954). In addition, it
illustrates why the dynamics of and may be nonmonotone. Intuitively, when ! is large, labor in
the traditional sector is a close substitute of capital in modern agriculture. When capital is scarce, it
is then e¢ cient to allocate its entire stock to nonagriculture and defer the modernization of agriculture
to a later stage in which capital is more abundant.
    The technical analysis is deferred to Appendix B. Here, we summarize the main qualitative ...ndings
in the case where " > 1. The dynamic equilibrium evolves through three stages. In the ...rst stage,
(Early Lewis stage), capital is very scarce, all agricultural production takes place in the traditional
sector ( = 0) and all capital is allocated to the manufacturing sector ( = 1). Capital accumulation
brings about a steady increase in the relative price of agricultural goods and a growth in the real wage.
The interest rate decreases over time.
    At some point, the increase in the capital stock and the growing price of the agricultural good make
it e¢ cient to activate modern agriculture allocating part of the capital stock to this subsector. We
enter then the Advanced Lewis stage. During this stage the share of capital in modern agriculture ( )
increases over time. Employment increases in both nonagriculture and modern agriculture and declines
in the traditional sector (thus, increases). The sectoral capital-labor ratios are constant over time,
and so are factor prices.
    Finally, when the labor force reserve in traditional agriculture is exhausted, the economy enters the
third stage (Neoclassical stage). In this stage, all the agricultural production takes place in modern
  11
    One could obtain a declining labor share by assuming an aggregate CES production function in agriculture.with a
high elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, like in Alvarez-Cuadrado et al. (2017). However, such alternative
model would feature, counterfactually, an ever declining labor share that would converge to zero in the long run. In our
model, like in the data, the labor share in agriculture declines but remains bounded away of zero.


                                                            19
farms using capital ( = 1). Since " > 1 and nonagriculture is more capital intensive than agriculture,
the output share of nonagriculture keeps growing. There is positive wage growth and a declining
interest rate.
     Figure 6 displays the equilibrium dynamics during economic transition, assuming no technical
progress, for simplicity. Each panel has the aggregate capital labor ratio on the horizontal axis. Panel
a plots the share of labor in each sector. The labor share in the traditional sector ( S ) starts high
and declines with in both the Early and Advanced Lewis stages. The labor share in nonagriculture
increases throughout the entire transition. The labor share in modern agriculture is nonmonotone:
it is zero in the Early Lewis stage, takes o¤ in the Advanced Lewis stage, and declines again in the
neoclassical stage.
   Panel b plots the factor price dynamics. During the Early Lewis stage, the interest rate falls and
wages increase with capital accumulation. Wages and interest rates are       at during the Advanced
Lewis stage. Eventually, the interest rate resumes its fall and wages resume their increase during the
Neoclassical stage.
    Panel c plots the productivity gap, which tracks the dynamics of : The gap is constant during the
Early Lewis stage, when = 0. It falls in during the Advanced Lewis stage, when the traditional
sector declines as a share of agricultural output. It is constant again in the Neoclassical stage, when
  = 1.
                                                                         G        M
   Finally, panel d plots the relative capital-output ratio P K         K
                                                              G Y G = P M Y M . The ratio stays at zero during

the Early Lewis stage. It increases during the Advanced Lewis stage. Eventually, it becomes constant
during the Neoclassical stage.*
         In summary, the model with ! ! 1 has three well-distinct stages.




4         Estimating the Model
In this section, we estimate the model. We generalize the theory in three dimensions. First, we use
discrete time.12 Second, we introduce an endogenous labor supply choice as in Equation (6). Third,
we introduce land as a ...xed factor in modern agriculture.13 We could add land also in the traditional
sector. However, in the spirit of Lewis (1954), we retain the property of a traditional sector working
as a labor force reserve at a constant marginal cost.
         Next, we go through the following two steps:

     1. We estimate the deterministic model with constant productivity growth in each sector. To this
        end, we start by calibrating some parameters externally. Then, we estimate the structural para-
        meters and initial conditions to match moments of the structural change of China between 1985
        and 2012.
    12
         We provide a formal description of the discrete-time model in the online appendix.
    13                              1
         We assume Y AM = K AM            T
                                             Z AM H AM T T ; where T is land and T is the output elasticity of land.


                                                             20
                              (a) Share of labor in each sector                                                       (b) Factor prices
                    100
                              Nonagrc.'s share in total employment (%)                                                                   Wage rate
                     90       Modern agric.'s share in total employment (%)                  0.9                                         Rental rate of capital
                              Traditional agric.'s share in total employment (%)
                     80                                                                      0.8

                     70                                                                      0.7

                     60                                                                      0.6
          Percent




                     50                                                                      0.5

                     40                                                                      0.4

                     30                                                                      0.3

                     20                                                                      0.2

                     10                                                                      0.1

                      0                                                                       0
                          0   2            4             6             8           10              0         2          4            6             8              10
                                    Capital labor ratio ( )                                                        Capital labor ratio ( )




                                      (c) Productivity gap                                         (d) Relative K-Y ratio in agriculture to nonagriculture
                                                                Productivity gap             0.8                            Relative K-Y ratio (Agr./Nonagr.)

                      3
                                                                                             0.7


                    2.5                                                                      0.6


                                                                                             0.5
                      2
                                                                                             0.4


                    1.5                                                                      0.3


                                                                                             0.2
                      1
                                                                                             0.1


                    0.5                                                                       0
                          0   2            4             6             8           10              0         2          4            6             8              10
                                    Capital labor ratio ( )                                                        Capital labor ratio ( )




Figure 6: The ...gure illustrates the allocations and prices as a function of capital per worker,                                                                      , in a
version of the Lewis model (! ! 1 and no technical change).




                                                                                        21
   2. We introduce productivity shocks. We estimate stochastic processes for the three TFP shocks
      and simulate the model. Then, we evaluate the ability of the stochastic model to account for
      the business cycle properties of China. Finally, we use the estimated model to forecast how the
      Chinese business cycle will evolve as economic development progresses further.14

    Parameters calibrated externally: We assume a 4% annual time discount rate. Note that log
preferences in Equation (6) ensure that there is no trend in labor supply in the ABGP. is chosen so
that in the long run agents work one third of their time. We set the annual population growth rate
(n) to 1.5% following Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008). This parameter has no signi...cant impact on the
results. Capital is assumed to depreciate at a 5% annual rate.
    Estimated parameters based on nonagricultural production data: We set                  = 0:5 to
match the labor-income share in the nonagricultural sector in China (see Bai and Qian (2010)). Then,
we estimate g M using standard growth accounting based on a Cobb Douglas production function ­as
in the model ­to match the trend of real GDP in the nonagricultural sector of China between 1985 to
2012. This yields g M = 6:5%.
    Parameters estimated based on endogenous moments: We estimate the remaining parame-
ters using Simulated Method of Moments. The parameters we estimate are

                                                          AM
                                  "; !; ; ; &; ;    T;g        ; g S ; Z1985
                                                                        M       AM
                                                                             ; Z1985    S
                                                                                     ; Z1985 :

We normalize Y1985 = 1 and target (the natural logarithms of) the following empirical annual obser-
vations from 1985 to 2012 in China:15 (i) the share of agricultural employment in total employment;
(ii) the share of capital in agriculture relative to the total capital stock; (iii) the ratio of real output in
agriculture to total GDP; (iv) the relative value added share of agriculture, evaluated at current prices
(i.e., the expenditure share of agricultural goods); (v) the aggregate GDP growth; (vi) the initial and
...nal aggregate capital-output ratios; and (vii) the 1985-2012 change in the productivity gap between
agriculture and nonagriculture, adjusted for rural-urban wage di¤erences. We calculate this gap as
the ratio of labor productivity in nonagriculture to agriculture times the ratio of wages in agriculture
to nonagriculture. Recall that in the model this gap equals (1             (1     )) = , i.e., the ratio of the
labor-income share in agriculture to the labor-income share in nonagriculture.16
  14
     We decided to use China instead of a fully industralized economy because it is di¢ cult to ...nd data for periods in
which on such economy had a large agricutural sector. For instance, the available time-series for the US cover a period
when the employment in agriculture is already quite low (20.3% of the total US employment in 1929) and the activites
captured by our traditional agricultural sector are arguably negligible. In contrast, China has a large and declining share
of employment in agriculture ranging from 62.4% in 1985 to 33.6% in 2012. As late as in 2004 more than 10% of China'      s
agricultural output was produced without machine equipment (source: Fixed Point Survey of Research Center for Rural
Economy (RCRE)).
  15
     We choose the year 1985 as our initial period because it was a turning point in internal migration policy. In earlier
years restrictions on labor mobility between rural and urban areas were very severe. These restrictions were relaxed
in January 1985, following the issuance of the "Ten Policies on Further Active Rural Economy" from the CPC Central
Committee and the State Council.
  16
     We could alternatively have targeted the empirical labor-income shares directly. However, such data are available
only up until 2003. From 2004 onwards, the labor income shares are not comparable to their counterparts in the pre-2004
period. See Bai and Qian (2010) for details. As it turns out, the overall change in the ratio of labor income shares is



                                                            22
    This procedure yields 143 moment conditions ­ 28 for each of the annual moments (i)-(v) plus
moments (vi)-(vii). The estimation is based on equal weights on the annual moments (i)-(v) and
corresponding weights for moments (vi) and (vii) (i.e., 14 times the weight on the annual moments for
each of the two K/Y ratios, and 28 times for the relative deviation of the output gap).
    We measure real output in agriculture and nonagriculture following the same approach as China'
                                                                                                 s
                                      17
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). To be consistent with the empirical data, we start the model
in 1980 and base the 1985-1990 growth rates using 1980 as the base year, then update and chain the
output levels using 1990 relative prices, etc.
      Nonhomothetic preferences: We also estimate a model with non-homothetic Stone-Geary pref-
erences, where the agricultural good is a necessity. To this end, we reinterpret the goods M and G
as ...nal goods that are allocated to consumption (denoted C M and C G ) and investment (denoted X M
and X G ), where Y G = C G + X G = N cG + X G and Y M = C M + X M = N cM + X M . More formally,
we replace the per-capita utility function in Equation (6) by
                                                                   " !
                                                       " 1                          " 1    " 1
           u cG ; cM ; h = log            cG      c     "
                                                             + (1       ) cM         "
                                                                                                   + (1   ) log (1   h) ;


while the investment good continues to be a CES aggregate of the agricultural and nonagricultural
goods,
                                                                                      "
                                                 " 1                          " 1    " 1
                                             G    "                       M    "
                                         X             + (1         ) X                     = I:

    The aggregate resource constraint (7) can be written as

                                             _ =I
                                             K               K        W H M + T r:                                          (17)

We denote the total expenditure by Y = P G Y G + P M Y M , the total consumption expenditure as
C = P G C G + P M C M , and the total investment expenditure as I = P G X G + P M X M . The constant c
is added to the list of parameters we estimate. The baseline model is a restricted version with c = 0.


    Estimation results:
   Table 1 summarizes the results of the estimation. The benchmark model with homothetic utility is
labeled CRRA.
comparable to the change in the labor productivity gap: over the 1985-2003 period these ratios fall by 13 and 14 log
points, respectively.
   17
      The NBS measures real growth in agricultural and nonagricultural output using prices in a base year. The base year
was updated in 1980, 1990, 2000, 2005, and 2010. The levels of real sectoral output are chained when a new base year
is adopted. Therefore, in the year of change in base year prices the real levels are by construction invariant to using the
new or the old set of prices. This approach is similar to that pursued in the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts
before 1996.
   As is well known, this approach introduces a bias when the relative prices change substantially over time. In Figure 16
in the online appendix we quantify the magnitude of this bias in China by plotting the series measured in the same way as
does the NBS against the exact measures of real sectoral output in the model. The average bias is 0.2 percentage points:
the real GDP growth is overstated by 0.5 percentage points over the sample period 1985-1990. Then the bias decreases
over time. In contrast, the bias would be negligible if real growth were calculated using chain weighting.


                                                                 23
                                                       CRRA         Stone Geary          NoPrGap
                Parameters Set Exogenously                      " unrestricted " = 0:5
n                     popul. growth rate (15+          1:5%         1:5%        1:5%      1:5%
                          capital deprec. rate          5%           5%          5%        5%
 1
1+                          discount factor            0:96          0:96        0:96     0:96
                   pref. weight on consumption         0:73          0:73        0:64     0:71
            Parameters Estimated Within Model
                Targeting Data on Nonagr. Prod.        CRRA       StGeary      " = 0:5   NoPrGap
                        labor share in nonagr.          0:50        0:50         0:50       0:5
gM                   nonagr. TFP growth rate            6:5%       6:5%         6:5%       6:5%
 M
Z1985               initial TFP level in nonagr.        4:33        4:45         1:69      3:42
                  Targeting Empirical Moments          CRRA       StGeary      " = 0:5   NoPrGap
c                    Subsist. level in food cons.                   0:05         0:69      0:05
"               ES btw agric. and nonagric. cons.      3:60         3:36          0:5      4:00
!                 ES btw modern and trad. agr.         9:00         9:00          9:0      8:22
                       weight on agric. goods          0:61         0:60      0:000074     0:54
&                 weight on modern-agr. output         0:40         0:39         0:41      0:50
1       T     capital' s income share in modern agr.   0:14         0:13         0:20      0:11
              labor' s income share in modern-agric.   0:61         0:60         0:67      0:68
                              labor wedge              0:76         0:75         0:63      0:73
g AM             TFP growth rate in modern-agr.        6:1%        6:1%         6:8%       5:9%
gS               TFP growth rate in trad. sector       0:9%        0:9%         0:0%       1:0%
  S
Z1985             initial TFP level in trad. agr.      1:23         1:18         2:17      1:35
  AM
Z1985            initial TFP level in modern-agr.      2:26         2:25         3:28      2:42

                               Table 1: Estimated parameters.




                                            24
   The estimated elasticities of substitution " and ! are signi...cantly larger than unity, both with and
without a subsistence level in food consumption. This is in line with our conclusion from Section 6 and
" = 3:6 is within the range of the estimates we found for China in Section 6.18 . Moreover, the ...nding
that " > 1 and g M      g AM    g S is consistent with the assumption of the ...rst case of Proposition 2
(convergence to an ABGP when " > 1).
    With Stone-Geary preferences (second column), the estimated " falls slightly. This is not surprising.
With homothetic preferences there is only a substitution e¤ect: nonagricultural products turn relatively
cheaper due to capital accumulation and faster technical progress causing a decline in the relative
demand of agricultural goods. To match the declining expenditure share on agricultural good observed
in the data, the price elasticity of the relative demand must be su¢ ciently high (recall that if " = 1 the
expenditure shares would not change at all). In contrast, with Stone-Geary preferences, the expenditure
share in agriculture falls also because of an income e¤ect. Therefore, the Stone Geary model has a
potential of lowering the estimate of " (even, possibly, turning it smaller than unity). However, the
estimated subsistence level c turns out to be very small, corresponding to 11% of agricultural production
in 1985. Therefore, the estimated " falls only marginally, and the remaining parameters are also very
similar to the case with homothetic preferences.
    In column 3 we restrict " to be equal to " = 0:5. Namely, we impose complementarity between
agricultural and nonagricultural goods. This case yields very large estimates for the subsistence level
in agriculture, which now amounts to 98% of agricultural production in 1985. Moreover, in this case
the TFP growth in modern agriculture exceeds the TFP growth in nonagriculture, in line with the
conditions for the second case of Proposition 2 (convergence to an ABGP when " < 1).
    Finally, in the fourth column, we show the estimation results when we do not impose the productiv-
ity gap as a target moment. Since the model without a traditional agricultural sector cannot generate
a declining productivity gap by construction, one might worry that the estimation results hinge on
the inclusion of the productivity gap as a targeted moment. However, the results are highly robust,
being quantitatively very similar to those in the second column. In particular, the data demand a
large traditional sector ( = 0:5) and estimated elasticities that are very similar to the baseline case.
The nonhomotheticity continues to be small. In other words, the estimated model predicts a declining
productivity gap over the process of structural change even though if this moment were not targeted.
    The estimated elasticity of substitution between modern and traditional agriculture ! is in all cases
very large. The productivity growth rate is very high in both manufacturing and modern agriculture,
re ecting the high growth rate of the Chinese economy. To avoid the unrealistic implication of a long run
annual growth rate in excess of 6%, we assume that the productivity growth rate in both nonagriculture
and modern agriculture gradually (linearly) declines to 1.8% over the 2012-2085 period. Thereafter,
the economy grows at an annual 1.8% growth rate. This assumption is for the sake of realism and has
negligible e¤ects on the quantitative results. Finally, we note that the estimated productivity growth
in modern and traditional agriculture satisfy the (su¢ cient) conditions for convergence to the ABGP
set forth in Proposition 2.
  18
    Recall that when estimating equation (20) on Chinese data we obtain "   4 (using 5-year di¤erences), while we
obtained " = 1:7 when estimating a model based on equation (19).


                                                      25
4.1   Accounting for Structural Change in China

In this section, we show that the benchmark model ...ts well the data along salient dimensions of the
process of structural change. Figures 7 and 8 plot the time series for the seven empirical targets against
the implications of the estimated model ­ with and without homothetic preferences. Figure 7 shows
that, in line with the data, the benchmark model predicts that the shares of employment, capital,
value added, and expenditure in the agricultural sector relative to total should be falling over time. In
contrast, the " = 0:5 economy cannot generate a monotone decline in the share of aggregate capital
allocated to agriculture. That economy also generates too large a decline in the employment share,
expenditure share, and output share of agriculture.
                         Employment share of agricultural sector                      Capital share of agricultural sector
                  0.8                                                       0.09
                                                Data                                                      Data
                                                Benchmark model             0.08                          Benchmark model
                  0.7                           Model w/subsistence                                       Model w/subsistence

                                                                            0.07
                  0.6

                                                                            0.06
                  0.5
                                                                            0.05
                  0.4
                                                                            0.04

                  0.3                                                       0.03


                  0.2                                                       0.02
                    1985      1990    1995    2000     2005     2010           1985     1990    1995    2000     2005     2010




                        Real output ratio agriculture/nonagriculture           Expenditure ratio agriculture/nonagriculture
                  0.6                                                        0.6
                                                Data                                                      Data
                                                Benchmark model                                           Benchmark model
                  0.5                           Model w/subsistence
                                                                             0.5                          Model w/subsistence


                  0.4                                                        0.4


                  0.3                                                        0.3


                  0.2                                                        0.2


                  0.1                                                        0.1


                   0                                                          0
                   1985       1990    1995    2000     2005     2010          1985      1990    1995    2000     2005     2010


Figure 7: Structural change in model versus targeted empirical moments. Solid blue lines: homothetic
model. Dashed lines: the nonhomothetic models with unrestricted " (black) and restricted " = 0:5
(green). The top left panel displays agricultural employment as a share of total employment. The
top right panel displays the share of aggregate capital invested in agriculture. The bottom left panel
displays the agricultural value added as a share of aggregate GDP at current prices. The bottom right
displays the expenditure on agricultural goods as a share of aggregate GDP.
   Figure 8 displays an index of the log GDP per capita (index), the capital-output ratio, and the
productivity gap measured by the output per worker in agriculture relative to total output per worker.


                                                                       26
The estimated models capture well the trend in GDP and capital-output ratio. They can also capture
the falling productivity gap, although the data feature large swings.
                                                      Index of real GDP (log)
                          3
                                     Data
                        2.5          Benchmark model
                                     Model w/subsistence
                          2

                        1.5

                          1

                        0.5

                          0
                          1985          1990          1995          2000            2005          2010


                                                   Aggregate capital-output ratio
                        2.8
                                     Data
                        2.6          Benchmark model
                                     Model w/subsistence

                        2.4

                        2.2

                          2

                        1.8
                          1985          1990          1995          2000            2005          2010


                                  (Demeaned) log of productivity gap nonagriculture/agriculture
                        0.3
                                                                                     Data
                        0.2                                                          Benchmark model
                                                                                     Model w/subsistence

                        0.1

                          0

                        -0.1

                        -0.2
                           1985         1990          1995          2000            2005          2010


Figure 8: Structural change in model versus targeted empirical moments. Solid blue lines: homothetic
model. Dashed lines: the nonhomothetic models with unrestricted " (black) and restricted " = 0:5
(green). The top panel displays an index of real GDP (logarithm). The middle panel displays the
capital-output ratio. The bottom panel displays changes the labor productivity gap.
   Finally, Figure 9 shows the demise of the traditional agriculture. The employment share of the
modern sector in total agriculture increases from about 25% in 1985 to almost one in 2012. The output
share (corresponding to the variable in the model) exhibits a similar behavior. Note that in the data
we do not observe a distinction between traditional and modern agriculture, and thus the transition
from traditional to modern agriculture is identi...ed from the change in the productivity gap (the bottom
panel of Figure 8). The decline of the traditional sector is due to both relative TFP growth and fast
capital accumulation.

                                                              27
    In conclusion, the unrestricted model does a good job at matching the data, irrespective of whether
or not the productivity gap is targeted. The model with " = 0:5 captures some salient features of the
data but does less well on others, as discussed above.
                               Employment in traditional agriculture/ Total employment in agriculture
                         0.8
                                                                                      Benchmark model
                                                                                      Model w/subsistence
                         0.6


                         0.4


                         0.2


                          0
                          1985            1990          1995          2000           2005          2010


                                  Value added in modern agriculture / Total agricultural value added
                          1

                         0.9

                         0.8

                         0.7

                         0.6
                                                                                      Benchmark model
                         0.5                                                          Model w/subsistence

                         0.4
                          1985            1990          1995          2000           2005          2010


                                           Relative KY ratio in agriculture to nonagriculture
                         0.3


                        0.25


                         0.2


                        0.15                                                          Benchmark model
                                                                                      Model w/subsistence


                         0.1
                           1985           1990          1995          2000           2005          2010


Figure 9: Structural change, according to the models. Solid blue lines: homothetic model. Dashed
lines: the nonhomothetic models with unrestricted " (black) and restricted " = 0:5 (green). Panel
A displays the share of agricultural employment working in traditional sector. Panel B displays the
evolution of ; value added in modern agriculture as a share of total agricultural value added, in current
prices.


5    Business Cycle Analysis
In this section, we introduce uncertainty in the form of shocks to the three sectoral TFPs.



                                                                28
5.1    Estimating the Stochastic TFP Process

The estimation of the process for technology shocks presents a measurement problem because, as
mentioned above, we do not have direct separate measures of traditional and modern agriculture. To
overcome this problem we exploit two equilibrium conditions in the theory, namely that the marginal
product of capital is equated across manufacturing and modern agriculture, and that the marginal
product of labor is the same in traditional and modern agriculture. Combining these conditions with
direct annual observations of capital, labor, and value added in agriculture and non-agriculture, yields
a uniquely identi...ed sequence ZtM ; Z AM ; Z S 2012 .
                                        t     t t=1985
    We decompose each TFP level into a trend and a cyclical part, assuming that the trend is deter-
                                j      j           j            j     j        t
ministic. To this aim, de...ne zt log Zt    log Zt   ; where Zt   = Z0  1 + g j is the deterministic
trend for j 2 fM; AM; S g. We assume that the stochastic process is VAR(1), such that
                                2  M
                                        3 2 M                         3 2 M 3
                                  zt +1                     0      0      zt
                                4 zt
                                   AM 5 = 4
                                    +1      0               AM
                                                                   0 5 4 zt
                                                                          AM 5 + ;
                                                                                 t                                   (18)
                                   S
                                  zt+1                              S     ztS
                                            0               0
where t = A ~t ; A is a 3 3 matrix and ~t denotes a vector of orthogonal i.i.d. shocks. O¤-diagonal
elements in the matrix A will capture correlation between the three TFP innovations j   t.
                                    M           AM              S
   The estimated parameters are: ^ = 0:63; ^        = 0:9; and ^ = 0:42; all signi...cant at 1% level.19
The persistence of the three shocks on a quarterly basis, is 0:89, 0:97, and 0:81, respectively. The
estimated correlation matrix is
                                         2                          3
                                              1    0:42       0:48
                              Corr (A) = 4 0:42       1        0:15 5 :
                                            0:48     0:15       1

Note that innovations to nonagriculture and modern agriculture are positively correlated, whereas
innovations to nonagriculture and traditional agriculture are negatively correlated. Below we will
perform a sensitivity analysis where we impose that the three shocks are orthogonal. Finally, the
implied standard deviation of the innovations in (18) are given by    M = 0:042;      AM = 0:036;
                                                                      t               t
and     S = 0:053.
        t
    We assume that the realization of the stochastic productivity shock is observed after capital is
installed in each sector. Therefore, capital can only adjust in the following period.
  19
    Note that the autocorrelation matrix has no o¤-diagonal elements. If we allow for o¤-diagonal elements in this matrix,
we obtain:
                                 M                      M               A             S
                            log zt+1   =   0:72    log zt    0:07 log zt  + 0:12 log zt  + "M
                                                                                            t+1
                                 A                     M                   A              S
                            log zt+1   =     0:03 log zt + 0:906      log zt   0:05 log zt  + "A
                                                                                               t+1
                                 S                   M              A                   S
                            log zt+1   =   0:10 log zt  + 0:02 log zt  + 0:438    log zt  + "S
                                                                                             t+1

Since all o¤-diagonal coe¢ cients are insigni...cant, we set them to zero and estimate a restricted VAR.




                                                             29
5.2     Simulating the Stochastic Economy

We simulate the model using the estimates in Table 1 that were obtained to match the structural
change of China. We augment the model with the stochastic process for TFPs estimated above.

5.2.1    Method

Solving the model is a nontrivial task. We cannot approximate the economy around a balanced growth
path. Instead, we proceed as follows.20 We ...rst solve for a stochastic one-sector version of our model
without agriculture, using standard methods. We assume that our benchmark three-sector model
converges to such one-sector model after 250 periods. Proposition 2 shows that the ABGP of our
benchmark economy indeed converges to the balanced growth path of this one-sector model. We then
solve the economy recursively for each time period, back to period t = 0.
    The stochastic process for zt        [ztM ; z AM ; z S ]0 is approximated by a 27-state Markov chain with
                                                 t      t
three realizations for each shock, using a standard Tauchen method (Tauchen 1986). There are two
continuous state variables, and . We approximate the next-period decision rules for (ct+1 ; ht+1 )
with piecewise linear functions over the state variable t+1 ; t+1 ; zt+1 . We solve for the optimal
decisions on a grid with 75 points for and . The location of this grid is adjusted over time.21 We
verify that realized optimal ( t ; t ) never exceeds this range. Given decision rules for (ct+1 ; ht+1 ), the
optimal control variables follow from the state and the optimality conditions. In particular, we solve
for current-period optimal choices for t+1 ; t+1 ; ht ; ct ; t ; M         AM ; S . The decision rules for
                                                                       t ; t    t                            t+1 ,
                  M
  t+1 , ht , ct , t ; t are approximated by piecewise linear functions over ( t ; t ; zt ) and the decision
rules for AM  t   and S t follow directly from the optimality conditions once the values for t and t are
                                                                                                           M

determined.
    We start each sample economy o¤ with an initial value for ^ 1980 such that the deterministic model
reaches the empirical value for ^ 1985 in 1985. Moreover, 1985 is set to the 1985 value on the ABGP.
We then simulate 1,000 versions of the economy starting in 1980 and calculate statistics from 1985 to
2185.

5.2.2    Results

Both the empirical data and the simulated data are ...ltered to remove trends. We report results for
the benchmark economy based on HP-...ltered data and data in First Di¤erences. The upper panel of
each table presents the business cycle statistics for China 1985-2012. The lower panel reports the same
statistics for the simulated economies. Table 2 reports results based on HP-...lter (with an HP parameter
of 6.25), whereas appendix Table 8 reports results based on ...rst di¤erences. In the discussion we focus
on the HP-...ltered data. As an inspection of the tables shows, the choice of ...lter is not important.
   We complement the discussion of Table 2 with an analysis of the impulse-response functions since
these are useful to explain our ...ndings. Figure 10 shows the impulse response functions for employment,
  20
    A more detailed description of the algorithm can be found in the online appendix.
  21
    In period t the grid for t is distributed from 0:90 t to 1:1 t where t denotes the deterministic trend. Similarly, the
grid for t distributed from t 0:025 to t + 0:025.


                                                           30
                    Employment after Nonagriculture Shock                                    Real Output after Nonagriculture Shock                 Productivity Gap and Kappa after Nonagriculture Shock
            2                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                        0.1
                                          total                                                                      total                                                           productivity gap
                                          nonagriculture                             2                               nonagriculture                                                  kappa

            1
                                          modern agriculture                                                         modern agriculture               0.05
                                          traditional agriculture                                                    traditional agriculture
 Percent




                                                                          Percent
                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                     0
            0
                                                                                                                                                      -0.05
                                                                                    -1

           -1                                                                       -2                                                                 -0.1
                0           5        10              15             20                   0            5         10              15             20             0      5         10        15             20
                                   Period                                                                     Period
                    Employment after Modern Agri. Shock                                       Real Output after Modern Agri. Shock                   Productivity Gap and Kappa after Modern Agri. Shock
            6                                                                       10                                                                    0
                                          total                                                                      total                                                           productivity gap
            4                             nonagriculture                                                             nonagriculture                                                  kappa
                                          modern agriculture                                                         modern agriculture
                                                                                     5                                                                 -0.5
            2                             traditional agriculture                                                    traditional agriculture
 Percent




                                                                         Percent


            0
                                                                                     0                                                                   -1
           -2

           -4
                                                                                    -5                                                                 -1.5
                0           5        10              15             20                   0            5         10              15             20             0      5         10        15             20
                                   Period                                                                     Period
                Employment after Traditional Agri. Shock                                     Real Output after Traditional Agri. Shock              Productivity Gap and Kappa after Traditional Agri. Shock
           10                                                                       15                                                                    2
                                          total                                                                      total                                                           productivity gap
                                          nonagriculture                                                             nonagriculture                                                  kappa
                                                                                    10                                                                  1.5
                                          modern agriculture                                                         modern agriculture
            5
                                          traditional agriculture                                                    traditional agriculture
Percent




                                                                         Percent




                                                                                     5                                                                    1

            0
                                                                                     0                                                                  0.5


           -5                                                                       -5                                                                    0
                0           5        10              15             20                   0            5         10              15             20             0      5         10        15             20
                                   Period                                                                     Period


Figure 10: Impulse Response Functions. All graphs show impulse response as percentage deviation
from the deterministic path. The three top panels show responses to a one-standard deviation change
in nonagricultural TFP (Z M ). The three middle panels show responses to modern agricultural TFP
(Z AM ). The three bottom panels show responses to traditional agricultural TFP (Z S ).

value added, and the productivity gap to sectoral TFP shocks. The ...gure illustrates the response to
each shock individually, holding the other TFP shocks at the deterministic equilibrium level.
    Productivity gap. The correlations between the productivity gap and sectoral labor supplies
have the same sign as their empirical counterparts, although the model predicts a lower volatility of the
 uctuations in productivity gap than is observed in the data. The productivity gap is countercyclical; it
decreases when the employment in nonagriculture is high and decreases when the employment in modern
agriculture is high. Intuitively, a positive productivity shock in nonagriculture attracts workers from
agriculture and induces modernization in agriculture. Interestingly, a temporary boom is associated
with a temporary acceleration of the process of structural change (cf. Lemma 2).
    The impulse response functions in Figure 10 illustrate the mechanism. An increase in z M (upper
panels) triggers a shift of labor and capital to nonagriculture. In the period when the shock occurs,
only labor adjusts (recall that capital is set one period in advance). Subsequently, capital goes up
in the more productive sector, sourced from both modern agriculture and net capital accumulation.

                                                                                                               31
Labor comes from traditional agriculture and, to a lesser extent, from modern agriculture. Thus, as
labor supply in agriculture falls, this sector becomes modernized: both the average capital intensity
and the average labor productivity increase in agriculture. Modernization reduces the productivity
gap (upper right panel of Figure 10). A shock to z S (bottom panels) has a similar but opposite e¤ect
on the employment and output dynamics: a higher z S causes labor to be reallocated to traditional
agriculture sourced from modern agriculture and nonagriculture. This in turn increases the relative
size of traditional agriculture and the productivity gap. Thus, shocks to z M and z S induce a positive
comovement in the productivity gap and agricultural employment. In contrast, a positive shock to
modern agriculture induces both an increase in total employment and modernization of agriculture.
Overall, shocks to modern agriculture mitigate the countercyclicality of the productivity gap.
    Structural change and sectoral productivity growth. Figure 11 shows the impulse responses
for the agricultural employment share in response to TFP shocks. As mentioned above, structural
change accelerates in response to positive TFP shocks to z M and slows down is response to TFP
shocks in agriculture. This prediction is in line with the causal evidence for employment dynamics
associated with the Green Revolution discussed in the introduction and reviewed in more detail in
Section 6 below.
    Our impulse-response functions also conform with the common narrative about business-cycle       uc-
tuations in contemporary China. For example, during the early 1980s China implemented large agricul-
tural reforms through the so-called Household Responsibility System. This reform induced substantial
productivity growth in agriculture (Lin (1988)). According to Figure 3, this period is associated with a
slowdown in structural change.22 Conversely, the period 2002­   08 witnessed a remarkable TFP growth
in manufacturing, associated with WTO accession and important market reforms (Song et al. (2011)),
while TFP in agriculture stagnated (Wang et al. (2013)). In Figure 3, this period is characterized by
an acceleration of structural change, which is in line with the prediction of our model after a positive
TFP shock in manufacturing.
    Sectoral labor supply and GDP. Both in the model and in the data (see Table 2) employment
in nonagriculture M is positively correlated with GDP, consumption, and investment whereas employ-
ment in agriculture G is negatively correlated with GDP, consumption, and investment. The reason
for these asymmetries lies in the presence of misallocation. Because of the wedge , the agricultural
sector is suboptimally too large. Our estimate is in line with a number studies which document the
presence of a signi...cant wedge between urban and rural sector in China, see e.g., Brandt and Zhu
(2010), Cheremukhin et al. (2015). Thus, resource reallocation away from agriculture has in general a
positive e¢ ciency e¤ect.
    With this in mind, consider the contrasting e¤ect of a TFP shock in nonagriculture and in agri-
culture. When TFP in nonagriculture increases, both capital and labor move towards nonagriculture.
  22
     Clearly, we do not mean to diminish the value of the agriculture reforms in the 1980s on the development of China.
The Household Responsibility System was important in highlighting the salience of individual incentives, with crucial
lessons for the subsequent reforms that increased productivity in the industrial sector. It also had dramatic e¤ects on the
living conditions of millions of people. These and other aspects are abstracted from in our stylized theory whose focus is
positive rather than normative.



                                                            32
                                     Relative agric. employment, high
                   1.5
                                                                            TFP shock Z
                                                                                          M
                                                                            TFP shock Z
                                                                                          AM

                    1                                                       TFP shock Z
                                                                                          S




                   0.5




                    0




                  -0.5
                         1   2   3   4     5      6      7     8        9   10      11         12




                                     Relative agric. employment, low
                    0




                  -0.5




                    -1




                  -1.5                                                      TFP shock Z
                                                                                          M
                                                                            TFP shock Z
                                                                                          AM
                                                                            TFP shock Z
                                                                                          S

                    -2
                         1   2   3   4     5      6      7     8        9   10      11         12


Figure 11: Impulse Response Functions. The graphs show impulse responses for the agricultural
employment share, i.e., N S + N AM =N , as percentage deviation from the deterministic path. The
top panel shows the employment dynamics in the estimated case (" = 3:6) for each of the TFP shocks
(Z S , Z AM , and Z M ). The bottom panel shows the corresponding responses in the case with a low
elasticity (" = 0:5).




                                                   33
Therefore, GDP goes up both by the direct e¤ect of the productivity increase and because misalloca-
tion falls. In contrast, when TFP increases in agriculture the positive direct e¤ect of a higher average
TFP is dampened (and possibly o¤set) by the increase in misallocation. This dichotomy is clear in
the second column of Figure 10: GDP increases sharply after a positive TFP shock in nonagriculture,
while GDP hardly moves after TFP shocks to agriculture.
   These predictions are again consistent with the recent history of China ­ see Figure 3. The early
1980s (positive TFP shock in agriculture) is associated with below-trend GDP growth whereas the
period 2002­ 08 (positive TFP shock in nonagriculture) is associated with boom in GDP.
    Note that the existence of a labor reserve in the traditional sector speeds up reallocation since
many workers can leave agriculture without much e¤ect on the marginal product of labor. This e¤ect
is reminiscent of Lewis (1954). Both the reduction in misallocation and the low opportunity cost of
sourcing workers from agriculture result in a strong correlation between employment in nonagriculture
and GDP.
    Expenditure and value added. Expenditure and value added exhibit a cyclical pattern similar
to that of sectoral labor: expenditure on nonagricultural good is strongly procyclical, while expenditure
on agricultural good is acyclical in the data and only weakly procyclical in the model. However, the
predictions of the model are inconsistent with the empirical observation that agricultural value added
is positively (negatively) correlated with nonagricultural labor (agricultural labor) in China.
    GDP and aggregate labor supply. The model generates the same volatility of GDP as in
the data. It also predicts a low volatility of employment and a low correlation with GDP, although
both are larger than in the Chinese data. Moreover, the model is consistent with the observation
that aggregate labor supply is highly correlated with employment in agriculture and approximately
uncorrelated with employment in nonagriculture. The low volatility and low correlation of employment
with total GDP stem from the availability of a large labor reserve in agriculture that can be reallocated
across sectors without generating large wage    uctuations. Therefore, total labor supply is less volatile
(and less correlated with GDP) than in a one-sector model. Note that TFP shocks to nonagriculture
are responsible for the lion'
                            s share of GDP    uctuations: a variance decomposition exercise shows that
they account for 95 percent of GDP     uctuations over the 1985-2012 period.
   Finally, the model shares many of the features of a standard one-sector RBC model concerning
consumption and investment: investment is more volatile and consumption is less volatile than output.

5.3   Business Cycle and Economic Development

In this section, we simulate the model beyond the stage of structural change reached by China in 2012.
This allows us to forecast the future evolution of business cycles and to compare the predictions of the
model for an economy at the stage of development of China with that of a fully industrialized economy.
We focus on four statistics: (i) the correlation between agricultural employment and productivity gap;
(ii) the correlation between agricultural and nonagricultural employment, (iii) the correlation between
total employment and GDP, and (iv) the volatility of labor supply and consumption relative to GDP.
   The results are shown in Figure 12. Each dot in the ...gure represents a statistic covering a 28-


                                                   34
                                                     P G yG    P M yM      AP LG
                                  c        i           P          P        AP LM
                                                                                    nG       nM     n
                                  A. HP Filtered China Data, 1985-2012              std (y ) = 1:7%
                std(x)
                std(y )            0.99     3.53      1.63          1.34     2.04    0.64 0.73 0.10
                corr(x; y )        0.70     0.65      0.06          0.95    -0.17   -0.69 0.73 -0.23
                corr(x; nG )      -0.60    -0.31     -0.37         -0.55     0.48    1.00 -0.94 0.48
                corr x; nM         0.60     0.37      0.41          0.57    -0.54   -0.94 1.00 0.04
                                  B. HP Filtered Model, Homothetic model            std (y ) = 1:7%
                std(x)
                std(y )            0.27     2.39      1.09          1.18     0.62    1.03 1.07 0.42
                corr (x; y )       0.81     0.99      0.30          0.97    -0.38   -0.25 0.73 0.43
                corr x; nG        -0.08    -0.25      0.78         -0.43     0.73       1 -0.75 0.69
                corr x; nM         0.45     0.75     -0.31          0.87    -0.74   -0.75        1 -0.21

                    Table 2: Summary Statistics for China data and Model: HP-...ltered

year rolling window. The ...rst dot on the right of each ...gure (i.e., that corresponding to the largest
agricultural share) corresponds to simulations over the period 1985-2012 which are those reported in
Table 2); the second dot corresponds to 1986-2013, and so on. In each ...gure, the process of economic
development is a shift from left to right. A fully industrialized economy is an economy with an
employment share of agriculture lower than 10%.
    The top left panel shows that the correlation between the size of the agricultural sector and the
productivity gap decreases as the agriculture shrinks. This is in line with the empirical cross-country
evidence documented in Section 2. The reason for this behavior in the model is that as the agricultural
sector modernizes and the traditional sector shrinks, the economy converges to a Hansen-Prescott
economy with a constant productivity gap.
    The upper right panel shows that the correlation between employment in agriculture and nonagri-
culture increases as the share of agriculture falls. In particular, the correlation is negative and large in
absolute value as long as the employment share in agriculture is between 40%-50% (close to the value
for today' s China), falling to zero in fully modernized economies. This is again in line with the empir-
ical cross-country evidence (cf. Panel b of Figure 5). The reason is twofold. First, a large agricultural
sector works as a bu¤er: when there are sector-speci...c shocks, it is possible to move labor in and out
of agriculture. Second, the labor reserve in the traditional sector o¤ers a high elasticity of substitution
between sectoral employments. As this sector shrinks, the e¤ective elasticity of substitution across
sectors falls.
    The bottom left panel shows that the correlation between total employment and GDP increases
from 40% to 100% as the share of agriculture falls. The increase in the correlation along the process
of structural change, again in line with the empirical evidence in Figure 5.
   The bottom right panel also shows that the volatility of employment relative to GDP is lower for
an economy like China than in a fully industrialized economy.23 Finally, our model generates a decline
  23
    Note that in our calibration, employment volatility decreases with development at earlier stages of the process of struc-
tural change (i.e., when agriculture employs more than 45% of the total hours worked). The reason for this nonmonotone
behavior is that when traditional agriculture is large,  uctuations are largely driven by TFP shocks to this sector (Z S ).
The estimated persistence of the TFP shock in traditional agriculture happen to be low which implies a large response


                                                              35
                  corr(agric. employment, productivity gap)                    corr(agric. employment, nonagric. employment)
          0.8                                                            0.2
                          Benchmark model                                                                    Benchmark model


          0.6                                                             0



          0.4                                                           -0.2



          0.2                                                           -0.4



            0                                                           -0.6



          -0.2                                                          -0.8
                     10         20          30    40          50                     10       20        30       40        50
                 Agriculture's share in total employment (%)                     Agriculture's share in total employment (%)



                       corr(aggr. labor supply, output)                              std(aggr. labor supply)/std(output)
            1                                                            0.6
                                                                                                             Benchmark model

          0.9
                                                                        0.55

          0.8
                                                                         0.5

          0.7

                                                                        0.45
          0.6

                                                                         0.4
          0.5

                          Benchmark model
          0.4                                                           0.35
                     10         20          30    40          50                     10       20        30       40        50
                 Agriculture's share in total employment (%)                     Agriculture's share in total employment (%)


Figure 12: Business Cycle during Structural Change. The graphs show the evolution of business
cycle statistics as a function of the employment share in agriculture. Each dot shows a statistic
covering a 28-year rolling window. Simulated data are HP-...ltered. The upper left panel shows the
correlation between employment in agriculture and the productivity gap. The upper right panel shows
the correlation between employment in agriculture and employment in nonagriculture. The lower left
panel shows the correlation between total employment and GDP. The lower right panel shows the
volatility of aggregate employment relative to GDP.




                                                                   36
in the volatility of consumption relative to GDP as the economy develops, in line with the empirical
evidence in Aguiar and Gopinath (2007). The reason is that in an economy where agriculture has a
large share of production, the aggregate capital-output ratio is low. Therefore, a ...xed absolute change
in aggregate capital causes large swings in the marginal product of capital. This makes consumption
more volatile and more positively correlated with GDP through a standard Euler Equation mechanism.
In turn, this lowers the  uctuations in labor supply due to income e¤ects.

5.4     Robustness Analysis

This section explores four robustness analysis exercises: (1) a low elasticity " = 0:5 combined with a
large food subsistence level, (2) introducing capital adjustment costs; (3) assuming shocks to Z S have
the same persistence of as shocks to Z AM ; and (4) uncorrelated shocks.

5.4.1    Low Elasticity of Substitution

Our estimation identi...ed a high elasticity of substitution " and small subsistence component in agri-
culture c. It is interesting to contrast the results of the estimated benchmark model with those of a
model with a low " and a large c. Section 4.1 estimates a version of the economy when " is restricted
to " = 0:5. In this case the estimation yields a large subsistence level c. We have already documented
that the success of this model at accounting for the structural change in China is mixed. Here we
document the business-cycle properties of such a model.
    Consider ...rst the response of relative sectoral employment to TFP shocks to agriculture. The lower
panel of Figure 11 shows that the " = 0:5 economy implies a decline in agricultural employment when
TFP increases in agriculture. The reason is twofold. On the one hand, the relative price of agricultural
goods falls sharply when " is low, causing an increase in nonagriculture . On the other hand, when
TFP in agriculture increases, the demand for nonagricultural goods increases more, due to a stronger
income e¤ect. This implication runs counter to the causal evidence from the Green Revolution and
from rainfall patterns reviewed in Section 6: positive technology and weather shocks slow down the
structural change from agriculture to nonagriculture in the data. It also collides with the common
narrative about the Chinese business cycle discussed above.
    The e¤ect of a TFP shock to nonagriculture is qualitatively similar to that of the benchmark econ-
omy: it increases relative employment in nonagriculture. Although the relative price of nonagricultural
goods falls, the income e¤ect comes to rescue. However, the overall quantitative e¤ect is signi...cantly
smaller than in the benchmark economy. For this reason, TFP shocks to agriculture play a signi...cantly
more important role as drivers of business cycles. A variance decomposition analysis shows that agri-
cultural TFP shocks account for about half of the GDP    uctuations in the " = 0:5 economy whereas in
the benchmark economy GDP       uctuations are almost entirely driven by TFP shocks to nonagriculture.
in labor supply. We believe that this result may partly arise from measurement error, which is particularly important in
the traditional sector (where, recall, we retrieve TFP shocks indirectly rather than through standard growth accounting,
because of lack of data). Measurement error is likely to exaggerate the volatility and underestimate the persistence of
shocks to Z S : We return to this in the robustness section.



                                                          37
    The business-cycle properties of the " = 0:5 economy are presented in panel B of Table 3. For
convenience, the statistics for the benchmark economy are restated as panel A of this table. Many
of the qualitative properties are similar to those of the benchmark economy. However, one important
failure is that the productivity gap is uncorrelated with sectoral employment in the " = 0:5 economy.
The reason is that TFP shocks to traditional sector increases relative employment in nonagriculture
(cf. Figure 11) and at the same time increases the productivity gap (through labor reallocation within
agriculture).


                                           P G yG   P M yM   AP LG
                           c       i         P         P     AP LM
                                                                      nG      nM      n
                           A. Benchmark Economy                               std (y ) = 1:7%
            std(x)
            std(y )         0.27 2.39        1.09     1.18     0.62    1.03    1.07       0.42
            corr (x; y )    0.81 0.99        0.30     0.97    -0.38   -0.25    0.73       0.43
            corr x; nG     -0.08 -0.25       0.78    -0.43     0.73       1   -0.75       0.69
            corr x; nM      0.45 0.75       -0.31     0.87    -0.74   -0.75       1      -0.21
                           B." = 0:5                                          std (y ) = 1:6%
            std(x)
            std(y )         0.38 2.46        1.72     1.20     0.40    1.27    0.93       0.41
            corr (x; y )    0.81 0.99      -0.002     0.99    -0.26   -0.42    0.80       0.39
            corr x; nG     -0.37 -0.41       0.84    -0.43   -0.001       1   -0.76       0.58
            corr x; nM      0.60 0.82       -0.47     0.82    -0.12   -0.76       1      -0.13
                           C. Capital Adjustment Cost                         std (y ) = 1:7%
            std(x)
            std(y )         0.71    1.47     1.22     1.22     0.71    1.35    1.05       0.45
            corr (x; y )    0.99    0.99     0.14     0.96    -0.41   -0.49    0.58      -0.27
            corr x; nG     -0.45   -0.49     0.74    -0.68     0.78       1   -0.92       0.93
            corr x; nM      0.53    0.77    -0.09     0.88    -0.50   -0.56       1       0.14
                           D. Same autocorrelation for Z S and Z AM           std (y ) = 1:6%
            std(x)
            std(y )         0.27 2.40       0.97      1.18     0.38    0.82    0.97       0.32
            corr (x; y )    0.80 0.99       0.33      0.98    -0.68   -0.34    0.83       0.54
            corr x; nG     -0.15 -0.35      0.72     -0.48     0.51       1   -0.70       0.50
            corr x; nM      0.49 0.86      -0.15      0.93    -0.77   -0.70       1       0.08
                           E. Orthogonal Shocks                               std (y ) = 1:5%
            std(x)
            std(y )         0.25    2.43     1.25     1.19     0.67    1.20    1.08       0.48
            corr (x; y )    0.79    0.99     0.16     0.96    -0.06   -0.19    0.68       0.49
            corr x; nG     -0.06   -0.18     0.87    -0.40     0.66       1   -0.76       0.69
            corr x; nM      0.40    0.68    -0.48     0.84    -0.53   -0.76       1      -0.22

Table 3: Robustness analysis, benchmark model versus alternative model. All statistics refer to HP-
...ltered simulated data for 1985-2012.




                                                    38
5.4.2    Capital Adjustment Costs

In the benchmark model, capital in each sector is set one period in advance, and after one period
reallocation of capital between sectors can occur without cost. In this section, we investigate the e¤ect
of introducing additional costs of reallocating capital between agriculture and nonagriculture. Capital
adjustment costs are commonly assumed in the quantitative DSGE literature (cf. Christiano et al.
(2005); Smets and Wouters (2007)), including papers studying business cycles in models with multiple
sectors (see e.g. Horvath (2000); Bouakez et al. (2009); Iacoviello and Neri (2010)).
    Following Bouakez et al. (2009) and Iacoviello and Neri (2010), we consider a canonical model
where it is costly to change the investment rate. Recall that for each sector j , the law of motion of
                       j                j    j                           j
capital is given by Kt  +1 = (1     ) Kt  + It , where j 2 fM; Gg and It   is the e¤ective investment in
sector j . The investment cost is re  ected in an aggregate resource constraint for investment goods,
                                                          "
                           " 1                     " 1   " 1             G
                                                                        It
                      G     "                  M    "                G          G
                     Xt          + (1     )   Xt                =    t    G
                                                                            ; Kt
                                                                        Kt
                                                                            M
                                                                           It
                                                                    + M
                                                                      t      M
                                                                                  M
                                                                               ; Kt          G
                                                                                          + It    M
                                                                                               + It ;
                                                                           Kt

where the terms AGt  and M                                                  i
                           t capture the adjustment cost. Recall also that Xt is the quantity of good
i 2 fM; Gg allocated to investment. We assume that the adjustment cost function       has a standard
quadratic form,
                                            !                  !2
                                    j              j
                               j   It     j       It         j      j
                               t     j
                                       ; Kt =       j
                                                           gt     Kt  ;
                                   Kt          2 Kt
                        j                                 j
where the parameter gt    is the growth rate of capital Kt  in period t in the deterministic structural
transition and is a nonnegative adjustment cost parameter. It follows that as long as the capital
         j                                                             j
stock Kt   grows at the same rate as in the deterministic transition, gt , the adjustment costs are zero.
However, when the investment rate deviates from this level then quadratic costs are incurred.
    We set the adjustment cost parameter to = 2:5, which is slightly lower than the annual equivalent
to the value of estimated by Iacoviello and Neri (2010) based on quarterly data for the US ( = 11).24
Since the deterministic model of structural change is not a¤ected by the capital adjustment cost, we
keep all other parameters the same as in the benchmark economy.
   Because adjustment costs make investments more sluggish, consumption must respond more to
TFP shocks, which in turn increases its volatility. Adjustment costs also a¤ect sectoral employment
because sluggish capital makes less advantageous moving labor across sectors in the short run.
    Panel C of Table 3 shows the results. The main e¤ect of introducing adjustment costs is that the
cyclical behavior of aggregate labor supply and consumption is more in line with the data: n becomes
negatively correlated with GDP and positively correlated with nonagricultural labor supply, as it is
for China (see panel A of Table 2). Moreover, consumption becomes substantially more volatile, more
  24
    Recall that in an annual model it is impossible to change the capital stock more often than annually, so our benchmark
economy already embeds some frictions since sectoral capital is set one period in advance.



                                                           39
negatively correlated with agricultural labor supply, and get a more reasonable correlation with GDP.
However, aggregate investment turns too smooth.

5.4.3   More Persistent Shocks in the Traditional Sector

In the benchmark model the persistence of shocks to z S is signi...cantly lower than that of shocks to z AM
   S                 AM
( ^ = 0:42 versus ^      = 0:90). We argued above that the transitory nature of shocks to traditional
        S
sector z was the cause behind the falling volatility of aggregate employment in the initial phase of the
transition (see the lower right panel of Figure 12).
    Since neither traditional nor modern agricultural production are directly observed, measurement
error in agricultural capital and employment will show up as movements in the two TFP levels. This
will a¤ect the estimated TFP processes for z S and z M . For this reason, we consider a sensitivity
analysis where TFP shocks to traditional agriculture have the same persistence as shocks to modern
               S     AM
agriculture ( ^ = ^      = 0:9). Moreover, we adjust the volatility of the innovations to z S ,  S , so
                                                                                                 t
that the stationary variance of z S is kept constant. The results are shown in panel C of Table 3. The
main e¤ect of a higher persistence of shocks to z S is that the aggregate volatility of labor supply n
falls and the correlation between n and GDP increase somewhat. Moreover, the relative volatility of
employment is predicted to increase monotonically during structural change (see panel D of appendix
Figure 15). Lowering the standard deviation of innovations to z S ,     S , has similar e¤ects.
                                                                        t


5.4.4   Orthogonal Shocks

The benchmark model estimated the correlation between TFP shocks based on the empirical time series
for China. In order to quantify the role of this correlation structure for the results, we investigate the
e¤ect of abstracting from this correlation by assuming orthogonal shocks. The results are presented in
panel E of Table 3. The di¤erences relative to the benchmark model are negligible.


6    International Evidence
The elasticity of substitution " plays an important role in our analysis. When estimating the model for
China we found " > 1. Using data from other countries, other studies have instead estimated " < 1. For
example, Herrendorf et al. (2013) shows that a model with " < 1 and higher TFP growth in agriculture
than in manufacturing accounts well for structural change in the US after 1950. In this section we use
data from other countries to evaluate the robustness of our estimate of " outside of China.
    We proceed in two steps. First, estimate aggregate multi-sector production functions based on
time-series evidence on structural change in the world' s largest economies. Rather then committing
to the structure of our model, we use a production function approach that is comparable to previous
studies in the literature. We also consider some correlation analysis using cross-country data. Then,
we review causal evidence of how TFP shocks in agriculture a¤ect structural change, and discuss its
implications for ".



                                                    40
6.1   Estimating Aggregate Production Functions

Herrendorf et al. (2013) estimate a three-sector CES production function where the elasticity of
substitution between agricultural goods, manufacturing goods, and services is assumed to be identical
across sectors. Using a consumption value added approach, they estimate an elasticity of substitution
between manufacturing, services and agriculture close to zero for the US. Following their lead, we now
extend our analysis to a class of models where the nonagricultural sector comprises two sectors: a
service sector and a manufacturing sector. More formally, we assume that
                                                                                         ms
                                                   ms 1                        ms 1     ms 1
                            M            M anuf     ms                  Serv
                        Y       = ^ Y                     + (1   ^) Y           ms




where the superscripts M anuf and Serv denote manufacturing and services, respectively, and the pa-
rameter ms represents the elasticity of substitution between services and manufacturing in production
of the nonagricultural good. Moreover, following the approach proposed by Herrendorf et al. (2013),
we construct consumption value-added data consistent with national accounts and with input-output
tables. We also estimate the model using standard production value-added data from the Gröningen
data (GGDC) 10-Sector Database. We estimate the model for the world'       s three largest countries ­
China, USA, and Japan.
   The estimation procedure follows Herrendorf et al. (2013). More formally, we estimate the following
Stone-Geary demand system,

                  2                                                                          !"       1   3""1
                                                                                       ms         "
                                           ms 1                             ms 1      ms 1
                6           ^ Y M anuf      ms    + (1     ^ ) Y Serv + s    ms                           7
             Y =6
                4
                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                          5      :   (19)
                                                                    " 1
                                             + (1         ) YG+c     "


This speci...cation follows that used in a di¤erent context by (Krusell, Ohanian, Rios-Rull, and Violante
2000). In particular, we allow " to di¤er from ms . Moreover, as in Herrendorf et al. (2013) we allow
for a subsistence level in agriculture (c 0) and home production in services (s 0). Note that the
generalized model nests the speci...cation of Herrendorf et al. (2013) as the particular case in which
 ms = ". The estimated nonlinear equations are stated in Appendix C.
   Table 4 summarizes the main results (the full estimation results are reported in appendix Table 9).
We present results for both the three-sector model and a restricted version where we do not distinguish
between manufacturing and services (this is closer to the speci...cation we use in our model).
    We obtain estimates of the agriculture-nonagriculture elasticity above unity for all countries and
with both consumption value added and production value added. The benchmark estimation ­ the
three-sector model using consumption value added data ­imply "U S = 2:5, "JP = 1:6, and "CN = 1:7,
and the estimates are signi...cantly larger than unity at a 1% level for all countries. The production-
based estimate of " is higher for Japan and slightly lower for the US and China. Moreover, in all cases
the estimates originating form the three-sector model are very similar to those of the two-sector model.
   We estimate    ms   to be close to zero for the US and China, and 0:8 for Japan. Thus, our ...ndings


                                                          41
                          Table 4: IFGNLS Estimates of Nested CES Elasticities
                                  Elasticity Cons. value added       GGDC
                                             3-sector 2-sector 3-sector 2-sector
                          USA         "       2.49      2.32    1.36       1.53
                                               (0:28)    (0:32)  (0:13)     (0:48)
                                      ms            0         - 0.48             -
                                                              - (0:005)          -
                          Japan       "       1.58      2.24    5.46       6.06
                                              (0:053)    (0:36)  (0:80)     (0:91)
                                      ms      0.79            - 1.66             -
                                              (0:003)         -  (0:13)          -
                          China       "       1.70      1.34    1.30       1.75
                                               (0:22)    (0:25)  (0:13)     (0:08)
                                      ms        0.007         - 0.65             -
                                               (0:05)         -  (0:04)          -

Table 4: Estimates of elasticities under the nested CES preference speci...cation. " is the elasticity
between agriculture and nonagriculture and ms is the elasticity between manufacturing and services.
Table 9 in Appendix D reports the full results.

strongly reject the null hypothesis that ms = ", and suggests that the elasticity of substitution between
agricultural and nonagricultural goods is substantially higher than the elasticity between manufacturing
and services.25

6.2      Correlation between Expenditure and Output (or Prices)

Cross-country data could also be used to shed light on the elasticity ". In particular, the value of " has
implications about the correlation between relative expenditure and relative production in agriculture.
To this aim, consider an aggregate CES production function like in Equation (1), which implies a
                                                                     1="
standard isoelastic demand condition PtG =PtM = 1       YtG =YtM         . Taking log on both sides and
considering the ...rst di¤erence yields

                                                 YtG PtG         "       1          YtG
                                           ln                =                ln                                         (20)
                                                 YtM PtM             "              YtM

or, equivalently,
                                                YtG PtG                              PtG
                                         ln                = (1          ")    ln                                        (21)
                                                YtM PtM                              PtM
We take these two versions of the demand equation to the data. When doing so, one should bear in mind
that this exercise is potentially problematic since both sides of Equations (20)-(21) are endogenous.
We return to these endogeneity issues below.
       When " > 1, the model predicts the expenditure ratio growth will be positively correlated with the
  25
     Note that when we impose the restriction ms = " and reestimate the model, we replicate the ...nding of as Herrendorf
et al. (2013) that the elasticity is close to zero for the US. Similarly, when this restriction is imposed for Japan and China,
we estimate the elasticity to be smaller in unity for both countries, 0:65 and 0:58, respectively.


                                                              42
real output ratio growth (eq. (20)) and negatively correlated with the relative price growth (eq. (21)).
Conversely, these correlations will be reversed if " < 1.
   We use value added for 10 sectors from the Gröningen Growth and Development Centre, and use
the UN Analysis of Main Aggregates dataset (1970-2017) for robustness.
    Appendix Table 5 documents the results from estimating equation (20) with OLS across a number
of speci...cations. All speci...cations yield regression coe¢ cients in the range 0.46-0.84, which implies an
elasticity " in the range between 2 and 6. In all cases the estimates are signi...cantly positive at a 1
percent level. Conversely, appendix Table 6 documents the OLS estimates implied by Equation (21).
This speci...cation yields regression coe¢ cients in the range -0.44 to 0.78, which implies estimates of "
in the range 0.2 to 1.4. The bulk of the estimates implies " < 1.
    The overall evidence is mixed. In Appendix C.2 we show that (classical) measurement error is not a
likely cause of the di¤erences across speci...cations. Measurement error should, if anything, mitigate the
di¤erences between the estimators. In Appendix C.3 we show that these inconclusive results could be
caused by an identi...cation issue. Namely, the comovements could be driven by both productivity and
demand (preference) shocks, which we show have opposite implications for the sign of the correlations.
This problem applies to the estimation of both Equation (20) and (21). With this in mind, we now
turn our attention to studies that consider exogenous and well identi...ed shocks to TFP in agriculture.

6.3   Causal E¤ects of TFP Shocks in Agriculture

Empirical analyses of demand systems using data on prices and quantities, as in Equations (20)-(21) and
(6.1), su¤er from a potential omitted variable bias, since their comovements may be a¤ected by factors
other than productivity shocks that in   uence relative prices and output simultaneously. To address
this identi...cation problem, we turn to event studies that focus on plausibly exogenous productivity
shocks.
    Exogenous shocks to agriculture are especially informative about ". In the model with " < 1,
a positive TFP shock to agriculture will lead to structural change from agriculture to industry. In
contrast, when " > 1, such shocks slow down the process of structural change. This was evident in the
discussion of the impulse response functions of TFP shocks in our model, see Section 5.
    One prominent event that o¤ers sharp identi...cation is the Green Revolution: the introduction
of high-yield crop varieties caused a sharp increase in agricultural TFP in developing countries, and
the impact was particularly pronounced in the 1970s. Foster and Rosenzweig (2004) and Moscona
(2018) exploit the fact that, due to di¤erences in ecological and geographic characteristics, di¤erent
regions were able to adopt and reap the bene...ts of high-yield crops to di¤erent degrees. The di¤erences
generated by this exogenous variation provide a valid instrument for agricultural TFP growth. Foster
and Rosenzweig (2004) shows that the Green Revolution slowed down non-farm growth across rural
Indian villages. In another study covering the period 1970-2000, Foster and Rosenzweig (2004) use
time series for 240 Indian villages and document that the growth of rural industry was systematically
slower in areas where crop yields grew faster. They conclude that the evidence is consistent with
a model in which industrial capital is mobile and industrialization and technological development in


                                                     43
agricultural are substitutes. Moscona (2018) reaches similar conclusions. He ...nds that both across
Indian districts and across countries, areas that were for exogenous reasons better placed to bene...t from
the Green Revolution witnessed a larger increase in agricultural TFP together with an expansion of
employment in agriculture. However, this also caused a slower growth of manufacturing and non-farm
labor as well a slower process of urbanization. His conclusions again suggest substitutability rather
than complementarity between agriculture and industrial technology.
    Similarly, in a study of the Green Revolution in Brazil, Bustos et al. (2016) ...nd that the intro-
duction of high-yield maize, which increased the marginal product of land, resulted in a reduction in
industrial employment. Finally, Jayachandran (2006) estimates the response of agricultural wages and
labor supply to positive TFP shocks in agriculture. He uses rainfall as an instrument for TFP shocks
and shows that higher crop yield is strongly associated with higher wages and higher labor supply in
agriculture across districts in India over the 1956-1987 period.
    In conclusion, the evidence from causal studies estimating the e¤ects of technological progress in
agriculture are consistent with the predictions of our structural model when the output of agriculture
and nonagriculture are substitutes (" > 1).26


7        Conclusion
Business cycle   uctuations in countries undergoing structural transformation di¤er systematically from
business cycles in mature economies. We document that countries with large declining agricultural
sectors ­ including China ­ have aggregate employment        uctuations that are smooth and acyclical,
while these countries experience volatile and procyclical reallocation of labor between agriculture and
nonagriculture. We provide a uni...ed theoretical framework for studying business cycle during structural
change. The central aspect of the theory is the modernization of agriculture that occurs during the
structural change: agriculture is becoming increasingly capital intensive and less labor intensive as a
large traditional sector is crowded out. With a large traditional sector the expansion of manufacturing
draws workers from traditional agriculture, triggering modernization in agriculture and sustaining
aggregate productivity. This process is driven by capital accumulation and di¤erential productivity
growth between agriculture and nonagriculture. At business cycle frequencies, positive TFP shocks in
nonagriculture accelerate this process while TFP shocks in agriculture slowdown structural change in
line with the evidence from the Green Revolution discussed in the paper.
   We estimate the model using data for China and show that its quantitative predictions are consistent
both with China's structural transformation and with the business cycle properties of China. Moreover,
the model is consistent with the changing business cycle properties as a country evolves from a poor
economy with a large agricultural sector to a modern industrialized economy with negligible agricultural
employment.
    26
     We also note that the elasticity of substitution between agriculture and nonagriculture is potentially di¤erent at the
household preferences (consumption) level versus at the aggregate country level (production). There are many reasons
for that. For example, if goods could be stored or traded across countries, the relative production would di¤er from the
relative consumption and the e¤ective production elasticity would be larger than the consumption elasticity.



                                                            44
    Our business cycle analysis only focuses on productivity shocks. Future research will extend it to
a broader set of disturbances including demand shocks. Another limitation that we plan to address in
future work is the closed-economy environment. In spite of these and other shortcomings, we believe
the theory casts new light on the relationship between business cycles and economic development.


References
  Acemoglu, D. and V. Guerrieri (2008). Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced Economic Growth.
     Journal of Political Economy 116 (3), 467­498.
  Acemoglu, D. and F. Zilibotti (1997). Was Prometheus Unbound by Chance? Risk, Diversi...cation,
     and Growth. Journal of Political Economy 105 (4), 709­51.
  Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath (2007). Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle Is the Trend.
    Journal of Political Economy 115, 69­102.
  Alder, S., T. Boppart, and A. Müller (2018). A Theory of Structural Change That Can Fit the Data.
     2018 Meeting Papers 988, Society for Economic Dynamics.
  Alvarez-Cuadrado, F., N. Long, and M. Poschke (2017). Capital-Labor Substitution, Structural
     Change, and Growth. Theoretical Economics 12 (3), 1229­1266.
  Alvarez-Cuadrado, F. and M. Poschke (2011). Structural Change out of Agriculture: Labor Push
     versus Labor Pull. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (3), 127­58.
  Bai, C.-E. and Z. Qian (2010). The Factor Income Distribution in China: 1978-2007. China Economic
     Review 21 (4), 650­ 670.
  Baumol, W. J. (1967). Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban Crisis. The
     American Economic Review 57 (3), 415­ 426.
  Benhabib, J., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1991). Homework in Macroeconomics: Household Pro-
     duction and Aggregate Fluctuations. Journal of Political Economy 99, 1166­87.
  Boldrin, M., L. J. Christiano, and J. D. M. Fisher (2001). Habit Persistence, Asset Returns, and the
     Business Cycle. American Economic Review 91 (1), 149­    166.
  Boppart, T. (2014). Structural Change and the Kaldor Facts in a Growth Model with Relative Price
     E¤ects and Non-Gorman Preferences. Econometrica 82 (6), 2167­   2196.
  Boppart, T., P. Kiernan, P. Krusell, and H. Malmberg (2019). The Macroeconomics of Intensive
     Agriculture. Mimeo, Stockholm University.
  Bouakez, H., E. Cardia, and F. J. Ruge-Murcia (2009). The Transmission of Monetary Policy in a
     Multisector Economy. International Economic Review 50 (4), 1243­1266.
  Brandt, L. and X. Zhu (2010). Accounting for China's Growth. IZA Discussion Papers 4764, Institute
     for the Study of Labor (IZA).
  Buera, F. and J. Kaboski (2009). Can Traditional Theories of Structural Change Fit the Data?
     Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2-3), 469­477.

                                                 45
Bustos, P., B. Caprettini, and J. Ponticelli (2016). Agricultural Productivity and Structural Trans-
   formation: Evidence from Brazil. American Economic Review 106 (6), 1320­      65.
Chang, C., K. Chen, D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2016). Trends and Cycles in China'
                                                                                 s Macroecon-
  omy. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016 (Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathon Parker, eds.),
  Volume 30, pp. 1­ 84. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chen, C. (2018). Technology Adoption, Capital Deepening, and International Productivity Di¤er-
   ences. Mimeo, National University of Singapore.
Cheremukhin, A., M. Golosov, S. Guriev, and A. Tsyvinski (2015). The Economy of People's Republic
   of China from 1953. Working Paper 21397, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005). Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic
   E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy. Journal of Political Economy 113 (1), 1­45.
Comin, D. A., D. Lashkari, and M. Mestieri (2015). Structural Change with Long-Run Income and
  Price E¤ects. Working Paper 21595, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Da Rocha, J. M. and D. Restuccia (2006). The Role of Agriculture in Aggregate Business Cycles.
   Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (3), 455­482.
Foster, A. D. and M. R. Rosenzweig (2004). Agricultural Productivity Growth, Rural Economic
   Diversity, and Economic Reforms: India, 1970-2000. Economic Development and Cultural
   Change 52 (3), 509­542.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. E. Waugh (2014). The Agricultural Productivity Gap. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 129 (2), 939­993.
Gollin, D., S. Parente, and R. Rogerson (2002). The Role of Agriculture in Development. American
   Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 92 (2), 160­  164.
Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and Ã. Valentinyi (2013). Two Perspectives on Preferences and Struc-
   tural Transformation. American Economic Review 103 (7), 2752­  89.
Holz, C. (2006). Measuring Chinese Productivity Growth, 1952-2005. SSRN paper no. 928568.
Horvath, M. (2000). Sectoral Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations. Journal of Monetary Eco-
   nomics 45 (1), 69­106.
Iacoviello, M. and S. Neri (2010). Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an Estimated DSGE
   Model. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2), 125­    64.
Jayachandran, S. (2006). Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in Developing
   Countries. Journal of Political Economy 114 (3), 538­575.
Kongsamut, P., S. Rebelo, and D. Xie (2001). Beyond Balanced Growth. The Review of Economic
  Studies 68 (4), 869­882.
Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J.-V. Rios-Rull, and G. L. Violante (2000). Capital-Skill Complementarity
   and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis. Econometrica 68 (5), 1029­       1053.


                                                46
Lewis, W. A. (1954). Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour. The Manchester
   School 22 (2), 139­191.
Lin, J. Y. (1988). The Household Responsibility System in China'
                                                               s Agricultural Reform: A Theo-
   retical and Empirical Study. Economic Development and Cultural Change 36 (53), S199­S224.
Mokyr, J. (1976). Industrialization in the Low Countries, 1795-1850. New Haven, CT: Yale University
  Press.
Moscona, J. (2018). Agricultural Development and Structural Change within and across Countries.
  Mimeo, MIT.
Ngai, L. R. and C. A. Pissarides (2007). Structural Change in a Multisector Model of Growth.
   American Economic Review 97 (1), 429­ 443.
Nurkse, R. (1953). Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries. New York, NY:
  Oxford University Press.
Ravn, M. O. and H. Uhlig (2002). On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for the Frequency of
   Observations. The Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (2), 371­375.
Restuccia, D., D. Yang, and X. Zhu (2008). Agriculture and Aggregate Productivity: A Quantitative
   Cross-Country Analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (2), 234­  250.
Rostow, W. W. (1960). The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto. Cambridge,
   UK: Cambridge University Press.
Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007). Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE
  Approach. The American Economic Review 97 (3), 586­     606.
Song, Z., K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti (2011). Growing Like China. American Economic Re-
   view 101 (1), 196­233.
Tauchen, G. (1986). Finite State Markov-Chain Approximations to Univariate and Vector Autore-
   gressions. Economics Letters 20 (2), 177­181.
Wang, S. L., F. Tuan, F. Gale, A. Somwaru, and J. Hansen (2013). China's Regional Agricultural
  Productivity Growth in 1985-2007: A Multilateral Comparison. Agricultural Economics 44 (2),
  241­ 251.
Yao, W. and X. Zhu (2018). Structural Change and Aggregate Employment Fluctuations in China
   and the US. Mimeo, University of Toronto.
Zhang, L., S. Rozelle, and J. Huang (2001). O¤-Farm Jobs and On-Farm Work in Periods of Boom
   and Bust in Rural China. Journal of Comparative Economics 29 (3), 505­526.




                                               47
A     Appendix: Data Description in Section 2
In this appendix, we describe how we constructed the data to document the evidence on the structural
change and business-cycle facts across countries. In all cases, we exclude countries. We exclude the
following city states: Bahrein, Hong Kong, Macao, Qatar, Singapore. Agricultural sector'  s shares of
employment and GDP are negligible in these countries.
    When computing the K/Y ratio, we exclude countries that have K/Y ratio higher than 100. When
calculating the productivity gap, we exclude countries that have productivity gap higher than 20.
    The data for aggregate GDP, capital stocks, investment, and consumption are from the World
Development Indicators. The data for value added in agriculture and capital stocks in agriculture is
from the FAO. The data for sectoral employment comes from the International Labor Organization
(ILO). The real consumption is contructed by dividing households consumption by CPI index. The
real output is constructed by dividing the GDP in current price by GDP de ator.
    The data set is constructed as follows. First, we use data from the labor force surveys, households
surveys, o¢ cial statistics, and population censuses. We exclude data from ...rm surveys. Second, we
exclude data that are not representative of the whole country. In particular, we exclude data from some
countries which report data that only cover the urban population. Third, if multiple sources exist for
the same country and these data cover overlapping time periods, we merge (by chaining) the di¤erent
sources provided that data in the overlapping time periods are small. However, if the di¤erences are
large across di¤erent sources, we only retain the most recent data source, provided that the sample
period is at least 15 years. If the most recent data cover less than 15 years, we retain the less recent
data series (provided the sample covers at least 15 years).
    Fourth, if multiple sources exist for the same country and these data do not cover overlapping time
periods, then we do not merge the data. Instead we retain only the most recent data, provided that
the sample period is at least 15 years. Again, if the most recent data covers less than 15 years, we use
less recent data, provided that the data cover at least 15 years. The country is dropped if there are no
data series longer than 15 years.
    The sample of countries plotted in Figure 3 ranges from 63 to 66 across panels (a)-(c). We further
exclude countries with relative consumption volatility higher than 3 in panel (d). The detailed descrip-
tion of which countries appear in each panel and for which sample period is provided in the online
appendix.


B    Appendix: Formal Analysis in Section 3
This appendix contains proofs and analytical derivations.




                                                   I
B.1    Proof of Proposition 1

We take FOCs of the program 8 using standard methods. After rearranging terms, the equalization of
the marginal product of capital in modern agriculture and nonagriculture yields:
                                                                                                      " 1
                                               1               1                          yG           "
                                                             =                                                  :                                              (22)
                                                               1          1               yM

The equalization of the marginal product of labor in modern agriculture and nonagriculture, and in
traditional agriculture and nonagriculture yield, respectively,

                                                AM                    1       1               1            M
                                                             =                                                  ;                                              (23)
                                                                     1        1
                                                    S                11           AM
                                                             =                            :                                                                    (24)

Combining (22), (23), and (24) with the resource constraint on labor, and solving for                                                            M;   yields
                                                                                                                                 1
                                   M                     1       1            1                       11
                                       =       1+                                             1+                                     :                         (25)
                                                    1                         1

These four equations, together with the de...nitions of y G and y M provided in the text, implicitly de...ne
the unique set of equilibrium policy functions       = ( ; Z) ;      = ( ; Z ), M ( ( ; Z ) ; ( ; Z )) ;
 AM ( ( ; Z ) ; ( ; Z )) ; and S ( ( ; Z ) ; ( ; Z )) :



B.2    Derivation of Equation 10

Proof. The FOC (22) that equates the marginal product of capital can be rewritten as
                                                                                          " 1                       ! 1
                                   1                             1            YG           "
                                                                                                      Y AM           !
                                               =&                                                                            :
                                                     1           1            YM                       YG

Taking logarithms, and letting ! = " yields

                                                                                  1                    "        1         yG
                           ln (1           )    ln       = ln &                                   +                 ln
                                                                      1           1                         "             yM

Substituting in the expressions for y G and y G ; and di¤erentiating with respect to ln                                                          yields

                   "       1                   1 1               @ ln                 "       1                                      @ ln    M
                               (       )                                      =                   (             )        1                                     (26)
                       "                       "1                @ ln                     "                                           @ ln




                                                                          II
Next, consider (25). Di¤erentiating with respect to ln                                                yields

                    @ ln      M                   AM                                                                               S
                                                  + (1 + (1       ) (" 1) (1                                              ))               1     @ ln
                                      =                                                                                                                                        (27)
                      @ ln                           (1 + S (1        ) (! 1))                                                         1         @ ln
                                                  S (!    1) (1      )
                                              +      S
                                                1+     (1     ) (" 1)

Plugging-in (27) into (10) and simplifying terms leads to:

                          @ ln                                  (" 1) (                               ) (1        )
                                 =                                                                      M)            S
                                                                                                                                               > 0:                            (28)
                          @ ln K   1 + ("                     1) ((     )(                                    +           (1            ))



B.3    Proof of Lemma 2

Proof. Having de...ned zS        ZS= ZM    and zA                                                      Z AM        = ZM                 , the four static equilibrium
conditions and the de...nition of can be expressed as
                                              S                                               "                            (1          )(" 1)               " 1
                                                                      11              &                 1                                              zS
                                              AM
                                                          =                                                                                                                    (29)
                                                                              &                         1                                              zA
                                              AM                      1               1
                                              M
                                                          =                                                                                                                    (30)
                                                                      1
                       AM             S                                1
                          M
                              +       M
                                                          =               M
                                                                                      1                =                                                                       (31)
                                                                                                        "                              (" 1)
                1                 (       )(" 1)                                          1                       1
                           ( )                            =           &                                                                         (zA )("     1)
                                                                                                                                                                               (32)
                                                                          1               1                       1
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                              1                   (1           )
                                                                      M
                                                                              =                                           AM
                                                                                                                                                                               (33)
                                                                                              1

We start with the comparative statics for zA . Rewrite eq. (32) as
                                                                                                                                               !        1
                                          1                                       "                               (" 1)                            (    )(" 1)
                          1                                       1                               1                                    (" 1)
                 =                                &                                                                       (zA )                                                (34)
                                                      1           1                               1

                                                                                                  S               AM
Substitute (29)-(30) into (31) to get rid of the ratios                                           AM   and         M      and obtain an equation in                           and ;

                                                                                  "                           (" 1)(               )
                      1           1                   1       &                                   1                                            (" 1)(1       )
               1=                             +                                                                                        ( )                       (zS )"   1
                      1                                           1                               1




                                                                                  III
Substitute in eq. (34), and simplify
                                         1                                                                                       !            1
                                                                                            "                          (" 1)         (        )(" 1)
      1                         (        )(" 1)                             1                        1                                                           1
                                                          &                                                                                            (zA )
               1                                              1             1                        1
                                                                                                                            (1    )                            (1    )
                                                                                            "                                       "                                  (   (" 1) ")+(" 1)(              )
          1                                                       1    &                                                    (     )            1               (     )
  =                                                   +                                         &
          1                         (1            )                         1                       1                                          1
                           (1       )             1                            (1       )
                                                                      ("    1) (
          (1           )   (        )   ( )           (zA )                             )   (zS )"       1


The LHS is increasing in zA and in . The RHS is decreasing in zA and in . It follows that an
increasing in zA must be associated with a decline in . Equation (30) then implies that AM = M
increases. Suppose @ ln =@ ln zA   0. Then the RHS of eq. (29) unambiguously falls, implying that
            S
the ratio AM must also fall. Suppose instead that @ ln =@ ln zA < 0. Combine eq. (30) with the
identity 1    S = M + AM ,


                                                                       S                                 1                               AM
                                                              1                     =       1+
                                                                                                         1          1
                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                    1                                          1
                                                                                    =               1                  (1          )
                                                                                                    1

Since @ ln =@ ln zA < 0 and since @ ln =@ ln zA < 0 by assumption, the RHS must increase. It follows
that S must fall, implying that the ratio S = AM must also fall. This proves that @ ln S = AM =@ ln zA <
0 . It follows immediately that both and AM must increase.
   Consider now the comparative statics for zA . Substitute (29)-(30) into (31) to get rid of the ratios
  S      AM
 AM and   M and obtain an equation in     and ;
                                                  "                                                                                                          !                         #
                                                                                        "                              (1        )(" 1)                " 1
                   1                                                  11            &           1                                              zS                    1
                           =                          1+                                                                                                                           1
              1                                                             &                   1                                              zA                    1

Rewrite (32) as,
                                                                                    "                             (" 1)
                            1                                 1                             1                                            (" 1)
                                        =     &                                                                             (zA )                  ( )(        )(" 1)
                                                                                                                                                                           + 1:
                       1                          1           1                             1

Equate these expressions and rearrange to get one equation in ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                              "                            (1       )(" 1)+1
                           11            &            1                                                      (1     )(" 1)                " 1             1                                " 1
          ln                                                                                    ( )                              (zS )             +                              (zA )
                                    &                 1                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                             !
                                                                  "                             (" 1)
                       1                      1                                 1
      = ln                      &                                                                                 +(              ) ("         1) ln ( ) + ln (                   )              (35)
                                    1         1                                 1




                                                                                                     IV
Di¤erentiate Equation (35) w.r.t. zS , and rearranging terms yields
                                              "                         (1     )(" 1) 1                                               " 1
                                     11 &              1                                                    (1       )(" 1)      zS
                   ("       1)         &               1                                       ( )                               zA
                                          "                            (" 1)
                                                                                         (" 1)
                       &1        1
                                 1
                                                  1
                                                  1                            (zA )                   ( )(            )(" 1)

                   2                                                                                                                               3
                                                           (                 ) ("       1) +
                6                             1 1 &
                                                       "       zS      " 1
                                                                                 1
                                                                                              (1       )(" 1) 1
                                                                                                                            (1   )(" 1)            7 @ ln
              = 4           (1       )(" 1)      &             zA                1
                                                                                                                     ( )                  +        5
                        +                          "                          (" 1)                                                                  @ ln zS
                                          1                                                   (" 1)
                                     &1   1
                                                               1
                                                               1
                                                                                      (zA )             ( )(          )(" 1)




Recall that = M > due to > M . Therefore both coe¢ cient on @ ln =@ ln zS is positive. It
follows that @ ln =@ ln zS > 0. Now take log on both sides of Equation (32) and di¤erentiate w.r.t. ln zS ;
0 = @=@ ln zS ln [(1     )= ] + (      ) (" 1) @ ln =@ ln zS . Since (     ) (" 1) @ ln =@ ln zS > 0, it
must be that @=@ ln zS ln [(1     ) = ] < 0, which in turn implies that @=@ ln zS ln > 0. Recall that
  AM = (1        ) = . Since both and are increasing in zS , AM must be falling in zS . Now substitute
                                            S
(30) into (31) to obtain an equation in AM , and ;

                                                                   1                           S                 1
                                                   1                     =          1+        AM
                                                                                                                                 1
                                                           1                                                     1
                                                                                                                            S
Since both and           are increasing in zS , it follows that the ratio AM must also be increasing in zS .
                        1
Since S = AM =            (1    ) = , it follows immediately that must fall in zS .

B.4    Analysis of the Dynamic Equilibrium

The dynamic equilibrium can be characterized by solving the Hamiltonian (12). The following propo-
sition summarizes the results equilibrium:

Proposition 3 The dynamic competitive equilibrium is characterized by the following system of ordi-
nary di¤ erential equations:
                             c
                             _t                                                                    1
                                      = ( ( ( t ; Z t ) ; ( t ; Z t ))) " (1                                         ) (1        )                             (36)
                             ct
                                                                 ( t; Z t) t
                                               M M
                                              Zt               ( ( t ; Z t ) ; ( t ; Z t ))
                             _t =             ( ( t ; Z t ) ; ( t ; Z t ))                         (    t    ( t ; Z t ))1                                     (37)
                                               M       M
                                              Zt           ( ( t ; Z t ) ; ( t ; Z t ))                                ( + n)         t       ct
                          M
                         Zt                         AM
                                                   Zt                                  S
                                                                                      Zt
                          M
                                      = gM ;        AM
                                                                   = g AM ;            S
                                                                                              = gS
                         Zt                        Zt                                 Zt

where ( ; ) is given by (14), M ( ; ) satis...es (25), and ( t ; Z t ) and ( t ; Z t ) are the static
equilibrium policy functions. The solution is subject to a vector of initial conditions ( 0 ; Z 0 ) = 0 ; Z 0
and a transversality condition.


                                                                                    V
    Equation (36) is a standard Euler Equation for consumption. For constant TFPs, the growth rate
of consumption is decreasing in because the aggregate production function exhibit decreasing returns
to capital. Equation (37) is a resource constraint.
    It is useful to rewrite the equilibrium conditions in Proposition 3 in terms of an autonomous system
of di¤erential equations. To this aim, we di¤erentiate with respect to time the set of static equilibrium
(22), (23), (24), and (25). After rearranging terms, we obtain:
                                         0                                     1
                                              gM      g AM + (        ) _t +
                                         B                                t    C
                                         @      1   (    )( 1    M( ; )
                                                                    t t )   _t
                                                                               A
                      _t                      !   1      1    t (1 )         t
                           = (1       t)    1                      M ( ; ))
                                                                                 ;                    (38)
                       t                   " 1 +(        )( t           t t
                                                                                _t                   M(
                                                                                       _t                        t; t)
                    _t           (1   t)   g AM   g S + (1                  )            t
                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                     1       t
                                                                                 t
                         =                            (1                         M(                                        :                   (39)
                                             1                  t )(1   )(1           t ; t ))
                     t
                                            ! 1   +                 1    t (1    )

This dynamic system is de...ned up to a pair of initial conditions:                          0   =       (       0; Z 0)   and   0   =   (   0; Z 0)
consistent with the static equilibrium conditions at time zero.

Corollary 1 The dynamic competitive equilibrium is fully characterized by the solution to the au-
tonomous system of ordinary di¤ erential Equations (36)-(37)-(38)-(39) and the exogenous law of mo-
tion Z_t
       M =Z M = g M ; after setting
            t                        ( t ; Z t ) = t and ( t ; Z t ) = t for t > 0; with initial conditions
  ( 0; Z 0) =    0; Z 0      0 and ( 0 ; Z 0 ) =    0; Z 0    0:


    Equations (38)-(39) allow us to eliminate Zt      AM and Z S from the dynamic system, while only
                                                                 t
retaining their initial levels and their growth rates. In other words, 0 =      0 ; Z 0 and 0 =    0; Z 0
are su¢ cient statistics. If 0 and 0 are set at the static equilibrium level at time zero, Equations (38)-
(39) guarantee that t and t will also be consistent with the static equilibrium in all future periods.

B.5    Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. We start by evaluating Equations (36)-(37) under the ABGP conditions. Note that (14) implies
                       "
that (1; 1) = (1    ) " 1 : Thus,

                          c
                          _t                           "
                                  = gM = (1       )"       1   (1       )                                    ;
                          ct                                                    ZM
                          _t                           "                                                     c
                                  = gM = (1       )"       1                          ( + n)                      :
                             t                                      ZM

Solving for c= and =Z M yields the expressions in (15) and (16). Therefore, (36)-(37) hold true under
the ABGP conditions. It is straightforward to see that under the ABGP conditions (in particular,
when = = 1) (38)-(39) yields _ = _ = 0: Likewise, (22) holds true when = = 1.
    Next, consider the asymptotic growth rates of the sectoral capital. Taking logarithms and di¤er-
                                                                       _ M =k M = _ = + _ = = g M and
entiating with respect to time the de...nitions of k M and k AM yields k

                                                               VI
_ AM =k AM =                 1
k               (1       )           _ = + _ = = gM                     ("         1)           gM           g AM :
    Next, consider the asymptotic growth rates of the sectoral employments of labor. First, observe
that Equation (25) yields M = 1 at the ABGP conditions = = 1: Second, note that M = 1
             _ M =N M = N
implies that N            _ =N = n: In order to establish the growth rate of N AM ; observe that taking
logarithms on both side of Equation (23), di¤erentiating with respect to time, and using the ABGP
conditions and Equation (38) yields

                             _ AM
                             N                    1       _        _ AM
                                                                   N
                                  =                            +        =n                      ("          1)            gM           g AM :
                             N AM             1                    N AM

Finally, to establish the growth rate of N S ; observe that taking logarithms on both side of Equation
(24), di¤erentiating with respect to time, and using the ABGP conditions and Equation (39) yields

          _S
          N              1       _       _ AM
                                         N      _ AM
                                                N
             =                       +        =                         (!        1)            g AM             g S + (1                 ) gM       g AM   :
          NS         1                   N AM   N AM

    To establish convergence, we linearize the dynamic system in a neighborhood of the ABGP. The
system has three predetermined variables ( ; ; ) and one jump variable (c). Therefore, we must prove
that the linear system has three negative eigenvalues and one positive eigenvalue. The rest of the proof
is devoted to establish that this is the case.
                                             d ~ =dt                                   _
   Let ~ = Z M and c ~ = Zc
                          M ; implying that     ~    =                                          g M : Then, we can write the dynamic system
(36)-(37)-(38)-(39). We can rewrite the system as

                  dc
                   ~=dt                               1                                                  t ~t
                                 =        ( t;    t) "    (1        ) (1               )         M
                                                                                                                                                 gM
                    c~                                                                               ( t;            t)
                 d ~ =dt                            1                   t ~t
                                 =        ( t;    t)               M                                    t                 c
                                                                                                                          ~t = ~ t       n      gM
                    ~                                                   ( t;       t)
                                                      0                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                      d ^ =dt
                                                               gM                g AM + (                        )       ^         + gM
                                                      B                                                                                         C
                                                      @                            1             (     )(1            M
                                                                                                                           )       _
                                                                                                                                                A
                                                                        +        ! 1                 1 (1             )
                         _
                                 = (1             )                       1                                                M)
                                                                         " 1 +             (                )(
                                                                                                                               !
                                                                          g AM                  gS +
                                                                            _t                          M(
                                                                                           _t   t                t; t)
                         _                                (1        )                       t        1       t
                                                                             t
                                 = (1             )                          (1        )(1 )(1               M)
                                                                 1
                                                                ! 1     +              1 (1 )

where we use Equation (25) implying that

                                          1           M        1         1                               11
                                                 M
                                                          =                                         +                          :
                                                                         1

The transversality condition (TVC) becomes

                                                                             (     n)t
                                                               lim e                       K=0
                                                              t!1


                                                                             VII
Substitute the condition that
                                                        _
                                                        K
                                                    lim   = n + gM
                                                    t!1 K
The TVC becomes
                                                        _
                                              lim           + gM + n <                          n
                                              t!1

Because
                                        c
                                        _                                    _ h
                                                                             h     _
                                          = (1              ) (1         )        + +n
                                        c                                    h1 h
Then we have
                                                   c
                                                   _                              _
                                                 lim =                   lim                n
                                               t!1 c                    t!1

                        _
                        h                           _
where we use limt!1     h   = 0. Plug limt!1                =       gM        n into the TVC to get

                                              gM            n + gM + n <                            n

In the end, the TVC can be rewritten as
                                                                        n>0

Letting         c; ~ ; ; )0 ; we can write the system of di¤erential equations as
             = (~

                                                            A_ =f( )

where                                               2                                   3
                                                     1                  0     0       0
                                                    60                  1     0       07
                                                  A=6
                                                    40
                                                                                        7
                                                                        a     1       b5
                                                     0                  c     d       1
and, after

                                        (1        )(                )
                        a =        1                                    M)
                                  " 1   +(              )(
                                                                         )(1      M
                                                   1            (                      )
                                                  ! 1               1     (1      )
                        b =       (1      )    1                                          M)
                                              " 1   +(                   )(
                                    (1         ) (!             1) (1 )
                        c =
                                   1+ 1       1         1
                                                                 (! 1) M
                                                                                            1           M       1
                                  (1      ) (!          1) (1            ) 1              (1        )       +
                        d =
                                                    1 + (!              1) 1          1         1       M




                                                                    VIII
                        2                   1
                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                       t ~t
                            ( t;        t ) " (1         ) (1            )         M(
                                                                                           t; t)
                                                                                                                        gM
                       6                                                                                                     7
                       6                                 t ~t
                                                                                                                             7
                       6
                       6        ( t;            t)    M(
                                                           t; t)
                                                                             ~t = ~ t n
                                                                             c    t                                gM        7
                                                                                                                             7
                    f =6                                                g AM )(g M                                           7
                       6                               (1    ) 1 +(                                                          7
                       6                                                )(     M)                                            7
                       4                                       " 1                                                           5
                                            (1       )(! 1)(g AM g S +(1 )(g M g AM ))
                                                         1+ 1        1        1        M (!         1)

where we use the
                                1           M              1              1                              11
                                        M
                                                     =                                              +
                                                                         (1            )
                            1           M                        1                 1                1
                                                            M
                                                     =
                        1       (1              )                                 (1          )
                                            M                             M         1                         1
                                                     =          1+                                        +
                                    1                                             (1            )

The inverse of matrix A is given by
                                          2                                                                   3
                                           1                 0                              0             0
                                          60                 1                              0             0   7
                                A   1
                                         =6
                                          40            1                                     1            b
                                                                                                              7
                                                                                                               5
                                                      bd 1 (a            bc)                bd 1         bd 1
                                                        1                                    d               1
                                           0          bd 1 (c            ad)               bd 1           bd 1

Along the approximate balanced growth path,

                                                a = 0; b = 0; c = 0; d = 0

Now we compute                                       0                 1
                                           J1 (                      )
                                         B J2 (                      ) C
                                    J( )=B
                                         @ J3 (
                                                                       C=A                  1
                                                                                                ( )f ( )
                                                                     ) A
                                           J4 (                      )




                                                                     IX
where
                             1                                               ~
               J1 ( ) =      "   (1            ) (1          )       M
                                                                                                                   gM
                                                                          ( ; )
                                              ~                                              1
               J2 ( ) =              M
                                                                              c
                                                                              ~ (~ )                 n        gM
                                          ( ; )
                                                                                                                                     !
                                 1                                        ~
               J3 ( ) =                   (a       bc)             M
                                                                                                              c
                                                                                                              ~= ~      n       gM
                            bd        1                                  ( ; )
                                     1                                    gM             g AM
                                              (1         )    1                                          M)
                                bd        1                  " 1     +(                  )(
                                     b        (1         ) (!       1) g AM                  g S + g M g AM (1                           )
                            +
                                bd        1                        1+ 1 1                    1
                                                                                                  (! 1) M
                                                                                                                                     !
                                 1                                        ~
               J4 ( ) =                   (c       ad)               M
                                                                                                               c
                                                                                                               ~= ~     n       gM
                            bd        1                                  ( ; )
                                     d                                    gM             g AM
                            +                 (1         )    1                                          M)
                                bd        1                  " 1     +(                  )(
                                     1        (1         ) (!       1) g AM                  g S + g M g AM (1                           )
                                bd        1                        1+ 1 1                    1
                                                                                                  (! 1) M

From (25) it follows that

                                          _1     M    _   1     M
                   _M   =       M
                                                   +
                                            1           1    (1   )
                                          _  M  1            11                                           _        1        M
                                M
                        =                                  +                                         +
                                               (1    )                                                        1        (1       )

Hence
                                                                 2
                             @ M                         M            1                              11
                                              =                                                  +
                              @                                      (1          )
                             @ M                      M          1           M
                                              =                                          :
                              @                              1         (1            )

                                                              c; ~ ; ; )0 ; we obtain
Computing the Jacobian evaluated at the balanced growth path (~
                                        2                  3
                                          0 J12 J13 0
                                        6J21 J22 J23 0 7
                                   J =6 4 0
                                                           7
                                               0 J33 0 5
                                          0    0 J43 J44




                                                                         X
with determinant given by                  J12 J21 J33 J44 and four eigenvalues given by
                                                   2           q                  3
                                                     1       1        2
                                                       J +      (J ) + 4J12 J21
                                                   6 2 22 2 q 22                  7
                                                   61                 2           7
                                                   6 2 J22 1    (J22 ) + 4J12 J21 7 ;
                                                   6         2                    7
                                                   4             J33              5
                                                                 J44

where
                                                                       "
                                                                                                             1
                                 J12 =                 (1         )"       1   (1     ) (~ )                     <0
                                                             1
                                 J21 =             (~ )           <0
                                                         1
                                 J22 = (~ )                  (         n) > 0
                                 J33 =             ("        1)        gM           g AM < 0
                                 J44 =             (!        1) g AM                gS + gM                      g AM (1           ) <0
                                                                                                                      q
Thus, three eigenvalues are negative, while one is positive                                       1
                                                                                                 (2 J22 + 1
                                                                                                          2               (J22 )2 + 4J12 J21 > 0), establishing
the result.

B.6        The Lewis Model

In this section we provide the details of the analysis in Section 3.3. We abstract from technical progress
and set Z M = Z AM = Z S = 1: Moreover, we set = 0: Endogenous capital accumulation is then the
only source of transition. We continue to assume that " > 1 and > :
   Stage 1 (Early Lewis). Consider an economy in which capital is very scarce. When < , then,
 AM  = 0, M > 0, S > 0, and = 1.27 Intuitively, because capital is scarce, it is optimal to use it
only in nonagriculture, where it is an essential factor, to take advantage of the high relative price of
the nonagricultural good. Over time, employment grows in nonagriculture and falls in agriculture.28
    The average labor productivity is higher in nonagriculture than in agriculture, re ecting the nona-
griculture uses capital. More formally, the productivity gap is given by the inverse ratio of the labor-
income shares in the two sectors, which equals 1= :
   Consider, next, the evolution of the aggregate capital-output ratio and factor prices in the Early
Lewis stage. If the agricultural and nonagricultural goods were perfect substitutes, both the wage and
                                                   1                                                             "                          1   (" 1)(1   )
  27                        (1    )   (1   )   1                                           (1        )               (1   )   (1   )    1
       In particular,   =   (1    )                     1+
                                                             , where                             "       1           (1   )
                                                                                                                                                              :
                                                                                      (1        ) "
  28
    The key equilibrium condition is the equalization of the marginal product of labor in nonagriculture and traditional
agriculture. Using the implicit function theorem, we can show that M is an increasing function of . More formally,
                                                               !"
                                          M
                                                      (1    )           (" 1)(1  )
                                            M
                                              =            " 1      M
                                                                                   ;                                (40)
                                       1            (1    ) "
                                       M                                                                                           M
where the LHS is increasing in              and the RHS is increasing in                         and decreasing in                     . Thus, standard di¤erentiation
implies that @ M =@ > 0.



                                                                                    XI
the interest rate would stay constant as capital accumulates. However, for " < 1 capital accumulation
triggers an increase in the relative price of agricultural goods and real wage growth. Wage growth in
turn causes capital deepening in the nonagricultural sector and a declining interest rate.
   As capital accumulation progresses, the relative price of the agricultural good increases. Once
capital is su¢ ciently abundant, (i.e., as      ), the relative price of agriculture is so high that it
becomes optimal to put some capital in the modern agricultural sector. At this point the modernization
process of agriculture starts and the economy enters the Advanced Lewis stage.
   Stage 2 (Advanced Lewis). In this stage the equalization of factor returns across the two sectors
implies that they have a constant capital-labor ratios. These are given by
                                                                            1
                          AM       (1         )            1            1                                         (1      ) AM
                      k                  AM
                                                  =                             ; kM                          =             k :             (41)
                                                                                                                  (1      )

The share of capital that goes to nonagriculture declines over the process of development in Stage 2:
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                    (1       )       1            1
                                                  KM   LM      1        1+                                    1
                                             =                     =                                     1+
                                                                                                                                            (42)
                                                  LM L                          1+       1

The optimal allocation of labor in manufacturing and modern agriculture yields

                          M
                                             + k AM 1                       AM                               1+       M
                              =                   1+
                                                                    ;               =                                         :             (43)
                                  k AM                     +   kM                        1                                1
                                         1

These expressions shows that employment in both manufacturing and modern agriculture increase as
grows. Since the sectoral capital-labor ratios are constant, this also implies that capital and output in
these sectors are increasing at the expense of a falling production of the traditional agriculture. Since
factor prices are constant while the aggregate capital intensity in the economy is increasing, then the
aggregate share of GDP accruing to capital grows while the labor share falls.
    An interesting observation is that throughout this stage the expenditure share on agriculture and
nonagriculture remain constant, even though " 6= 1. To understand why, consider an economy without
a Lewis sector. In this case, when " > 1 and > ; capital accumulation would imply that the capital-
intensive sector (in our case, nonagriculture) would grow faster over time. Although this implies an
increase in the relative price of the agricultural product, the expenditure share on nonagricultural goods
would increase over time. However, reallocation within agriculture with the decline of the Lewis sector
o¤sets this force by increasing labor productivity in agriculture.
                                                                                     " 1
                                                  M    M                        M                                                 "   " 1    (1    )(" 1)
                                           =1                               1         "
   More formally, we can show that P   Y
                                    P GY G
                                                  Y
                                                  YG
                                                           = ; where                 1         kM                                                           .
This implies that the productivity gap between agriculture and nonagriculture is shrinking, since
                                                        PMY M                                M
                                                         LM                     1
                                                        P GY G
                                                                        =            M
                                                                                                 ;
                                                          LG

and, recall,   M   is increasing in the Advanced Lewis stage. In particular, the productivity gap (which

                                                                        XII
is the inverse of the ration between the labor income share in the two sectors) declines from 1= to
  = in this stage, where, recall, is the labor income share in modern agriculture. Finally, in the
Advanced Lewis stage, the capital-output ratio in agriculture increases relative to the capital-output
ratio in nonagriculture. More formally,
                                                                       !
                               KG                             1+
                                                                   +1
                             P GY G             1+      1
                              KM
                                    =                      1             ;
                              M M
                                        1                 kM
                                                               +1
                            P    Y

which is increasing in :
   Stage 3 (Neoclassical). As the process of capital accumulation proceeds, the labor reserve in
traditional agriculture becomes eventually exhausted. This happens when
                                                       1
                                          (1   )   1            (1     )
                             =                             1+                  > :
                                     +                            (1       )

For any > ; S = 0 and = 1: Henceforth, the economy exhibit standard properties of neoclassical
models. In particular, if " > 1 and > ; the nonagriculture sector grows in relative size, capital
share (i.e., increases) and expenditure share. The productivity gap remains constant at = and the
relative (agriculture vs. nonagriculture) capital-output ratio is also constant. During this stage, the
interest rate falls and the real wage increases as capital accumulates.

Proposition 4 Suppose " > 1;         >   and ! ! 1: Then, as       grows, economic development progresses
through three stages:

  1. Early Lewis: If           ; then, AM = = 0; = 1: Moreover, M is increasing and S is
     decreasing in : The interest rate is decreasing and the wage rate is increasing in : The (average
     labor) productivity gap is constant and equal to 1= :

  2. Advanced Lewis: If 2 ; then, M and AM are increasing linearly in while S is falling
     linearly in (cf. Equation (43)). Therefore, is increasing in : Moreover, is decreasing in
     (cf. Equation (42)). The capital-labor ratio in nonagriculture and modern agriculture is constant
     (cf. Equation (41)), but the relative nonagriculture-to-agriculture capital-output ratio is falling
     in : The interest rate and the wage rate are constant, implying that the aggregate labor income
     share is falling. The (average labor) productivity gap is monotonically decreasing.

  3. Neoclassical: If          ; then, S = 0 and = 1: M is increasing and AM is decreasing in
       . Moreover, is increasing in . The capital-labor ratio is increasing in in both nonagri-
     culture and modern agriculture, but the relative nonagriculture-to-agriculture capital-output ratio
     is constant. The interest rate is decreasing in and the wage rate is increasing in , while the
     aggregate labor income share is falling. The (average labor) productivity gap is constant. As
     becomes arbitrarily large, ! 1, M ! 1 and the expenditure share of agriculture tends to zero.




                                                   XIII
C      Appendix: Details of the Analysis of Section 6
C.1     CES estimation with cross-sectional data

We now estimate the elasticities implied by a CES model based on Equations (20)-(21) and cross-
country data.
     We use the 10-sector data from the Gröningen Growth and Development Centre as our benchmark
data set, henceforth GGDC. These data provide long time series on sectoral output for 41 countries.
We also use the UN Analysis of Main Aggregates dataset which covers more countries (220 countries)
albeit over a shorter time period (1970-2017), henceforth UN AMA. Using value-added sectoral output
and real output data (in 2005 prices) from GGDC, we can derive the implied price de          ator for each
sector. We then aggregate the sectoral price indices and real quantities into agriculture, manufacturing,
and nonagriculture following the cyclical expansion procedure used in Herrendorf et al. (2013). We
de...ne manufacturing sector as the union of "Mining"    , "Manufacturing"  , "Utilities", "Construction" .
Similarly, we aggregate all sectors except agriculture sector and government sector into the nonagricul-
ture sector. Following Comin et al. (2015), our benchmark speci...cation focuses on ratios of agriculture
to manufacturing. We show that all our ...ndings are robust to using a broader data set (UN data) and
a broader de...nitions of nonagriculture.
   It is appropriate to estimate the model in ...rst di¤erences since one cannot reject the hypothesis
that the logarithm of the empirical relative value added-, price-, and output ratios have unit roots. For
robustness we also estimate the models in levels, allowing country-speci...c ...xed e¤ects.
      We start by estimating Equation (20). Table 5 documents the results. Speci...cation (1) is based on
calculating average ratios over non-overlapping 10-year periods and taking the ...rst di¤erence across
these observations (the results are robust to instead taking simple 10-year di¤erences of annual data).
Speci...cation (2), which we consider our benchmark speci...cation, adds time ...xed e¤ects to the re-
gression. The estimated coe¢ cient of interest is signi...cantly positive (0.838 and 0.746). According to
Equation (20), a coe¢ cient of 0.746 implies a high elasticity; " 4. This ...nding is robust to di¤erent
data and speci...cations. Speci...cation (3) adds log of aggregate real consumption as a control. Spec-
i...cation (4) estimates the model in levels, allowing country and time ...xed e¤ects. Motivated by our
focus on China, speci...cation (5) estimates the model on Asian countries. Speci...cation (6) estimates
the model using a higher frequency (annual). Finally, speci...cation (7) considers ratios of agriculture
to nonagriculture (as opposed to manufacturing).29 The coe¢ cient of interest is signi...cantly positive
in all speci...cations and imply an elasticity " between 2 and 6. These results are robust to using UN
AMA data.
    We now estimate equation (21). Table 6 documents the results. The speci...cations (1) and (2) yield
positive coe¢ cients which are all signi...cant at a 10% level. According to Equation (21), the benchmark
estimate in column (2) implies a low elasticity; "        0:6. This ...nding is robust to adding aggregate
consumption as a control (3), to estimating the model in levels (4), at a higher frequency (6), and using
  29
    The coe¢ cient in column (7) of Table 5 is somewhat lower than the other estimates. However, when estimating this
speci...cation with UN AMA data, the coe¢ cient is higher, 0.862.



                                                        XIV
            EXPENDITURE SHARE OF AGRICULTURE, regressed on QUANTITY RATIO
                        (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
 Data                 GGDC       GGDC       GGDC          GGDC      GGDC Asia GGDC              GGDC
 VARIABLES                                Agriculture/Manufacturing                         Agri./Nonagr.
                     10yr FD 10yr FD 10yr FD 10yr level               10yr FD      1yr FD      10yr FD
   logrel_quantity 0.838*** 0.746*** 0.664***                         0.685***    0.681***     0.459***
                     (0.0893)    (0.100)    (0.141)                   (0.0625)    (0.0591)      (0.119)
   logconsumption                            -0.204
                                            (0.142)
 logrel_quantity                                        0.787***
                                                         (0.0928)
 Year Fixed E¤ect        N          Y           Y            Y            Y           Y            Y
 Observations           139        139        139           179          33         1,923         139
 R-squared             0.684      0.756      0.763         0.830        0.961       0.361        0.541
        Standard errors (clustered at country level) in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 5: The table shows regressions based on equation 20. Speci...cation (1) is based on di¤erences
over averages for 10-year periods for all countries in the GGDC data. Speci...cation (2) adds time
...xed e¤ects as additional control. Speci...cation (3) adds log real consumption from PWT as additional
control. Speci...cation (4) is based on 10-year average levels. Speci...cation (5) is based on GGDC Asia
sample, excluding HKG and SGP. (6) uses 1-year di¤erence instead, and speci...cation (7) estimates the
model based on ratios of agriculture to nonagriculture.


               EXPENDITURE SHARE OF AGRICULTURE, regressed on PRICE RATIO
                        (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)          (7)
 Data                 GGDC       GGDC       GGDC         GGDC       GGDC Asia GGDC              GGDC
 VARIABLES                                Agriculture/Manufacturing                         Agri./Nonagr.
                     10yr FD 10yr FD 10yr FD 10yr level               10yr FD      1yr FD      10yr FD
   logrel_price      0.539**     0.356*     0.501**                     -0.445    0.775***     0.518***
                      (0.233)    (0.203)    (0.200)                    (0.285)    (0.0497)      (0.103)
   logconsumption                          -0.983***
                                            (0.125)
 logrel_price                                           0.451***
                                                         (0.112)
 Year Fixed E¤ect        N          Y           Y           Y              Y          Y            Y
 Observations           139        139        139          179            33        1,923         139
 R-squared             0.099      0.381      0.648        0.671          0.820      0.548        0.591
        Standard errors (clustered at country level) in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 6: The table shows regressions based on equation 21. Speci...cation (1) is based on di¤erences
over averages for 10-year periods for all countries in the GGDC data. Speci...cation (2) adds time
...xed e¤ects as additional control. Speci...cation (3) adds log real consumption from PWT as additional
control. Speci...cation (4) is based on 10-year average levels. Speci...cation (5) is based on GGDC Asia
sample, excluding HKG and SGP. (6) uses 1-year di¤erence instead, and speci...cation (7) estimates the
model based on ratios of agriculture to nonagriculture.


                                                  XV
ratios of agriculture to nonagriculture (7). These regressions suggest that " is between 0.2 and 0.6.
However, when considering only Asian countries, the estimated coe¢ cient implies an elasticity above
unity, " 1:4.
    In conclusion, the simple regressions based on expenditure, prices, and quantities, summarized in
Tables 5 and 6, give mixed evidence on ". These inconclusive results could be due to the fact that both
sides of Equations (20)-(21) are endogenous. In Appendix C.3 we present a structural model with two
goods where relative prices, quantities, and expenditures are endogenous and where the economy is
subject to both supply shocks and demand shocks, captured by TFP shocks and preference shocks. We
show that demand shocks and supply shocks have opposite implications for the sign of the correlations
between prices and quantities. This problem applies to the estimation of both Equation (20) and (21).
    Finally, note that (classical) measurement error is not a likely cause of the di¤erences across speci...-
cations. To see this, note that in the presence of classical measurement error, potential biases should be
smaller at lower frequencies, as the signal to noise ratio is larger. Consider ...rst Table 5. The estimated
coe¢ cients are virtually unchanged when going from di¤erences over 10-year periods to annual di¤er-
ences (speci...cation (6) versus (2)) in Table 5). This suggests that potential biases due to measurement
error must be negligible. Consider, next, Table 6. The coe¢ cient of interest in Table 6 is higher at
an annual frequencies (see speci...cation (6) relative to (2)). We show below that measurement error
in this regression gives rise to an annenuation bias, which should bias the estimated coe¢ cient toward
zero. The fact that this coe¢ cient is larger at higher frequencies suggests that classical measurement
error is not plausible explanation for the di¤erences in results across speci...cations.

C.2    Classical measurement error in the price-quantity regression

This section examines how the estimates of " from regressions in (20)-(21) would be inuenced by
classical measurement error.
   Assume that there is classical measurement error in both log expenditure and prices, and that
quantities are de...ned as expenditures over prices, i.e.,

                             P\G G             PtG YtG
                               t Yt
                        ln              = ln           +      e
                             PtM YtM           PtM YtM
                                 d
                                 PG            PtG
                              ln t      = ln       +     p
                                 PtM           PtM
                                 d
                                 Y  G          P\GY G             d
                                                                  PtG      YtG
                              ln tM       ln     t t
                                                             ln       = ln     +   e   p
                                 Yt            PtM YtM            PtM      YtM

   Note ...rst that ^ p in the price regression is biased toward zero (relative to the true coe¢ cient)




                                                     XVI
through an attenuation bias;

                      P\G G                                  d
                                                             PtG
                        t Yt                      ^
                 ln                 =         0p + p ln          +     t
                      PtM YtM                                PtM
                                                                           PtG
                                                                var         M
                                                                           Pt                        <          if       >0
                                    ) ^p =         p              G                             =         p          p
                                                                                                                            ;
                                                        var
                                                                Pt
                                                                           + var                          p     if   p    0
                                                                 M
                                                                Pt                      p


where p is the true coe¢ cient. It follows that since p = 1 " and ^ p > 0, the estimated ^ " in the
price regression is biased upward.
    Second, note that ^ in the quantity regression is also biased toward zero (relative to the true
                            y
coe¢ cient) provided that measurement error in expenditures is small relative to measurement error in
prices. This is again driven by through an attenuation bias;

            P\G G                              d  G
              t Yt                             Y
       ln               =       0   + ^ y ln     t
                                                    +    t
            PtM YtM                            YtM
                                               PtGY G            YtG
                                        cov     M
                                               Pt YtM
                                                   t
                                                        +     e; Y M   +        e       p
                        ) ^y =                                    t
                                                        YtG
                                                var     YtM
                                                              +   e         p
                                                          YtG
                                                  var     YtM                                                 var ( e )
                        =       y                                                       +                                           :
                                          YtG                                                       YtG
                                    var   YtM
                                                  + var ( e ) + var                 p       var     YtM
                                                                                                          + var ( e ) + var     p


Assume that var ( e ) is small. This seems reasonable given that expenditure ratios are calculated from
national accounts. It follows that if p > 0, then the attenuation bias will dominate and ^ y < y .
Since y = (" 1) =" and the estimated coe¢ cient ^ y >> 0, the estimated ^  " in the quantity regression
must be biased downward.

C.3    Estimation bias in the presence of demand shocks

This appendix argues that in the presence of demand shocks a¤ecting the relative demand for agricul-
tural goods, the estimate of " from Equation (21) is biased toward zero while that from Equation (20)
is biased away from zero.
   Consider a dynamic production economy where a representative household has preferences over the
goods Yg and Ym given by Equation (1). There is no capital and no storage, so equilibrium consumption
equals production of each good.
   The goods are traded at prices Pg and Pm . Utility maximization implies the demand equation
                                                                                        "
                                                       Yg                   Pg
                                                          =                                 :                                           (44)
                                                       Ym   1               Pm




                                                                  XVII
   A continuum of ...rms, owned by the household, produces Yg and Ym via the function

                                                                   Yi = Ai L'
                                                                            i;                                                        (45)

where ' 2 [0; 1) and i 2 fg; mg. The household has one unit of labor that is split between sec-
tors. Firm optimization implies that the marginal product of labor is equalized across sectors, i.e.,
Pg 'Ag (Lg )' 1 = Pm 'Am (Lm )' 1 .
    Combine this equation with Equations (44)-(45) to substitute out the labor ratio Lg =Lm and the
price ratio Pg =Pm . Rearranging terms yields an expression for Yg =Ym in terms of = (1 ) and Ag =Am ,

                             Yg                 '                                          "                  Ag
                    ln                =                         ln               +                   ln               :               (46)
                             Ym           ' + " (1         ')            1           ' + " (1   ')            Am

Combining Equations (44) and (46) yields an expression for Pg =Pm in terms of = (1                                        ) and Ag =Am ,

                             Pg              1 '                                           1                  Ag
                    ln                =               ln                                             ln               :               (47)
                             Pm           ' + " (1 ')                    1           ' + " (1   ')            Am

    The economy is subject to supply and demand shocks, interpreted as shocks to growth in rel-
ative TFP and relative preference weights. For notational convenience, de...ne the variables pt =
ln (Pg;t =Pm;t ) ln (Pg;t 1 =Pm;t 1 ), yt = ln (Yg;t =Ym;t ) ln (Yg;t 1 =Ym;t 1 ), t = ln [ t =(1       t )]
ln t 1 =(1       t 1 ) , and at = ln (Ag;t =Am;t )  ln (Ag;t 1 =Am;t 1 ). The growth in relative expendi-
ture, xt ln [Pgt Ygt =(Pmt Ymt )] ln [Pg;t 1 Yg;t 1 =(Pm;t 1 Ym;t 1 )], is then xt = pt + yt . For simplicity,
assume that var ( t ) and var (at ) are constant and that corr ( ; a) = 0.
   Consider now simulating time-series data from this model and running OLS regressions on Equations
(20)-(21). The following proposition derives the implied coe¢ cients from these regressions.

Proposition 5 The regression coe¢ cient on the relative price growth pt in the expenditure-price re-
gression xt = 0 + p pt + t is given by

                                                           '                 (1 ')2 var ( )
                         p   =1           "+ "+                                                           1       "                   (48)
                                                       1       '        (1   ')2 var ( ) + var (a)

The regression coe¢ cient on the relative output growth yt in the expenditure-output regression xt =
 0 + y yt + t is given by

                                  "       1       ' + " (1         ')          '2 var ( )                 "       1
                         y   =                +                                                                                       (49)
                                      "                '"               '2   var ( ) + "2 var (a)             "
Proof. The regression coe¢ cients are de...ned as p = cov (p + y; p) =var (p) and y = cov (p + y; y ) =var (y ).
The expressions in (48)-(49) follow from the equilibrium relationships (46)-(47) and the assumption
corr ( ; a) = 0. The inequalities in Equations (48)-(49) follow from ' 2 [0; 1) so the last term in each
equation is non-negative.
   Proposition 5 shows that when there are no demand shocks (var ( ) = 0) then p and                                              y   are
unbiased estimates of 1 " and (" 1) =", respectively. However, when var ( ) > 0, then ^
                                                                                      " 1                                         p   <"

                                                                        XVIII
and ~
    " 1= 1      y > ". It follows that the estimate from Equation (21) yields a downward bias in "
and that from Equation (20) yields an upward bias in ".

C.4    Estimated equations in Section 6.1

The production function (19) in Section 6.1 gives rise to the following equilibrium conditions, based on
...rst-order conditions,
                                                             1 "ms
          pServ Y Serv                      (1   ^ ) pServ
                                  =
pServ Y Serv + pM anuf Y M anuf       ^ (pM )1 "ms + (1 ^ ) (pS )1 "ms
                                        pServ Y Serv + pM anuf Y M anuf + pServ s                pServ s
                                             pServ Y Serv + pM anuf Y M anuf        pServ Y Serv + pM anuf Y M anuf
                                                       1 "
                   pG Y G                         pG
                                  =
              pG Y G + pM Y M          (pG )1 " + (1    ) (pM )1 "
                                       pG Y G + pM Y M + pG c + pS s            pG c
                                              pG Y G + pM Y M             pG Y G + pM Y M
The nonlinear least square regressions in Section 6.1 are based on these conditions.



D     Appendix: Appendix Tables and Figures




                                                    XIX
                                                                               (a) Relative K-Y ratio in agriculture
                                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)                             (5)          (6)
 log(agr. empl. share)                                                -0.296***    -0.297***    -0.262***       -0.249**                         -0.281*      -0.219
                                                                       (0.0186)     (0.0241)     (0.0964)        (0.105)                         (0.150)     (0.223)
 Sample                                                                 FULL     NO AFRICA        FULL       NO AFRICA                            FULL     NO AFRICA
 Time dummy                                                              YES          YES           NO             NO                              YES         YES
 Country FE                                                              NO            NO          YES             YES                             YES         YES
 Observations                                                             292          206          292            206                             292         206
 R-squared                                                              0.638         0.586        0.047          0.052                           0.047       0.052
                                                                                       (b) Productivity Gap
                                                                         (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)                             (5)         (6)
 log(agr. empl. share)                                                0.370***      0.348***     0.300***        0.191**                        0.901***    0.965***
                                                                      (0.0165)      (0.0176)     (0.0979)       (0.0863)                         (0.139)     (0.163)
 Sample                                                                FULL      NO AFRICA        FULL       NO AFRICA                            FULL     NO AFRICA
 Time dummy                                                             YES           YES           NO             NO                              YES        YES
 Country FE                                                              NO            NO          YES             YES                             YES        YES
 Observations                                                            290           208          290            208                             290         208
 R-squared                                                              0.797         0.771        0.066          0.036                           0.261       0.281

Table 7: Panel (a) reports the results of a set of regressions whose dependent variable is the logarithm
of the K-Y ratio. Panel (b) reports the results of a set of regressions whose dependent variable is
the logarithm of the productivity gap. Columns (1) and (2) are pooled regressions with time e¤ects.
Columns (3) and (4) are within regressions with country ...xed e¤ects. Robust standard errors clustered
at country level are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                                                           Relative employment volatility
                                                             4
                                                             3
                                                                                                       ZAF
                                                                                     DEU
                 Employment volatility relative to output




                                                                                                                                HND
                                                             2
                                                                                                                  POL        EGY
                                                                                                              ESP                    PAK
                                                                                                       BGR
                                                                                     USAPRI
                                                                                         BHS AUS                       CRI PRY
                                                                              BEL            BRB                      JAM
                                                                                                                        SLV            THA
                                                                                               NORAUT               PRT        MDA
                                                             1                            CYP
                                                                                        SWE            NZL        CHLGRC          PHL
                                                                                     NLD         HUN     FIN                  ROU
                                                                                          CAN DNK ISL         LVA                          ALB
                                                                          GBR           ISR    SVK ITA SVNIRL   DOM
                                                                          MLT           CHE      FRA
                                                                                                EST     TTO    LTU
                                                                                 LUX                                   KOR
                                                                                                                       MYS
                                                                                                                   MEX PAN                MMR
                                                                                           CZE            RUS            BRA       IDN
                                                                                                              VEN
                                                                                                     JPN               CUB




                                                                          Fitted line (unweighted)
                                                                                                                                AZE
                                                                          Fitted line (weighted)
                                                                                                                                       CHN
                                                            0.1
                                                                  1                            5                      20     35       50   65
                                                                                  Agriculture's share in total employment (%)


Figure 13: The cross country panel on the relative employment volatility. The ...gure has log-log scale.
The two regression lines stand for unweighted OLS regression (solid line) and the regression weighted
by the size of total employment (dotted line).

                                                                                                      XX
                                                                               Volatility of employment and GDP in the US
                                                                1.4

                                                                1.3
                     Volatility of employment relative to GDP
                                                                1.2

                                                                1.1

                                                                 1

                                                                0.9

                                                                0.8

                                                                0.7

                                                                0.6

                                                                0.5

                                                                0.4
                                                                      1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                                                                                  Year

Figure 14: The ...gure shows the time evolution of the volatility of total employment in private sector (excluding
government) relative to the GDP in the US from 1955 to 2015. The relative volatility is measured by the standard
deviation of the HP-...ltered log total employment divided by the HP-...ltered log real output, both of which are
computed on a 28-year rolling window. The x-axis denotes the end year of the sample window. The HP-...lter
use the smoothing parameter 6.25 (Ravn and Uhlig 2002). Source: Employment in private sectors is from the
NIPA Table 6.8A, 6.8B, 6.8C, and 6.8D. The GDP in current price is de     ated by the implicit price deators from
NIPA Table 1.1.9.




                                                                                           G G      M    M        G
                                                                                         P y     P y     AP L
                                                                          c      i        P        P     AP LM
                                                                                                                  nG       nM    n
                                                                          A. FD- Filtered China Data, 1985-2012: std (y ) = 2:4%
                  std(x)
                  std(y )                                                  1.27   3.34    1.82     1.31    2.39    1.00     0.76  0.33
                 corr(x; y )                                               0.57   0.63    0.12     0.93   -0.09 -0.57       0.66 -0.25
                           G
                 corr(x; n )                                              -0.74 -0.34    -0.38    -0.38    0.35    1.00 -0.50     0.71
                 corr x; nM                                                0.32   0.37    0.40     0.53   -0.52 -0.50          1  0.19
                                                                          B. FD- Filtered Model, Homothetic model std (y ) = 2:7%
                  std(x)
                  std(y )                                                  0.30   2.36    1.11     1.25    0.72    1.10     1.27  0.49
                 corr (x; y )                                              0.80   0.99    0.24     0.95   -0.42 -0.30       0.69  0.18
                 corr x; nG                                               -0.22 -0.27     0.80    -0.51    0.79       1 -0.78     0.75
                 corr x; nM                                                0.55   0.66   -0.40     0.88   -0.81 -0.78          1 -0.52

               Table 8: Summary Statistics for China data and Model: First-di¤erenced




                                                                                                 XXI
        Param.                           USA                                               Japan                                            China
                    Cons. value added                GGDC               Cons. value added               GGDC             Cons. value added            GGDC
                     3-sector     2-sector    3-sector     2-sector     3-sector    2-sector     3-sector     2-sector   3-sector 2-sector      3-sector    2-sector
        "          2.49***       2.32***     1.36***      1.53***      1.58***     2.24***      5.46***      6.06***     1.70*** 1.34***       1.30***     1.75***
                     (0.28)       (0.32)      (0.13)       (0.48)       (0.05)      (0.36)       (0.80)       (0.91)      (0.22)     (0.25)     (0.13)      (0.08)
         ms             0            -       0.48***          -        0.79***         -        1.66***          -        0.007          -     0.65***         -
                                             (0.005)                   (0.003)                   (0.13)                   (0.05)                (0.04)
        c         -160.6*** -160.6*** -215.0*** -224.0***             -669.6*** -828.2*** -58334*** -59631***            -9.0***    -9.2*** -654.2*** -614.9***
                      (3.8)        (3.8)       (6.0)        (5.7)       (43.1)      (46.1)      (5417)       (5417)        (0.4)      (0.4)     (41.6)      (41.4)
        s         4299.4***          -      12897***          -       3234.0***        -       36056***          -         0.01          -    139.8***         -
                    (444.0)                  (431.8)                    (92.9)                   (6269)                                         (31.1)
                   0.99***       0.99***    0.997***     0.994***      0.97***     0.97***     0.994***     0.995***     0.89*** 0.92***       0.90***     0.90***
                   (0.0005)      (0.005)    (0.0004)     (0.0005)       (0.03)     (0.005)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.005)     (0.006)




XXII
        ^          0.15***           -       0.20***          -        0.21***         -        0.44***          -       0.63***         -     0.61***         -
                    (0.004)                  (0.003)                   (0.002)                  (0.004)                  (0.008)               (0.004)
        Sample            1947-2010                1947-2010                1955-2017                 1953-2010               1985-2012             1980-2010
        AIC          -909.3       -525.0      -840.0       -506.0       -596.6      -259.6       -663.8       -392.2      -270.2       -9.2     -302.1      -158.8
        RMSEG         0.004       0.004       0.003         0.003       0.022       0.022         0.008       0.008       0.015      0.015      0.018       0.017
        RMSEM         0.011          -        0.020           -         0.016          -          0.021          -        0.016          -      0.025          -
        RMSES         0.012          -        0.018           -         0.037          -          0.025          -        0.020          -      0.016          -

       Table 9: Estimation results for the models in Section 6.1. "3-sector" refers to agriculture, manufacturing, and services. "2-sector"
       refers to agriculture and nonagriculture. Consumption value added data for USA are from Herrendorf et al. (2013). Consumption
       value added data for China and Japan are constructed following the methodology in Herrendorf et al. (2013) using o¢ cial input-
       output tables from NBS and Japan'    s Ministry of Internal A¤airs and Communications, respectively. Production value added data
       are from GGDC.
   corr(agricultural employment, productivity gap non-ag/ag.)   corr(agricultural employment, non-agricultural employment)
     0.8                                                           0.8
                    Benchmark                                                                  Benchmark
                    Adjustment costs                               0.6                         Adjustment costs
     0.6                                     S                                                                          S
                    Modified TFP process Z                                                     Modified TFP process Z
                                                                   0.4
                    Orthogonal Shocks                                                          Orthogonal Shocks

     0.4                                                           0.2

                                                                    0
     0.2
                                                                 -0.2

      0                                                          -0.4

                                                                 -0.6
    -0.2
                                                                 -0.8

    -0.4                                                            -1
              10          20           30        40   50                     10       20        30         40           50
           Agriculture's share in total employment (%)                   Agriculture's share in total employment (%)



                   corr(total employment, output)                             std(total employment)/std(output)
      1                                                            0.6
                                                                                               Benchmark
                                                                 0.55                          Adjustment costs
     0.8
                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                               Modified TFP process Z
                                                                   0.5
                                                                                               Orthogonal Shocks
     0.6
                                                                 0.45

     0.4                                                           0.4

     0.2                                                         0.35

                                                                   0.3
                    Benchmark
      0
                    Adjustment costs
                                             S
                                                                 0.25
                    Modified TFP process Z
    -0.2            Orthogonal Shocks                              0.2

    -0.4                                                         0.15
               10          20          30        40   50                     10       20        30         40           50
           Agriculture's share in total employment (%)                   Agriculture's share in total employment (%)


Figure 15: The ...gure reports the result of the robustness analysis discussed in Section 5.4.




                                                           XXIII
