                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE EFFECTS OF COMPETITION IN CONSUMER CREDIT MARKET

                                         Stefan Gissler
                                       Rodney Ramcharan
                                          Edison Yu

                                       Working Paper 26183
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26183


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




We thank Bob Adams, Kenneth Ahern, Antonio Bayeh, Mitchell Berlin, Sreedhar Bharath, Fabio
Braggon, Harry DeAngelo, Hiroshi Fujiki, Elena Loutskina, Greg Nini, Wenlan Qian, Amit Seru,
David Sovich, You Suk Kim, Taylor Nadauld, Jordan van Rijn, Hirofumi Uchida and seminar
participants at the Board of Governors, Dutch National Bank, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Maastricht University, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Rotterdam, Tilburg, Stanford,
and USC Marshall for helpful suggestions. We are especially grateful to Scott Borger, Ralph
Monaco and Scott Vaughan at the NCUA for their detailed comments­all errors remain our own.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Stefan Gissler, Rodney Ramcharan, and Edison Yu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Competition in Consumer Credit Market
Stefan Gissler, Rodney Ramcharan, and Edison Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 26183
August 2019
JEL No. D12,G21,G23

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper finds that banks and non-banks respond differently to increased competition in
consumer credit markets. Increased competition and the greater threat of failure induces banks to
specialize more in relationship business lending, and surviving banks are more profitable.
However, non-banks change their credit policy when faced with more competition and expand
credit to riskier borrowers at the extensive margin, resulting in higher default rates. These results
show how the effects of competition depend on the form of intermediation. They also suggest that
increased competition can cause credit risk to migrate outside the traditional supervisory
umbrella.

Stefan Gissler                                    Edison Yu
Federal Reserve Board                             Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
20th Street and Constitution Avenue               edison4521@gmail.com
NW Washington, DC 20551
stefan.gissler@frb.gov

Rodney Ramcharan
University of Southern California
rramchar@marshall.usc.edu
        This paper studies the consequences of competition in local consumer credit markets.
Influential theories of intermediation observe that greater competition in credit markets can
generate more efficient intermediation, reduce borrowing costs and relax credit constraints for
marginalized borrowers.1 But some arguments note that more competition can also erode the
profitability of incumbent financial institutions, leading to changes in credit policy that can
produce riskier lending and unstable banking. 2 In the most extreme case, increased competition
can foster an ex-post misallocation of credit to riskier borrowers, producing asset price booms
and busts (Mian and Sufi (2009), Favara and Imbs (2015) and Rajan and Ramcharan (2015)). 3
        The consequences of credit market competition can also depend on the sources of
competition and regulation. Deposit-taking institutions like banks and credit unions engage in
both relationship and arms-length or transaction banking, while non-banks, such as finance
companies and securitization pools, typically focus only on transaction lending, often within
specialized segments like car loans ((Benmelech, Meisenzahl et al. 2016), (Farhi and Tirole
2018)). Because relationship lending can partially insulate a bank from pure price competition,
the source of competition can cause depository institutions to substitute between relationship and
transaction banking (Boot and Thakor (2000)). In contrast, when faced with increased
competition, non-banks, with less capacity to substitute towards other types of lending and less
encumbered by regulation, might more aggressively defend their market by reducing prices and
lending to riskier borrowers.
        Endogenous entry into local markets--the unobserved factors that determine both entry
and ex-post outcomes--makes it difficult to understand the consequences of credit market
competition and assess these varied theoretical predictions. The particular setting that we use to


1
  Academic surveys include (Allen and Gale (2004), Beck (2008), and (Vives 2012). Vives (2016) provides a book
length treatment of many of the underlying theoretical ideas. (Bernanke 2009) and (Vickers 2010) discuss some of
the recent policy issues surrounding financial competition within the US and international contexts respectively.
Earlier work on the distributional effects of credit access is surveyed in (Aghion, Caroli et al. 1999)
2
  (Bhattacharya 1982), (Hellmann, Murdock et al. 2000), (Keeley 1990) are seminal references in the "franchise
value" literature: How increased competition reduces bank profits and increases the incentives for greater risk-
taking. In contrast, (Boyd and De Nicolo 2005) show that competition can lower lending rates, inducing firms to
choose safer projects and thereby improving bank asset quality and safety (Martinez-Miera and Repullo 2010) point
to the limits of this argument, noting that lower rates also reduce bank revenues, possibly increasing bank failure
rates. A number of papers also emphasize the interaction between information asymmetries, lending standards and
competition. See for example (Dell'Ariccia and Marquez 2006), (Rajan 1994), and (Petersen and Rajan 1995).
3
 Recent theories have also hypothesized more general links between the overall structure of intermediation and
economic fluctuations (He and Krishnamurthy (2013), (Brunnermeier and Sannikov 2014)).

                                                             2
address this identification challenge is the recent changes in federal regulations that allowed
some credit unions (CUs) to compete directly with banks for deposits and expand their balance
sheets--the "low-income" rule. CUs are a major source of consumer finance. The industry
serves about 105 million people, has about $1.4 trillion in assets, and originates roughly 28
percent of all new car loans and accounts for over 25 percent of all consumer unsecured lending
in the US.4
        Individuals with a common bond--such as employees of a university or residents of a
town--can establish a credit union to access financial services. CUs are traditionally restricted
from intermediation outside of their common bond, thereby limiting the ability of CUs to
compete directly with community banks and nearby non-banks. But under the low-income rule,
some CUs that serve lower income customers are exempted from this competition restriction and
can freely accept deposits outside their common bond. In 2008, the industry's federal regulator
began changing both the legal eligibility standard for the low-income rule and eventually the
process by which a CU could become eligible. Competition increased sharply thereafter. By
2016, the total assets of "low-income" CUs, those without deposit-taking restrictions, rose to
nearly $400 billion--an almost 8-fold increase compared to 2008.
        The regulatory roll-out of the low-income rule created plausibly exogenous variation in
local credit market competition. Uncertainty about the low-income eligibility criteria delayed
entry into the program until the regulator issued a notification letter to potentially all eligible
CUs. Once notified of their low-income eligibility, over 90 percent of these institutions took-up
the program within a year. Thereafter, the regulator determined each CU's eligibility for the low-
income rule at the time of the supervisory exam. Examination schedules are on a preset cycle.
Their timing is not driven by local economic conditions, expectations about future lending
opportunities within the local market, beliefs about local demand, or the behavior of local
lenders. A battery of statistical tests also corroborate the narrative that this regulatory roll-out led
to exogenous variation in local credit market competition.
        We find that banks and non-banks respond differently to this plausibly exogenous
increase in competition. Among banks, there is a mirror decline in lending and deposit taking


4
  See Experian's 2017 report on http://www.experian.com/assets/automotive/quarterly-webinars/2017-q3-safm-
recording.pdf.



                                                           3
when the number of nearby low-income credit unions (LICUs) increases--those within a five- or
10-mile radius of the bank's headquarters. To illustrate the magnitudes, consider two banks with
identical loan levels in 2012Q1--just before the regulatory roll-out. Suppose that one of these
banks is exposed to the growth in LICUs at the 10th percentile, while the other bank is exposed to
LICU growth at the 90th percentile. The OLS point estimate suggests that the level of loans at the
bank more heavily exposed to LICU competition (the 90 th percentile) is about 4.3 percent less by
end 2015 compared with the bank that faced less competition from LICUs. The IV point
estimates, which uses a bank's potential exposure to LICU competition as an instrument for the
actual growth in LICUs, are about 40 percent larger.
         Moreover, increased competition is associated with greater profitability at banks. Two
factors appear to explain this finding. First, banks accommodate entry in the consumer segment
by substituting towards more relationship business lending, where CUs have less expertise and
pricing pressures are less intense and margins higher. 5 Second, increased competition is also
associated with selection pressures, as bank failure rates rise when the number of nearby LICUs
increase. State tax policy appear to be a key mediating mechanism through which LICU
competition induces bank failure. CUs are exempt from most state and federal taxes and in states
with high tax rates, banks operate at a significant cost disadvantage when competing with
LICUs. We find that the positive impact of LICU competition on the probability of bank failure
is more pronounced in the higher tax states.
         Regulatory balance sheet data are too aggregated to measure the impact of competition at
the extensive margin or on credit policy; these data are also unavailable for most non-banks.
Thus, to understand better the effects of increased competition at the extensive margin across
different types of lenders, we use loan-level data that identify the Equifax Risk Score, zip-code
and importantly whether the lender in each car loan is a bank, CU or a non-bank. These data
show that competition affects an expansion in automobile lending at the extensive margin as well
as a reallocation of credit towards subprime borrowers.
         At the extensive margin, the estimates show that after a zip code becomes exposed to a
low-income CU, the total number of newly made auto loans increase by about 3 percent in the


5
 Unlike business lending, consumer lending contracts­a mortgage or an automobile loan­are more homogeneous
across the country and the underlying collateral, especially in the case of automobiles, require little specialized
knowledge to value. Lenders also tend to operate with more information in consumer credit markets (Pagano and
Jappelli (1993)).

                                                               4
period 18 months and beyond, with CUs and non-banks accounting for all of this increase. Also,
non-banks appear to respond relatively rapidly to greater competition, increasing lending by
about 1.6 percent within 6 months of first exposure to a low-income CU in the zip code. In
keeping with the balance sheet evidence indicating that banks tended to accommodate entry by
shifting towards business lending, the impact of increased competition on car loan origination is
insignificant among banks.
       Using information on borrower Equifax Risk Scores, we find that both CUs and non-
banks expand credit at the extensive margin towards borrowers in the bottom half of the credit
risk distribution. Among CUs for example, the ratio of new loans made to borrowers in the
bottom half of the credit risk distribution relative to all new loans in a zip code increases by
about 1.1 percentage points in the years a zip code is first exposed to a low-income CU. We also
find evidence that this reallocation in automotive credit to riskier borrowers on account of
increased competition is associated with a significant increase in non-performing loans
(Broecker (1990)).
       Our setting provides conditional support for theories that emphasize the benefits of
competition in reducing the cost of credit and improving access for previously marginalized
borrowers. Previously marginalized borrowers are also riskier, and our setting also highlights the
possible costs of competition, as greater subprime lending leads to more defaults. But these
results are nuance. Responses to competition depend greatly on the source of competition and the
form of intermediation--banks versus non-banks. Also, increased competition does not always
imply reduced profits, as the heightened threat of failure seem to induce bank managers to forego
"the quiet life" and seek out new higher margin relationship business lending (Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2003)).
       Taken together, models that incorporate managerial incentives and allow for responses
that differ by the form of intermediation appear to provide a more complete description of the
effects of competition. Moreover, a common policy view is that enhanced supervision of the
traditional banking sector allows economies to reap the benefits of increased competition while
mitigating socially harmful risk-taking. But the evidence that increased competition might induce




                                                      5
greater risk-taking in the unregulated non-bank sector suggests that this policy view might be
incomplete.6
         This is the first paper to use the lifting of deposit-taking restrictions at CUs to study the
effects of competition on banks and non-banks. We however build on enormously influential
literatures that have used various deregulation waves across US states beginning in the 1970s or
the variation in cross-state regulatory environments in the period before the Great Depression to
tackle the identification problem inherent in studying the effects of entry ((Black and Strahan
2002), (Jayaratne and Strahan 1996), (Carlson and Mitchener 2009)). 7 The most common
interpretation of this literature is that increased competition among banks leads to greater
efficiency and faster economic growth. In the case of consumer finance, evidence from the state
deregulation waves suggests that increased competition among banks is associated with
improved screening technologies, and the increased extension of consumer credit to both low and
high risk customers ((Dick and Lehnert 2010)).
         However, evidence drawn from variation beyond these two common sources in the
literature can reveal how existing theories of competition perform in very different institutional
settings. Indeed, unlike some previous studies, the current setting suggests that greater
competition is associated with increased consumer credit mainly to higher risk borrowers. This
setting can also help distinguish the consequences of competition from the benefits of asset
diversification, which also tends to increase when geographic restrictions on lending are relaxed.
Microeconomic data on credit standards and loan performance can also better distinguish the
consequences of competition at the extensive margin and across different types of intermediaries
from alternative explanations. Section 2 of the paper describes the institutional setting and data,
while section 3 examines the impact of LICU competition on banks. Section 4 uses




6
  See the discussion in the Economist at https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2009/06/25/deliver-us-
from-competition. There is a broader theoretical literature on the merits of "shadow banking", with some arguing
that it reflects regulatory arbitrage (Claessens, Pozsar et al. 2012) and others noting that it allows credit to bypass
suboptimal regulations ((Ordoñez 2018)).
7
  There is also a sizable literature that uses cross-country variation in financial regulation to understand the effects of
competition­see for example (Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt et al. 2006). Unobserved heterogeneity remains a key challenge
in that setting. (Braggion, Dwarkasing et al. 2017) use historical micro data from the UK to overcome some of these
identification challenges, while (Carlson, Correia et al. forthcoming) use population-based regulatory discontinuities
as exogenous variation during the National Banking Era in the US for identification.



                                                                 6
microeconomic data on auto-loans to study the effects of competition at the extensive margin for
non-banks, banks and credit unions. Section 5 concludes.

2. Data and Institutional Background
2.1 Data

           Credit unions (CU) are not-for-profit tax-exempt financial institutions that provide
traditional relationship-based financial intermediation. Employees of a specific corporation--
fraternal bonds--or residents of a specific town--geographic bond--can form a CU in order to
use relationship-based financial services. 8 Credit unions mainly specialize in consumer lending
and CUs and community banks are close substitutes. As Table 1 (Panels A, B and C)--drawn
from Call Report data--show, both community banks and CUs are relatively small and mainly
use deposits to fund their lending activities. The geographic range of lending for both types of
institutions is also relatively limited. And the FDIC's definition of a community bank is based in
part on the geographic range of a bank's operations, as well as the bank's size, its liabilities and
asset composition. In contrast, multi-market banks are larger, more leveraged and less reliant on
deposit-funding--Table IA1 in the internet appendix details the data sources. Panels D and E
provide summary statistics of balance data for the low-income designated credit unions.
           The second main data source is the New York Fed CCP/Equifax database. It provides
loan-level data on auto lending in the U.S. Panel F provides summary statistics of the market
shares of credit unions, banks and non-banks in automotive lending. The data show that the
aggregate market shares across the three types of institutions remained relatively stable over the
sample period. The panel also decomposes these market shares by Equifax Risk Score
quartiles--generally borrowers in the bottom quartile are the highest credit risk. Non-banks, with
their focus on transaction lending and securitization, generally dominate lending in the highest
credit risk segment, while banks account for a much smaller share of subprime auto-lending. And
as with the aggregate market shares, the market shares of the three types of institutions within the
various risk categories remained relatively stable over the sample period.




8
    See (Ramcharan, Verani et al. 2016) for additional information about the industry.


                                                                7
2.2 Low-Income Designation: Changes in Eligibility
        This subsection provides institutional details and statistical tests suggesting that the low-
income rule's lifting of deposit taking restrictions among some CUs likely led to a conditionally
exogenous increase in local credit market competition for community banks and non-bank
suppliers of consumer credit. Under the Federal Credit Union Act of 1972, CUs designated as
"low income" by the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)--the industry's federal
regulator--benefit from a relaxation of deposit-taking restrictions, and can compete directly with
other financial institutions for deposits and expand their balance sheets. In 2006, well before the
economic collapse and concerns about local credit demand and supply, the NCUA found the
1993 "low-income" regulation outdated and impractical--Figure 1 summarizes the key
institutional changes in this rule with additional background. 9 In 2009 the NCUA thus revised
the 1993 low-income rule and replaced the "household income" standard with the "family
income" standard.
        Under this revised rulemaking, a federal credit union qualified for "low-income"
designation if more than 50 percent of its membership was low income. To be "low income", a
member's family income must be less than or equal to 80 percent of the national median family
income. The 2009 rule change initially had little impact on the number of LICUs (Figure 2 and
Figure 3). Many credit unions were unaware of the rule change or were confused by the new
family income standard.10 In the case of the latter, few had current data from their membership
on either members' individual or especially family income. And for those with individual
membership income data, it was unclear whether these data could be legally benchmarked
against the family income standard. The NCUA thus issued a revised low-income rule in 2010
that clarified the income standard. 11


9
  See for example page 9 of https://www.ncua.gov/services/Pages/small-credit-union-
initiatives/Documents/Maximizing-Low-Income-Designation.pdf. Also see the following links for more
information: https://www.ncua.gov/Legal/Documents/LowIncomeDesignationFactSheet.pdf and
https://www.ncua.gov/services/Pages/resources-expansion/fom-expansion/low-income.aspx.
10
   Consider the following quote from Joseph Thomas Jr., the CEO of Fairfax County Federal Credit Union, on his
CU's LI eligibility: "We were very surprised to find that we were eligible". This CU has about 14,500 members,
mostly active or retired Fairfax county government employees, and is located just 25 miles from the NCUA.
https://www.bizjournals.com/washington/blog/2014/08/credit-unions-designated-to-serve-low-income.html.
11
 Individual income data would be benchmarked against median individual income data from the 2010 US Census,
while family income data would be benchmarked against median family income from the census.


                                                           8
          Two specific elements of the regulatory roll-out of the low-income rule feature in our
identification strategy. First, a notification letter sent in the second quarter of 2012 to all 1,003
potentially eligible CUs accompanied the implementation of this revised eligibility process. The
NCUA judged potential eligibility in part by whether a CU was headquartered in a relatively
lower-income area and thus likely to have a membership that would qualify under the revised
rulemaking. Over 900 or about 90 percent of the notified institutions selected into low-income
status within a year. This high-take up rate mitigates concerns that beliefs about local demand
played a role in driving the timing of selection into low income status. 12 Instead the very large
take-up rate, once CUs learn of the program, reflect the benefits of accessing sources of finance
external to the membership.13
          The second element of the regulatory roll-out that features in the identification strategy is
that the NCUA also linked low-income designations to the timing of the supervisory bank exam.
CUs earliest on the examination schedule were notified sooner of their low-income eligibility;
those eligible for designation quickly selected into low-income status. The key facts are that the
timing of these supervisory examination schedules are pre-specified and are not driven by local
economic conditions, expectations about future lending opportunities within the local market,
beliefs about local demand, or the behavior of local banks--banks are regulated and examined
independently by federal and state banking authorities. Figures 2 and 3 show the effects of the
letter and the subsequent automation of eligibility linked to supervisory exams. The fraction of
CUs designated as LICUs rose from its steady-state level of around 12 percent in 2009 to 36
percent by the end of 2015, with a discontinuous jump after the letter.
          Consistent with the rule-making tying low-income designation to the relative family
income of a CU's membership, column 1 of Table 2 shows that CUs in census tracts with median
income below that of the national median are significantly more likely to become a LICU
between 2009 and end 2015. A one standard deviation decrease in the ratio of census tract to
national median income is associated with a 14 percent increase in the probability that a CU



12
     See for example https://www.ncua.gov/newsroom/Pages/NW20131219LowIncomeCUs.aspx.
13
  The small number that delayed entry are the very tiny institutions with limited organizational capacity; some 14
small CUs still manually filed Call Reports and received computers from the NCUA to help modernize their
operations. See https://www.ncua.gov/Legal/Documents/Reports/AR2012.pdf and the discussion on capacity
building at small CUs (page 38).

                                                             9
becomes a LICU between 2009 and end 2015. Column 2 adds standard balance sheet
observables in 2008 and the log tract income itself, while column 3 includes census tract
demographic variables. The relative median income of the CU's headquarters remains a
significant predictor of subsequent low-income designation.

2.2 Low-Income Designation: The Statistical Evidence
       This subsection shows that low-income entry likely engendered an exogenous increase in
credit market competition. To this end, we first examine CU balance sheet outcomes in the
period around low-income designation. An increase in intermediation after low-income
designation would suggest that this relaxation in deposit-taking restrictions increased
competition in local credit markets. The absence of any trends in CU balance sheet outcomes in
the quarters preceding designation would be consistent with the institutional narrative of
exogenous "entry" into low-income status. The subsection also examines nearby bank balance
sheet outcomes in the period around first exposure to low-income credit unions (LICU), showing
that LICU exposure impacted bank outcomes, but that this exposure is unrelated to past bank
balance sheet trends.
       These statistical tests are important, as several factors can still precipitate endogenous
entry and pre-trends in balance outcomes despite the narrative evidence. For example, suppose
the NCUA's 2012 Q2 notification letter targeted credit unions with poor lending opportunities or
profitability on account of adverse local economic conditions. These adverse economic
conditions could also lower lending and profitability at local incumbent banks, inducing a
spurious correlation between low income entry and declining lending at nearby banks. Pre-trends
and spurious inference can also arise if CUs in distressed areas self-selected earlier into low-
income status conditional on eligibility--the standard Ashenfelter dip (Ashenfelter 1978). Of
course, the 90 percent take-up rate within a year of the letter weigh against these self-selection
narratives.
       Pre-trends and the potential for biased inference is also possible even when entry into
low-income status is linked to the timing of bank exams. The timing of these exams is
orthogonal to local economic conditions, but weaker financial institutions are examined over an
abbreviated exam cycle­6 months versus the standard 18-month cycle. As a result, weaker
institutions could enter into low-income status earlier than eligible but stronger credit unions that
are examined less frequently. This pattern can again lead to a spurious association between low-

                                                     10
income designation and outcomes at nearby banks. But as Table 1 (Panels D and E) shows, the
median LICU and non-LICU are very similar on observables, suggesting that they are unlikely to
be subject to dissimilar shocks.
           To evaluate the plausibility of the exogeneity low-income desigination, the basic
specification in equation (1) uses an indicator variable that equals 1 in the quarter t that a credit
union j located in county i becomes low-income and 0 otherwise-- . The baseline also
includes four leads of this variable to detect pre-existing balance sheet or income trends,  , in
the quarters before low-income designation. We also include four lags of this indicator variable,
as well as a post-low-income indicator variable that equals one in the years following low-
income designation to measure the impact of low-income designation--  . All specifications
include credit union fixed effects to absorb non-parametrically pre-existing factors like the
relative income of a credit union field of membership that might determine eligibility,  ; we
also include the county of headquarters-by-year-quarter fixed effects to absorb local economic
conditions,  ; standard errors are clustered at the credit union level:

(1)                        =                            +         +  +  + 


The coefficient  compares the impact of low-income designation on outcome                               in the
quarter of designation relative to outcomes in other periods for the same CU as well as relative to
outcomes among other CU-quarter observations without low-income designation. The sample
consists of all CUs--the internet appendix pertubs the sample across a number of dimensions.
           We report the results from these specifications in Table 3. Low income designation
allowed CUs to accept deposits outside of their field of membership and the dependent variable
in column 1 is the percent change or growth in deposits: the quarter on quarter change in deposits
divided by deposits in the previous quarter. The individual point estimates (dots) and their 95
percent confidence bands (lines) are in Figure 4. There is robust evidence that low income
designation led to a significant increase in deposit growth at CUs (column 1). Two quarters after
designation, deposit growth is about 0.23 percentage points faster than otherwise--about a third
of the average deposit growth in the sample.14 The impact of low-income designation on deposit



14
     Summary statistics of variables used in the regressions are provided in the Appendix (Table A1).

                                                               11
growth also appears persistent. In the years after low-income designation, average deposit
growth is about 0.18 percentage points faster than otherwise.
         Equally important, there is no trend in deposit growth in the quarters before low-income
designation. These lead variables are individually and jointly insignificant (p-value=0.19)--the
cumulative sums are in the bottom panel of Figure 4. Note that the results are identical if the
sample excludes CUs already designated as low-income under the 1993 rulemaking; for this
subsample, the peak effect also occurs three quarters after designation (0.33 percentage points)
and the one year and beyond effect is 0.22 percentage points. The lead variables are also
individually and jointly insignificant (p-value=0.25). In what follows we retain the full sample of
institutions. Also, note well that the results are the same when doubling the difference-in-
difference window to 24 months; these are available upon request.
         Balance sheet aggregates can be volatile and percent changes calculated from these
aggregates are prone to outliers. We thus follow the literature and use the quarter-on-quarter
change in deposits scaled by assets in the previous quarter as the baseline measure of the change
in deposits and other aggregates.15 From column 2, the results are unchanged. This increase in
deposit flows external to a CU's membership can allow low-income CUs to expand lending to its
membership, and column 3 uses the quarter-on-quarter change in loans scaled by assets the
previous quarter--referenced henceforth as the change in lending--as the dependent variable.
         Column 3 suggests that lending increased significantly after low-income designation.
And again, there is no pre-trend in lending in the four quarters before designation (Figure 5). All
four of these lead variables are individually and jointly insignificant (p-value=0.89). The change
in lending is about 0.17 percentage points higher one quarter after designation, and remains
about 0.2 percentage points higher than otherwise over the next three quarters. These magnitudes
mirror those obtained when using the change in deposits, as the change in lending is about 0.15
percentage points higher in the years after designation relative to otherwise. Columns 4 and 5
show further that much of this increase in lending is concentrated in automobiles, as the change
in real estate loans evince no trend in the periods around low-income designation.



15
  For example, scaling the change in lending by assets reduces substantially the volatility of the lending series--the
coefficient of variation of this variable is about 50 percent smaller compared with the percent change in lending; the
case of deposits is also similar. Recent papers that scale changes in lending and other bank aggregates by lagged
assets include Cornett, McNutt et al. (2011) and Ramcharan (forthcoming).

                                                              12
        Moreover, column 6 of Table 3 suggests that low-income designation and the increased
access to additional sources of funding induced a relative shift towards loans in a CU's asset
mix. The dependent variable is the loans to asset ratio, and this ratio is about 1.5 percentage
points higher in the years after low-income designation. There is also no evidence of any trend in
the loan to asset ratio in the four quarters before low-income designation. This relative shift to
loans after low-income designation is also associated with increased profitability, which is about
0.2 percent higher in the years of designation (column 7).
        Beyond a shift in asset composition, low-income designation is also associated with a
significant balance sheet expansion, suggesting that these institutions used their easier access to
deposits to finance an increase in lending at the extensive margin (column 8). The growth in
assets is about 0.2 percentage points higher in the years after low-income designation, with the
peak effect occurring about three quarters after designation. Note that there is one lead
coefficient--out of 28 presented thus far--that is marginally significant. But this point estimate
is about half that of the peak effect, and does not constitute any pre-trend--all the leads are
jointly insignificant (p-value=0.19).16
        The evidence in Table 3 suggests that the relaxation of deposit-taking restrictions relieved
funding constraints at designated institutions and engendered an exogenous increase in local
credit market competition on both sides of the balance sheet. That is, designated CUs likely
sought deposits from traditional bank customers, and used these funds to make loans, especially
car loans, to members who would otherwise borrow from banks or non-banks. Column 9
provides more direct evidence of the potential increase in competitive pressures. Marketing and
advertising expenses, geared towards attracting new business, rose sharply after low-income
designation and are about 6 percent higher in the years low-income designation. And as with all
other cases, there are no pre-trends in marketing expenses.
Parallel Trends at Banks

        Selection into low-income status at CUs might be driven by outcomes at nearby banks.
For instance, a CU that observes nearby banks benefitting from plentiful deposit in-flows or
lending opportunities might itself become low-income faster in order to compete for these


16
  Overdraft fees and other "fee income" can be important for CUs and small banks ((Melzer and Morgan 2015)),
and in results available upon request we examine the impact of low-income designation on fee income--there is no
significant evidence that designation impacted this source of income.

                                                           13
deposits and expand lending. Table 4 assesses this endogeneity concern. For each community
bank in the sample, we draw a circle of radius 5 miles around its headquarters. We next create an
indicator variable that equals 1 in the quarter that any CU within this 5-mile radius first becomes
a low-income credit union (LICU) in the period after 2008; this indicator equals 0 in quarters in
which no nearby CUs become low-income. This indicator variable thus captures the first
exposure of a bank to a LICU. We also include four lags and four leads of this variable to detect
whether outcomes at banks differ in the periods around the quarter in which banks first become
exposed to LICU competition.
       Low-income designation lifted deposit-taking restrictions and the dependent variable in
column 1 of Table 4 is the bank-level quarter-on-quarter change in deposits scaled by assets.
The results are striking. There is no evidence that the change in deposits at a bank differ
significantly in the quarters before the bank first becomes exposed to a LICU. However, in the
quarters after a bank's first exposure to a LICU, the change in deposits declines significantly--
about a percentage point. Figure 6 depicts these effects. Similarly, the change in lending is not
significantly different in the quarters before LICU exposure, but also declines significantly
thereafter (Figure 7).Interestingly, despite the increase in competition on both sides of the
balance sheet, there is some indication that the return on assets improves after exposure to LICUs
in column 3 of Table 4.
       Table 4 thus suggests that outcomes at banks do not precipitate exposure to LICU
competition. But foreshadowing the results of the next section, exposure to LICUs does however
impact nearby banks. Before analyzing in greater detail the effects of competition, we consider a
range of additional robustness tests, which for concision we report in the Internet Appendix
(Table IA.2). Notably, we show that the "parallel trend" assumption continues to hold even
among those CUs most in need of external finance and thus most likely to gain from low-income
designation. These additional tests also focus on different CU regulatory bonds; various tests also
perturb the appropriate choice of control groups, including propensity score matching exercises;
other tests focus on the role of the banking market structure and possible rents that might induce
endogenous entry.




                                                     14
3. The Effects of Credit Market Competition: Banks
3.1 The Basic Results
       To understand better the effects of exposure to LICU competition on nearby community
banks, this section uses a cross-section framework that exploits the exogenous timing of the 2012
Q2 letter that precipitated the sharp rise in LICUs. Building on the timing of this letter, the
analysis divides the sample into two periods--before the letter: 2008Q1-2012Q1--and after the
letter: 2012Q2-2015Q4. For each of the two periods, we average various bank-level outcomes,
creating a two-period panel. For example,         is the quarter-on-quarter percent change in

lending at bank i, averaged over the 2008Q1-2012Q1 period. And              is the average of this

variable for bank i in the quarters after the letter: 2012Q2-2015Q4.
       To measure a bank's exposure to competition from LICUs, the baseline approach
computes the log of the average number of LICUs located near the bank in each of the two
periods. Concretely, we begin with a 5 mile radius so that                  is the log of 1 plus the
average number of LICUs within 5 miles of bank i over the 2008Q1-2012Q1 period, while
               is the log of 1 plus the average number of LICUs within 5 miles of bank i over the
2012Q2-2015Q4 period. The fixed effects and first difference estimators are identical when there
are just two periods, and first differencing across the two panels, which absorbs non-
parametrically bank and local time invariant unobservables, yields our cross-section estimating
equation:

       (2)                    -        =  +                        -                  + 

The coefficient of interest,  , measures the impact of the log change or growth in the number of
LICUs within a 5-mile radius of the bank on the difference in average bank-level outcomes
before and after the NCUA's letter.
       Table 5 presents the results from estimating equation (2). The OLS specification in
column 1 uses state fixed effects and standard errors are clustered at the state-level. The
dependent variable in column 1 is the difference in the average quarterly percent change in
lending. The point estimate in column 1 is negative and significant at the 5 percent level (p-
value=0.03). It suggests that a one standard deviation increase in the growth in the average




                                                     15
number of LICUs within a 5-mile radius of a bank after the letter is associated with about a 0.16
percentage point or 0.04 standard deviation decline in average lending growth.
          To put these estimates in economic context, consider two banks with identical loan levels
in 2012Q1. Suppose however that one of these banks is exposed to the growth in LICUs at the
10th percentile, while the other bank is exposed to LICU growth at the 90 th percentile. The point
estimate in column 1 suggests that by end-2015, the level of loans at the bank more heavily
exposed to LICU competition (the 90th percentile) would be about 4.3 percent less compared
with the bank that faced less competition from LICUs over the subsequent 2012Q2-2015Q4
period.
          As noted earlier, balance sheet aggregates can be volatile and percent changes calculated
from these variables are prone to outliers. We thus use the quarter-on-quarter change in lending
scaled by assets in the previous quarter as the baseline measure of the change in lending (column
2)--the scaled changed in lending. 17 From column 2, the LICU point estimate remains negative
and is more precisely estimated (p-value=0.00). Importantly, the economic magnitudes are
similar when using either the percent change in lending or the change in lending scaled by assets.
From column 2, a one standard deviation increase in the growth in the number of LICUs within a
5 mile radius of a bank is associated with about a 0.1 percentage point or 0.04 standard deviation
decrease in the scaled change in lending.
          Much of the sample period includes the Great Recession and its aftermath, and
unobserved local shocks could bias these results. CUs eligible for low-income designation are
more likely to be located in poorer neighborhoods. And if the demand for financial services is
more depressed in poorer neighborhoods, then the growth in LICUs could well proxy for weak
local latent demand. In turn, latent weak demand could then explain the negative association
between an increase in exposure to low-income designation and the change in bank lending. To
be sure, the theoretical relationship between income and credit demand is ambiguous. When job
losses and unemployment risk rise, credit demand among lower income populations can increase
to smooth consumption. And the evidence showing that CU lending actually increased after low-
income designation clearly contradicts the weak demand interpretation. Nevertheless, given the




17
  Scaling the change in lending by assets reduces substantially the volatility of the lending series--the coefficient of
variation of this variable is about 4.7 times smaller than the lending growth series.

                                                               16
tumultuous economic background in which low-income designation occurs in the sample period,
it is important to directly address this latent demand concern.
       An extensive literature suggests that the local variation in house price movements
provides a direct and powerful way to evaluate the latent demand interpretation (Mian and Sufi,
2014). House price movements varied sharply across the country during the 2008-2015 sample
period and this variation was a key driver of local economic activity and demand. Building on
this literature, column 3 includes the average of the quarter-on-quarter growth in Zillow's zip
code level single family house price index. The zip code is matched to the headquarters of the
bank. The sample size drops by 60 percent since this index is not available for all zip codes, but
the main results remain unchanged, though less precisely estimated.
       It is important to note that the slight decline in the point estimate in column 3 reflects the
smaller sample size rather than the inclusion of the house price index itself. Re-estimating
column 2 but using the same sample from column 3 yields the same coefficient as in column 3;
this is shown in column 4. Column 5 includes the log of the median income of the census tract in
which the bank is headquartered, observed in 2010. The log of income directly controls for any
bias that might arise from the fact that lower-income tracts experienced the largest increase in
LICUs, and that these areas could also have less demand for credit. Again, the point estimate on
the log change in LICUs is unchanged.
       As a further robustness exercise, Table 6 gradually expands the distance window out to
50 miles. Because intermediation at CUs and community banks tend to occur within a small
geographic window, we would expect the effects of increased LICU competition on bank lending
to attenuate with distance. This is indeed what we find. The negative impact of exposure to LICU
competition on the scaled change in lending is identical at the 5- and 10-mile radii. But the point
estimate on the growth in the number of LICUs at the 20-mile radius drops by half, and is no
longer statistically significant at conventional levels at the 50 mile radius (p-value=0.1). In what
follows, we measure exposure to LICU competition primarily through the log number of LICUs
within a 10-mile radius, as it is more precisely estimated in some cases.


3.2 Instrumental Variable Estimates

       Contemporaneous shocks could still be a source of bias, and this subsection uses the pre-
existing variation in LICU eligibility to identify better the effects of competition on bank

                                                     17
outcomes. The identification strategy uses the fact that banks located near CUs that are
potentially eligible for low-income conversion under the revised rulemaking would naturally
become more exposed to competition after the regulatory roll-out: the 2012Q2 NCUA letter and
the subsequent linking of low-income designation to bank exams. In contrast, banks located near
CUs that have a simple majority of members with family income above the 80 percent
threshold--ineligible CUs--would experience no growth in LICUs and face much less exposure
to competition from these institutions after the NCUA's regulatory roll-out (Figure 8).
       To measure a bank's potential exposure to LICU competition, we use the baseline 10-
mile radius and first identify CUs within 10 miles from each bank's headquarters--a bank's CU
neighbors. Among this set of neighbors, we count the number of CUs headquartered in census
tracts with tract median income below the 80 percent national median income threshold--the
results are the same if we use a 50 percent threshold. These are the CUs potentially eligible for
LICU conversion after the NCUA's revised regulatory roll out. The log of one plus the number
of CUs located in these census tracts is our measure of a bank's potential exposure to
competition. To approximate better the NCUA's subsequent revised rule, which uses the 2010
Census data to establish eligibility, we use census tract and national median income data in 2010
when computing potential eligibility.
       Clearly, having data on the actual income of each CU member would allow us to
compute whether a simple majority of a CU's membership meet the income requirement,
eliminating any measurement error in the first stage. But neither we nor the NCUA have such
data. Instead, the NCUA uses a similar, but less coarse approach to ours, imputing members'
income based on the median income of the census tract in which the member lives. Of course,
we have already seen evidence in Table 2 that CUs located in lower income census tracts are
significantly more likely to become LICUs under the revised legal standard.
       The first stage results in column 1 of Table 7 is consistent with this previous evidence.
The dependent variable is the difference between the log of the average number of LICUs within
10 miles of a bank's headquarters in 2008Q1-2012Q1 and the log of the average number over
2012 Q2-2015Q4. The point estimate suggests that a 10 percent increase in the number of
potentially eligible CUs in 2008 is associated with a 2.3 percentage point increase in the log
change in the average number of LICUs within 10 miles of a bank's headquarters (p-



                                                    18
value=0.00). The F-statistic is 28.01in the first stage, suggesting that the instrument satisfies the
relevance condition.
        The evidence in Tables 3 and 4 showing no pre-trends in the balance sheets of either
banks or CUs in the quarters before low-income designation strongly suggest that the exclusion
restriction assumption is plausible. To wit, a bank's exposure to low-income CU competition is
unlikely to be related to unobserved demand shocks at the bank. But to address further any
possible violations of the exclusion restriction stemming from the fact that potentially eligible
CUs are likely to be located in poorer neighborhoods with possibly weaker credit demand, we
include a third order polynomial of the log of the median tract income in which the bank is
located (column 2). As always, the results are invariant to these controls.
        Building on this first stage evidence, column 3 presents the IV estimate of the impact of
the change in the number of LICUs on bank lending; the instrument is the log number of
potentially eligible CUs within 10 miles of a bank's headquarters in 2008. The IV point estimate
is about 40 percent larger than its OLS counterpart and significant at the 5 percent level. The
lifting of deposit restrictions was a principal component of low-income conversion, and column
4 of Table 7 uses the change in deposits scaled by assets as the dependent variable. The IV point
estimate is about 90 percent larger than the corresponding OLS coefficient, and suggests that a
one standard deviation increase in the growth in the number of LICUs is associated with a 0.16
percentage point or 0.07 standard deviation decrease in the average change in deposits. That is,
increased competition may have led to an erosion of market share on both sides of a bank's
balance sheet.
        The variation in bank size can help gauge the importance of the competition hypothesis in
explaining these results. CUs and smaller banks are very close substitutes. Both types of
institutions operate in the same geographic markets and compete for similar customers. Under
the competition hypothesis then, an increase in LICUs should have a bigger impact on
geographically proximate smaller banks. Using the variation in bank sizes can also address
concerns that the large scale regulatory changes in banking during the sample period might
distort inference.18 Smaller banks were exempted from most of these regulatory changes, though


18
  Dodd-Frank and Basel increased capital and liquidity standards, mainly for banks with assets in excess
of $50 billion. Also, the Durbin Amendment imposed a cap on interchange fees, though banks
below $10 billion in assets were exempted. Liquidity regulations were formalized in early 2013 (the liquidity
coverage ratio) and in 2014 (the net stable funding ratio), with gradual implementation thereafter.

                                                             19
the "qualified mortgage rule" could disproportionately affect these banks. But CUs were
themselves not major players in this market and were equally affected by the rule.
           Column 5 of Table 7 interacts the log change in the number LICUs with the log size of
the bank averaged over 2007. The dependent variable in column 5 is the scaled change in
lending. Consistent with the prediction that banks that are close substitutes to CUs face greater
competition from newly converted LICUs, the interaction term is positive and economically and
statistically significant. At the 10th percentile of the bank size distribution, a one standard
deviation increase in the growth in LICUs is associated with a 1.4 percentage point drop in
average lending. This effect is about 75 percent smaller in absolute value for a bank at the
median size (Figure 9). Column 6, which uses the scaled change in deposits as the dependent
variable, reveals even larger effects. The implied effect of competition is about 90 percent larger
at the 10th percentile of the size distribution relative to the median (Figure 10).

3.2.1 Specialization and Selection
           In the context of CUs and banks, theories of oligopolistic rent generation through
substitution and specialization can further distinguish the competition hypothesis from other
explanations.19 CUs mainly specialize in consumer loans, and traditionally face regulatory
barriers on expanding their business lending, such as commercial and industrial (C&I) loans. 20
The resulting increase in LICU competition concentrated in the consumer lending segment--
auto and personal loans--can significantly shrink bank profit margins in this market segment.
Indeed, some models of adverse selection and competition predict that the increased competition
could cause banks to face expected losses from consumer lending at the extensive margin. To
wit, LICUs can combine their additional lending capacity with their local knowledge to "cherry
pick" the more profitable consumers, leaving the community banks with an adversely selected
sample of consumers (Broecker 1990). In response to shrinking margins in the consumer
segment, models of competition predict that banks would substitute lending towards market


19
     Classic references include Salop (1979) and Spence (1976).

20
   Federal regulations restrain CU competition in commercial lending, capping a credit union's member business
lending--commercial and industrial loans--to either 1.75 times the net worth of a well-capitalized credit union or
12.25 percent of total assets. See the Credit Union Membership Access Act (CUMAA) (P.L.105-219) passed in
1998.



                                                              20
segments, like C&I lending, where CUs face regulatory barriers to entry and margins are higher
on account of less competition.
        Table 8 evaluates this substitution hypothesis. The dependent variable in column 1 is the
change in C&I lending, scaled by assets. A one standard deviation increase in the growth in
LICUs is associated with a 0.03 percentage point or 0.15 standard deviation increase in the
change in C&I lending. Column 2 shows that exposure to LICU competition also increases the
relative importance of C&I lending in the bank's loan portfolio. A one standard deviation
increase in the growth in LICU exposure suggests a 0.12 standard deviation increase in the ratio
of C&I to total loans. This evidence of substitution towards C&I lending among banks in
conjunction with the increase in consumer lending among newly converted LICUs is difficult to
reconcile with endogeneity narratives that view LICU growth as a proxy for weak local demand
for credit.
        Economic theory also observes that competition can affect the profitability of incumbent
banks. Well known arguments predict that competitive pressures on both sides of the balance
sheet can compress interest rate margins and reduce profits. Of course, competitive pressures that
push incumbents to specialize in higher margin businesses, and become more efficient could
have the opposite effect on profits. Moreover, the "entry" of LICUs into local banking markets
could also create selection pressures, forcing inefficient or less adaptable banks to fail, merge or
otherwise exit the sample, leaving behind a selected sample of the more profitable incumbents.
        Column 3 of Table 8 suggests that exposure to competition is associated with increased
profitability. The dependent variable is the average return on assets. The LICU growth point
estimate is positive and significant in both the OLS and IV specifications. The latter suggests that
a one standard deviation increase in the growth in LICUs is associated with a 0.16 standard
deviation increase in the average return on assets. To understand the possible link between
competition, risk-taking and profitability, column 4 uses the bank's Z-score. This is defined as
the sum of a bank's return on assets plus capitalization divided by the standard deviation of the
return on assets. In the absence of loan level data, the Z-score is a common albeit imperfect
proxy of risk-taking, with lower values generally indicating a riskier asset profile relative to the
bank's capacity to bear losses and remain solvent.
        From column 4, the point estimate on the growth in the number of LICUs is positive,
suggesting that not only did the return on assets increase in the period after banks became more

                                                     21
exposed to competition, but that incumbent banks' earnings became less volatile relative to their
capacity to bear losses. Column 5 provides more direct evidence of this channel, using the
standard deviation of the return on assets computed for each of the two periods as the dependent
variable. It shows that increased competition from LICUs is associated with a decline in the
realized volatility of earnings.
        Non-interest expenses are another dimension through which competition might affect
profitability. Increased competition and the compression of interest rate margins might force
banks to reduce non-interest expenses to augment profitability. But in the current context the
effects of competition can be ambiguous, as marketing, information gathering costs and other
adjustment expenses related to the substitution away from consumer lending and into C&I and
other higher margin businesses could increase. To gauge the effects of competition on these
expenses, column 8 uses the ratio of non-interest expense to assets--a common measure of
efficiency--as the dependent variable. The growth in exposure to LICUs is associated with an
increase in this ratio.


3.2.2 Tax Rates
        In addition to moving into possibly higher margin C&I loans, economic theory also
observes that selection pressures from increased competition can increase the probability of
failure among banks not able to shift easily their lending to higher margin businesses. This
selection effect could also explain the increased profitability among the surviving banks.
Moreover, CUs are exempt from most state and federal taxes and the variation in tax rates across
states is likely a key mediating mechanism through which LICU competition affects bank
solvency. In states with high tax rates, banks operate at a significant cost disadvantage when
competing with LICUs. For example, the relative tax advantage of LICUs in these states might
allow LICUs to undercut banks in loan pricing. The state-level variation in corporate taxes thus
provides another means of identifying the effects of increased LICU competition on bank
outcomes.
        Table 9 investigates the effects of competition, selection pressures and tax-rates on bank-
level outcomes. Columns 1 and 2 estimate separately the baseline change in lending specification
separately for banks in below median corporate tax states and for those in above median states.
There is significant evidence that the negative impact of LICU competition on changes in bank

                                                    22
lending is significantly larger in higher tax states. The point estimate on the growth in the
number of LICUs in column 2--the high tax states--is twice the size of the coefficient in
column 1--the latter itself is not significant at conventional levels (p-value=0.14).
       This loss of lending opportunities due to competition can cause some banks to exit the
sample and we focus on possible selection pressures. The dependent variable in column 3 equals
1 if a bank failed between 2012Q1 and 2015Q4--the period in which LICU conversion began--
and 0 otherwise. Column 3 uses the full sample of states and the LICU growth coefficient is
positive but not statistically significant (p-value=0.17). However, column 4 (5) re-estimates the
specification separately for banks headquartered in states with below (above) median tax rates.
Among the banks headquartered in low-tax states, the LICU growth point estimate is both
economically and statistically insignificant, suggesting that competition from these institutions
has no effect on the probability of failure. But for banks headquarted in higher-tax states (column
5), there is robust evidence that competitive pressures from LICUs increased the probability of
failure (p-value=0.03). A one standard deviation increase in the growth in the number of LICUs
is associated with a 2.1 percent increase in the probability of failure in this subsample.

4. Credit Policy, Non-Banks and the Extensive Margin
       Increased competition from LICUs is associated with greater efficiency and profitability
at community banks, as well as a contraction in overall intermediation among these banks. In
part, this reflects banks' substitution towards possibly higher margin businesses like C&I
lending, as well as the exit of smaller banks, especially those that operate at a tax disadvantage
relative to CUs. However, this evidence on the effects of competition is incomplete. Regulatory
balance sheet data are too aggregated to measure whether competition expands credit at the
extensive margin. Balance sheet aggregates also make it difficult to measure the effects of
competition on risk-taking. For example, the Z-score might take several years to detect a bank's
shift in credit policy favoring riskier borrowers. Equally important, non-bank financial
institutions, such as captives and other finance companies, are major suppliers of consumer
credit and go unmeasured in most regulatory data.
       Therefore, this subsection provides more direct tests of the effects of competition using
detailed micro-data on automobile lending--one of the key areas of lending expansion after low-
income CU designation. In particular, we use the Federal Reserve Bank of New York/Equifax
Consumer Credit Panel (CCP) to compute the sum of car purchases that are financed through

                                                     23
auto loans in each zip code from the first half of 2009 through the second half of 2017­the data
are observed only at the 6 month frequency. 21 While the CCP does not identify the lender, in this
version of the data set, it does identify whether the lender was a bank, a CU, or a non-bank
lender such as a car manufacturer's financing arm or a private pool of capital. The CCP data also
contain information on a borrower's Equifax Risk Score, a major credit score created by Equifax
and used by lenders to evaluate potential default risk of borrowers.
           We can thus measure whether increased competition is associated with a reallocation of
consumer credit to riskier borrowers--such as those with lower Equifax Risk Scores. We can
also measure the response of non-banks and other lenders. And since the CCP is representative
of the credit using population, it can also help us to determine whether increased competition
leads to an aggregate expansion in automotive credit at the extensive margin or results in
substitution away from incumbents towards the new low-income CU entrants.
           To construct these tests, we use a difference-in-difference specification similar to
equation (1). We first compute the log number of newly financed cars at the zip code level in
half-year intervals, and then define an indicator variable that equals 1 in the half year interval
that a zip code is first exposed to a low-income CU and zero otherwise. We also include leads of
this first exposure variable to capture any pre-existing trends and lags that measure the impact of
first exposure on car originations at the extensive margin. We use county by time fixed effects to
absorb all demand shocks to the county within each half-year interval. The baseline also includes
the log number of CUs itself in each zip code.
           Table 10 shows that increased competition is associated with an expansion in automobile
lending at the extensive margin. Column 1 uses the log of one plus total originations from all
sources of finance. In the first 6-month interval that a zip code is exposed to a low-income CU,
the number of car originations increase by 1.2 percent; this effect increases to about 2.2 percent
one year afterwards, and the total number of car originations is about 3 percent higher 18 months
or more after a zip code is first exposed to a low-income CU. There is no evidence of any pre-
trend. Column 2 uses only car loan originations by CUs, and in this case, the long-run impact of




21
     This is the FRBNY CCP/Equifax auto trade line data which covers all the auto loans at the account level.



                                                               24
low-income competition is similar: the number car loans originated by CUs increase by about 2.5
percent 18 months and beyond after first exposure.
       We also saw previously that when faced with increased LICU competition, banks
accommodated entry by contracting lending in the consumer segment, shifting instead towards
commercial and industrial loans. Consistent with this pattern in the balance sheet data, column 3
shows that among banks the impact of increased competition on car origination is insignificant.
Instead, non-banks, with few alternative lending markets, appear to respond to increased LICU
competition by aggressively fighting for market share. From column 4, the non-bank response to
competition appears immediate. First exposure to a low-income CU in the zip code suggests a
1.6 percent increase in the number of car loans originated by non-banks in that half-year. In the
long run, non-bank originations rise by about 4 percent. A concern here is that aggregate shocks,
such as regulatory changes, funding shocks or low interest rates, and a search for yield might
explain the penetration in non-bank automotive credit across zip codes. In results available upon
request, we allow for zip code specific time trends; the results remain unchanged.
       Table 11 suggests that this expansion in auto credit in response to competition is tilted
towards riskier borrowers--those with below median Equifax Risk Scores. For each type of
lender, we compute the ratio of newly made auto loans extended to borrowers with below
median Equifax Risk Scores to the total number of newly made auto loans by the same type of
lender in each zip code-6 month cell. We continue to use the same difference-in-difference setup.
Column 1 uses loans made by all kinds of lenders, while the remaining columns disaggregate by
CUs, banks and non-banks. It shows that 18 months and beyond after first exposure to a low-
income CU, the ratio of new loans to borrowers with below median Risk Scores relative to all
new loans increases by 0.74 percentage points in the zip code. Among CUs (column 2) this long
run effect is about 1.1 percentage points, while non-banks increase this ratio by about 0.6
percentage points. As before, there is no significant response among banks, and there is no
evidence of any pre-trend.
       Table 12 shows that this increase in automotive credit on account of greater competition
is also associated with a significant increase in non-performing loans. We use 2017 Q2 as the
end point and compute the log of the total number of non-performing auto-loans from the CCP
data within the zip code. Note that a non-performing auto loan is defined as one more than 30
days overdue. Other county-level controls, such as demographics and economic indicators, are

                                                     25
included in the regressions. From column 1, a one standard deviation increase in the change in
number of LICUs over this period is associated with a 11 percent rise in the number of
delinquent car loans, regardless of origination source. Not surprisingly, columns 2 and 3 show
that the effects are largest among loans made by CUs and non-banks. The impact on banks is
significant but economically smaller--about half that of non-banks (columns 5 ­ 8) also
measures non-performing loans in terms of the share of total loans­the results are similar.
       Table 13 disaggregates the impact of competition on non-performing loans by Equifax
Risk Score. The evidence shows that the effects are clearly concentrated among borrowers with
worse Equifax Risk Scores. The coefficient estimates are mostly statistically significant for the
first and second quartiles or Equifax Risk Scores. A 10 percent increase in the change in number
of LICUs between 2010 and 2013 is associated with a 12 percent higher number of delinquent
car loans in 2017 for all types of institutions among loans with the lowest Equifax Risk Scores.
In contrast, a 10 percent increase in the number of LICUs over the same period is associated with
only a 4-5 percent higher number of delinquent car loans by all institutions in 2017 for the two
middle quartiles of the Equifax Risk Scores. The coefficient estimates are not statistically
significant for the safest borrowers, and as before, the impacts are largest among the non-bank
lenders.
5. Conclusion
       This paper has studied the effects of increased competition using regulatory changes that
lifted deposit-taking restrictions at credit unions. We find that increased competition in the
consumer credit segment from credit unions elicited very different response between banks and
non-banks. In response to this competition, banks increasingly specialized in relationship
business lending, and surviving banks became more profitable, as competition increased failures
among banks in higher tax states. In contrast, non-banks aggressively fought entry in the auto-
loan segment, resulting in a reallocation of automotive credit towards riskier borrowers. There is
also evidence that increased competition is associated with higher subsequent delinquencies.
       Taken together, these results point to the benefits of increased competition in relaxing
financing constraints for marginalized borrowers. But consistent with models of competition and
fragility, these results also show that increased competition can potentially lead to a reallocation
of credit to riskier borrowers. Because much of this shift in credit policy is concentrated in the



                                                     26
unregulated sector, increased supervision of depository institutions are unlikely to mitigate fully
the risks associated with greater competition.
       There are a number of limitations with our approach. Most conspicuously, while non-
banks change their credit policy relative to banks, this paper does not identify why this difference
emerges. And we leave it to future work to understand better whether this shift in credit policy
reflects agency problems at non-bank institutions that is amplified by securitization; whether it
stems from the fact that funding costs at shadow banks are not affected by local competition; or
whether supervisory oversight prevent banks from pursuing a similar shift in credit policy in
response to increased competition. We also leave it to future research to understand better how
management incentives within banks determine their shift to business lending in response to
competition in the consumer segment.




                                                    27
                                                 Figures and Tables

Figure 1: Low Income Rule Regulatory Timeline and Background




This figure shows the timeline of the regulatory changes surrounding the low income credit union rule. The 1993
rule was based on the "household income" standard: If 50 percent or more of a CU's membership had household
income below 80 percent of the national median income, then the CU was eligible for "low-income" designation.
Cost-of-living adjustments were possible using the Department of Labor's administrative data. The NCUA's 2006
task force noted that this 1993 rule was inconsistent with the subsequent adoption of the family income standard by
other federal agencies when defining economically undeserved areas. The NCUA also noted that the Department of
Labor based adjustment for high cost areas was geographically incomplete. The 2010 Q2 linking of eligibility to the
supervisory exam notes that:
          "NCUA will make the determination of whether a majority of a FCU's members are low-income based on
          data it obtains during the examination process. This will involve linking member address information to
          publicly available information from the U.S. Census Bureau to estimate member earnings. Using
          automated, geo-coding software, NCUA will use member street addresses collected during FCU
          examinations to determine the geographic area and metropolitan area for each member account. NCUA
          will then use income information for the geographic area from the Census Bureau and assign estimated
          earnings to each member." (
Additional Background:
Competitive pressures between banks and CUs have long led to legal and legislative battles. Beginning in the mid
1970s, the American Bankers Association (ABA) sued to stop CUs from offering interest bearing checking
accounts; Congress eventually sided with the CU industry. In the 1990s, the ABA sued to stop the formation of CUs
based on multiple common bonds. The Supreme Court sided with the ABA, but Congress quickly allowed multiple
common bonds, in exchange for restrictions on CU business lending. More recently, community bankers sued the
NCUA in 2016 to stop CUs from purchasing commercial loans and loan participation originated by other institutions
without counting these loans against their restrictions on business lending--the courts sided with the NCUA. The
ABA also filed suit against the NCUA in 2016 because of a loosening of field of membership restrictions for
community-chartered CUs that allowed these institutions to serve large geographic areas; this case remains in
litigation. See the surveys in https://www.americanbanker.com/news/credit-unions-vs-banks-how-we-got-here.




                                                            28
Figure 2: Low Income Credit Unions, by Number 2008Q1-2016Q1




                                             29
Figure 3: Low Income Credit Unions, by Assets 2008Q1-2016Q1




                                              30
Figure 4: The impact of low-income designation on the percent change in deposits at CUs




This figure plots the regression estimates of the impact of low income designation on the percent change in deposits
of credit unions over the sample period of 2009-2015, as in column 1 of Table 3. The top panel plots the individual
point estimates (dots) and 95 percent confidence intervals (lines) of the low income designation dummy and its lead
and lag values around the designation. The bottom panel plots the cumulative sum of the individual coefficients in
the year before; the year after and more than one year after low-income designation.




                                                             31
Figure 5: The impact of low-income designation on the change in lending at CUs




This figure plots the regression estimates of the impact of low income designation on changes in lending (scaled by
assets in the previous quarter) of credit unions over the sample period of 2009-2015, as in column 3 of Table 3. The
bottom panel plots the cumulative sum of the individual coefficients in the year before; the year after and more than
one year after low-income designation.




                                                              32
Figure 6: First exposure to LICUs and the change in deposits at banks




This figure plots the regression estimates of the impact of banks' first exposure of low income credit unions on
changes in deposits (scaled by assets in the previous quarter) of banks over the sample period of 2009-2015, as in
column 1 of Table 4. The top panel plots the individual point estimates (dots) and 95 percent confidence intervals
(lines) of the low income designation dummy and its lead and lag values around the designation. The bottom panel
plots the cumulative sum of the individual coefficients in the year before; the year after and more than one year after
low-income designation.


                                                              33
Figure 7: First exposure to LICUs and the change in lending at banks




This figure plots the regression estimates of the impact of banks' first exposure of low income credit unions on
changes in lending (scaled by assets in the previous quarter) of banks over the sample period of 2009-2015, as in
column 2 of Table 4. The top panel plots the individual point estimates (dots) and 95 percent confidence intervals
(lines) of the low income designation dummy and its lead and lag values around the designation.

                                                             34
Figure 8: Using Potential Eligibility to Determine a Bank's Exposure to LICU Competition
                            A.                                                         B.




This figure illustrates the identification strategy in Table 7. In panel A, three CUs are located within 10 miles of the
bank. Of the three, one CU is headquarted in a census tract with median income that is 80 percent or less of the
national median income (the hatched triangle). This CU is thus potentially eligible for low-income designation after
the 2012 Q2 regulatory roll-out. Panel B shows the bank's exposure to LICU competition after this 2012 Q2 roll-
out, and the conversion of the potentially eligible CU to low-income status (dark triangle).




                                                               35
Figure 9: The marginal impact of low-income credit union growth on lending at banks




This figure plots the marginal impact of a one standard deviation increase in LICU growth on the change in lending
at different sized banks using the estimates from column 5 of Table 7. The dots are the estimated impact and the bars
denote their 95 percent confidence bands.




                                                             36
Figure 10: The marginal impact of low-income credit union (LICU) growth on deposits at banks




This figure plots the marginal impact of a one standard deviation increase in LICU growth on the change in deposits
at different sized banks using the estimates from column 6 of Table 7. The dots are the estimated impact and the bars
denote their 95 percent confidence bands.




                                                             37
Table 1: Summary Statistics

                              Panel A. Summary Statistics for Credit Unions, 2009-2015
                        Total Assets Loans/Assets Deposits/Assets Total Equity/Assets
mean                         125,263           0.53                 0.85       0.14
median                        16,342           0.54                 0.87       0.12
25th percentile                4,385           0.41                 0.83       0.09
75th percentile               61,861           0.66                 0.90       0.16
standard deviation           758,010           0.18                 0.07       0.07
Observations                   8,161          8,161                8,161      8,161
                                Panel B. Summary Statistics Community Banks, 2009-2015
                      Total Assets Loans/Assets   Deposits/Assets Total Equity/Assets
mean                       311,336            0.62              0.84             0.12
median                     150,441            0.64              0.85             0.12
25th percentile             75,968            0.54              0.81             0.10
75th percentile            314,701            0.72              0.88             0.13
standard deviation         604,727            0.14              0.07             0.29
Observations                 7,732           7,709             7,732            7,709
                            Panel C. Summary Statistics for Multi-Market Banks, 2009-2015
                     Total Assets      Loans/Assets Deposits/Assets       Total Equity/Assets
mean                      10,247,080            0.53                 0.66       0.09
median                       667,834            0.63                 0.77       0.11
25th percentile              162,192            0.36                 0.65       0.03
75th percentile            2,762,236            0.74                 0.84       0.13
standard deviation        69,744,006            0.28                 0.28       0.07
Observations                   1,205           1,205                1,205      1,205
          Panel D. Summary Statistics for Low-Income Designated CUs, 2012-2015
                      Total Assets Loans/Assets Deposits/Assets Total Equity/Assets
mean                         121,497           0.52                 0.86       0.13
median                        19,291           0.53                 0.88       0.11
25th percentile                4,898           0.39                 0.84       0.09
75th percentile               73,257           0.66                 0.90       0.14
standard deviation           378,871           0.18                 0.06       0.06
Observations                   2,640          2,640                2,640      2,640
                       Panel E. Summary Statistics for Non-Low-Income Designated CUs, 2012-2015
                      Total Assets Loans/Assets     Deposits/Assets Total Equity/Assets
mean                       170,579            0.50              0.86             0.13
median                      23,670            0.50              0.88             0.11
25th percentile              6,896            0.37              0.84             0.09
75th percentile             85,337            0.63              0.90             0.15
standard deviation       1,003,952            0.18              0.07             0.07
Observations                 6,049           6,049             6,049            6,049




                                                              38
Panel F. Automotive lending, market shares for credit unions, banks and non-banks
                      2009-2017                  2012-2017
                                 Overall Market Share
Credit Unions            0.25                           0.25
Banks                    0.28                           0.27
Non-Banks                0.47                           0.48
                       Market Share, by Equifax Risk Score Quartiles
                       2009-2017                 2012-2017
 1st quartile
  Credit unions              0.18                             0.17
  Banks                      0.15                             0.14
  Non-banks                  0.67                             0.69
 2nd quartile
  Credit unions              0.28                             0.28
  Banks                      0.27                             0.26
  Non-banks                  0.45                             0.46
 3rd quartile
  Credit unions              0.27                             0.28
  Banks                      0.35                             0.34
  Non-banks                  0.38                             0.38
 4th quartile
  Credit unions              0.27                             0.27
  Banks                      0.32                             0.31
  Non-banks                  0.41                             0.42
Panel A of this table reports summary statistics for all credit unions over the period 2009-2015. Panel B reports
summary statistics for the sample of community banks, as defined by the FDIC. Panel C focuses on the non-
community (multi-market) banks in the sample period. Panel D reports summary statistics for those credit unions
that eventually became "low-income" between 2012Q1 and end-2015. Panel C focuses on the sample of credit
unions that did not become "low-income". "Total assets" are in thousands of dollars. Panel F uses data from the
FRBNY CCP/Equifax Data to report the market shares for credit unions, banks and non-banks in aggregate
automotive lending for various sample periods. It also reports market shares by Equifax Risk Score quartiles; "1st
quartile" are Equifax Risk Scores in the bottom quartile ("highest credit risk").




                                                             39
Table 2: Probability of Low Income Designation and Census Tract Relative Income, 2009-2015

                                                                       (1)                (2)              (3)
VARIABLES

ratio of tract to national median income                           -0.695***          -0.560**          -1.558***
                                                                     (0.147)           (0.285)             (0.599)
 median income of census tract, log, 2010                                              -0.143               -0.318
                                                                                       (0.203)             (0.279)
 total equity/assets, 2007-2008                                                      -2.604***          -3.123***
                                                                                       (0.922)             (0.980)
 average assets, 2007-2008, log                                                       -0.00940           -0.00744
                                                                                      (0.0300)            (0.0303)
 average ROA, 2008-2007                                                                -0.728               -1.002
                                                                                       (1.092)             (1.126)
 average loans/assets, 2007-2008                                                        0.279                0.382
                                                                                       (0.272)             (0.294)
 percent of African-Americans                                                                                0.338
                                                                                                           (0.544)
 population per square mile                                                                             0.0311***
                                                                                                         (0.00516)
 Observations                                                          4,450              4,450              4,094
This table studies the determinants of low-income credit union (LICU) conversion. The dependent variable equals 1
if a CU becomes a low-income credit union (LICU) between 2009 and 2015 and 0 otherwise. The sample consists of
all CUs that are not LICUs in 2008. The estimates are obtained using logit, and all regressions include state fixed
effects and the standard errors are clustered at the state-level; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. "tract income" is the
median income of the census tract in which a CU is headquartered. All demographic and income data come from the
2010 US Census. The CU balance sheet data come from the CU call report and are averaged over the 2007-2008
period.




                                                              40
Table 3: The Impact of Low Income Designation on Credit Unions' Outcomes
                                          (1)              (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)        (8)             (9)
                                                Deposits
VARIABLES                              % change     scaled by assets    Loans       Cars     Real Estate Loans/Assets     ROA        Assets    Marketing Expenses

more than one year after designation   0.175***         0.149***       0.173***   0.0800**    0.0346      1.495***      0.0234**    0.196***       0.0564***
                                       (0.0622)         (0.0525)       (0.0541)   (0.0381)   (0.0227)      (0.369)      (0.00935)   (0.0556)        (0.0184)
4 quarters after designation             0.143            0.114        0.204***   0.179***    -0.0126     0.862***      0.0433**     0.174*        0.0508***
                                        (0.108)         (0.0909)       (0.0715)   (0.0513)   (0.0278)      (0.319)       (0.0217)   (0.0931)        (0.0177)
3 quarters after designation           0.319***         0.279***       0.265***   0.144***    0.0308       0.738**       -0.00491   0.328***        0.0414**
                                        (0.107)         (0.0905)       (0.0704)   (0.0505)   (0.0289)      (0.302)       (0.0175)   (0.0929)        (0.0173)
2 quarters after designation           0.231**          0.189**        0.286***   0.152***    0.0544*      0.693**        0.0154    0.273***        0.0400**
                                       (0.0982)         (0.0831)       (0.0701)   (0.0478)   (0.0283)      (0.288)       (0.0154)   (0.0859)        (0.0167)
1 quarters after designation             0.117            0.102        0.169***   0.124***   -0.00749      0.514*         0.0146      0.106          0.0204
                                       (0.0942)         (0.0797)       (0.0651)   (0.0453)   (0.0264)      (0.269)       (0.0225)   (0.0824)        (0.0156)
quarter of designation                   0.0551           0.0417         0.101     0.0442     0.0290        0.376        0.00788     0.0473         0.0286*
                                       (0.0952)         (0.0801)       (0.0650)   (0.0446)   (0.0267)      (0.256)       (0.0112)   (0.0824)        (0.0147)
1 quarters before designation            0.115            0.110         0.0583     0.0553     0.0125        0.317        0.00905      0.122         0.00912
                                       (0.0966)         (0.0817)       (0.0615)   (0.0446)   (0.0262)      (0.239)       (0.0132)   (0.0839)        (0.0140)
2 quarters before designation            0.121            0.0840        0.0656     0.0604     -0.0296       0.262         0.0159      0.115          0.0179
                                       (0.0934)         (0.0790)       (0.0616)   (0.0439)   (0.0252)      (0.224)       (0.0110)   (0.0818)        (0.0131)
3 quarters before designation            0.109            0.0980        0.0365     0.0493     -0.0138       0.219         0.0124     0.142*         -0.00413
                                       (0.0937)         (0.0786)       (0.0609)   (0.0419)   (0.0251)      (0.207)       (0.0173)   (0.0812)        (0.0129)
4 quarters before designation           -0.0208          -0.0209        0.0412      0.078    -0.00653       0.244       0.0240**     0.00669        0.00279
                                       (0.0899)         (0.0765)       (0.0565)   (0.0400)   (0.0235)      (0.190)      (0.00994)   (0.0788)        (0.0121)
Observations                            192,455          192,455        192,455    192,332    192,455      192,455        192,453    192,455         192,097
R-squared                                0.380            0.385          0.325      0.279      0.297        0.915          0.100      0.372           0.969

This table estimates the difference-in-difference framework in equation (1) using quarterly data on credit unions
over the sample period 2009-2015. Columns 2-5 uses the quarter-on-quarter change in the variable scaled by assets
in the previous quarter and multiplied by 100; columns 1 and 8 are percent changes. All columns include credit
union and county-by-year-quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the credit union level (7,064
clusters); and (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Figures 5 and 6 plot the coefficients (dots) and 95 percent
confidence banks (lines) in columns 1 and 3 respectively.




                                                                                   41
Table 4: The impact of first exposure to low-income credit unions (LICUs) on banks
                                                                (1)          (2)                  (3)
                                                                   change in:
VARIABLES                                                     deposits     Loans                 ROA

postyear                                                     -1.833***        -0.752**         0.0487
                                                               (0.637)         (0.355)        (0.0319)
4 quarters after exposure to LICU                              -1.092*        -0.691**         0.0340
                                                               (0.610)         (0.330)        (0.0310)
3 quarters after exposure to LICU                              -0.943*        -0.650**         0.0423
                                                               (0.570)         (0.315)        (0.0283)
2 quarters after exposure to LICU                            -1.587***          -0.258         0.0283
                                                               (0.531)         (0.305)        (0.0282)
1 quarters after exposure to LICU                             -1.035**         -0.0572         0.0306
                                                               (0.462)         (0.278)        (0.0242)
first exposure to LICU                                         -0.708*          -0.339         0.0258
                                                               (0.420)         (0.249)        (0.0232)
1 quarters before exposure to LICU                              -0.432          -0.232         0.00958
                                                               (0.394)         (0.234)        (0.0222)
2 quarters before exposure to LICU                             -0.598*         -0.0407         0.0247
                                                               (0.356)         (0.217)        (0.0193)
3 quarters before exposure to LICU                              -0.326          0.0247         0.0211
                                                               (0.282)         (0.179)        (0.0150)
4 quarters before exposure to LICU                              -0.118         -0.0874        0.000104
                                                               (0.218)         (0.128)        (0.0143)
Observations                                                  175,296         174,831          175,837
R-squared                                                       0.321            0.470          0.678

This table estimates the impact of community banks' first exposure to a low-income credit union (LICU). The
variable "first exposure to LICU" equals one in the quarter a bank first becomes exposed to a LICU that is within 5
miles of the bank's headquarters; this variable is 0 otherwise. The sample period is 2009-2015. Columns 1 and 2
multiply the quarter-on-quarter change in the dependent variable by 100 and divide by assets in the previous quarter.
"ROA" is the return on assets. All columns include bank-by-year fixed effects; year by quarter fixed effects and
county fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level (7,427 clusters); and (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1). Figures 6 and 7 depict the coefficients (dots) and 95 percent confidence banks (lines) in columns 1 and 2
respectively.




                                                             42
Table 5: The impact of low-income credit union (LICU) growth on nearby banks in the cross-
section, OLS
                                               (1)                  (2)          (3)                (4)           (5)
                                                                          change in loans scaled by assets
VARIABLES                            percent change in loans   baseline     house prices     constant sample    income

growth in number of LICUS, 5 miles          -0.567**           -0.256**       -0.185*           -0.171         -0.256**
                                             (0.239)           (0.0992)        (0.112)          (0.111)        (0.0998)
average change in house prices                                                 0.0477
                                                                              (0.0396)
log of tract income                                                                                            -0.262***
                                                                                                                (0.0838)

Observations                                 5,944              5,945          2,393             2,393          5,386
R-squared                                    0.067              0.048          0.060             0.060          0.054
This table estimates the impact of the growth in the number of LICUs within 5 miles of a bank's headquarters on the
average change in the bank's lending--Equation (2) in the text. The unit of observation is a bank. The analysis
divides the sample into two periods: 2008Q1-2012Q1 and 2012Q2-2015Q4. For each bank, the change in lending is
averaged over each of the two periods. The dependent variable is the difference in the average change in lending
between the two periods. The growth in the number of LICUs is the difference between the log of 1 plus the average
number of LICUs within 5 miles a bank between the two periods. All regressions include state fixed effects and
standard errors are clustered (49 clusters) at the state-level. (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                               43
Table 6: The impact of low-income credit union (LICU) growth on nearby bank lending in the
cross-section, OLS, various distances
                                                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
VARIABLES                                     5 miles      10 miles    20 miles     30 miles     40 miles    50 miles

growth in number of LICUS                     -0.256**    -0.204**      -0.101       -0.131*    -0.114**      -0.112
                                              (0.0992)    (0.0843)     (0.0808)     (0.0681)    (0.0560)     (0.0663)
Observations                                    5,945       5,945        5,945        5,945       5,945        5,945
R-squared                                       0.054       0.054        0.052        0.053       0.053        0.053

This table estimates the impact of the growth in the number of LICUs, within various miles from a bank's
headquarters, on the average change in the bank's lending--Equation (2) in the text. Column (1) uses a 5 mile
radius; column 2: 10 miles; column 3: 20 miles; column 4: 30 miles; column 5: 40 miles; column 6: 50 miles. The
unit of observation is a bank (Equation (2)). The analysis divides the sample into two periods: 2008Q1-2012Q1 and
2012Q2-2015Q4. For each bank, the change in lending is averaged over each of the two periods. The dependent
variable is the difference in the average change in lending between the two periods. The growth in the number of
LICUs is the difference between the log of 1 plus the average number of LICUs within a given radii from a bank
between the two periods. All regressions include state fixed effects and standard errors are clustered (49 clusters) at
the state-level. (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                               44
Table 7: The impact of low-income credit union (LICU) growth on nearby banks in the cross-
section, IV
                                        (1)                   (2)           (3)                 (4)                (5)                (6)
VARIABLES                                      first stage           change in lending   change in deposits change in lending change in deposits


log number of eligible CUs, 2008      0.232***          0.229***
                                      (0.0276)          (0.0278)
growth in number of LICUS, 10 miles                                      -0.305*             -0.380*           -6.279***          -8.144***
                                                                         (0.154)             (0.198)             (1.433)            (1.913)
growth in number of LICUS*size                                                                                 0.468***            0.622***
                                                                                                                 (0.112)            (0.152)
Observations                           5,945                 5,386        5,386                5,386             5,219              5,219
R-squared                              0.441                 0.444        0.057                0.062             0.121              0.121

The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the growth in the number of LICUs within 10 miles of a bank's
headquarters. The "log number of eligible CUs, 2008" is the log of 1 plus the number of CUs located within 10
miles of a bank that are themselves (the CUs) headquartered in census tracts with median income that is 80 percent
or less of the national median income (all income data are from 2010 US census). Columns 2-6 includes a third
order polynomial of the log median income of the census tract in which the bank is headquartered. "size" is the log
of average assets in 2007. Columns 3-6 instrument the "growth in number of LICUs, 10 miles" with the "log number
of eligible CUs, 2008". The "first stage" F-statistic is 28.01 (p-value=0.00). Note that the unit of observation
remains the bank. As before, the analysis divides the sample into two periods: 2008Q1-2012Q1 and 2012Q2-
2015Q4. For each bank, the change in lending or deposits is averaged over each of the two periods. The dependent
variable is the difference in the average change in lending or deposits between the two periods. The growth in the
number of LICUs is the difference between the log of 1 plus the average number of LICUs within 10 miles a bank
between the two periods. All regressions include state fixed effects and standard errors are clustered (49 clusters) at
the state-level. (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). The marginal impact of the growth in the number of LICUs on the
dependent variable in columns (5) and (6) as a function of size are in Figures 9 and 10. The change in lending has a
mean of 0.21 with a standard deviation of 1.87. The change in deposits has a mean of -0.78 with a standard deviation
of 1.95.




                                                                       45
Table 8: The impact of low-income credit union (LICU) growth on nearby banks in the cross-
section, extension 1.
                                                                 Panel A. IV
                                              (1)               (2)               (3)        (4)        (5)                (6)
VARIABLES                             change in C&I loans C&I loans/loans        ROA       Z-Score   ROA StDev    Non-Interest Expenses

growth in number of LICUS, 10 miles       0.0823***           1.213***         0.121***    1.51**    -0.0772***          1.834*
                                           (0.0173)            (0.333)         (0.0222)    (0.703)     (0.0204)          (0.998)

Observations                                5,386              5,385             5,386      5,276      5,276             5,386
R-squared                                   0.020              0.028             0.072      0.016      0.050             0.016

                                                                 Panel B. OLS
                                              (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)                (6)
VARIABLES                             change in C&I loans C&I loans/loans     ROA          Z Score   ROA StDev    Non-Interest Expenses

growth in number of LICUS, 10 miles       0.0396***           0.786***         0.0536***   0.829**   -0.0389***          1.115*
                                           (0.0105)            (0.212)          (0.0103)   (0.396)    (0.00999)          (0.562)

Observations                                5,386              5,385             5,386      5,276      5,276             5,386
R-squared                                   0.025              0.030             0.079      0.017      0.052             0.017

Panel A instruments the "growth in number of LICUs, 10 miles" with the "log number of eligible CUs, 2008". The
"first stage" F-statistic is 28.01 (p-value=0.00). "C&I" loans are "commercial and industrial loans". All changes are
quarter on quarter and scaled by assets in the previous quarter. The Z-score is defined as the sum of a bank's return
on assets plus leverage divided by the standard deviation of the return on assets. "ROA" is the return on assets and
"ROA StDev" is the standard deviation of the return on assets. Note that the unit of observation remains the bank.
Panel B repeats Panel A using OLS. As before, the analysis divides the sample into two periods: 2008Q1-2012Q1
and 2012Q2-2015Q4. For each bank, the change in lending is averaged over each of the two periods. The dependent
variable is the difference in the average between the two periods. The growth in the number of LICUs is the
difference between the log of 1 plus the average number of LICUs within 10 miles a bank between the two periods.
All regressions include state fixed effects and standard errors are clustered (49 clusters) at the state-level. (***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                                          46
Table 9: The impact of low-income credit union (LICU) growth on nearby banks in the cross-
section, Extension 2
                                                       Panel A. IV
                                             (1)                 (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
                                                 change in lending                      probability of failure
VARIABLES                               low-tax states    high-tax states    full sample low-tax states high-tax states

growth in number of LICUS, 10 miles        -0.0867            -0.546**         0.0208       -0.000701       0.0520*
                                           (0.177)             (0.227)        (0.0158)       (0.0135)       (0.0255)

Observations                                3,067              2,319           5,386          3,067          2,319
R-squared                                   0.071              0.039           0.017          0.029          0.002

                                                       Panel B. OLS
                                             (1)                 (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
                                                 change in lending                      probability of failure
VARIABLES                               low-tax states     high-tax states   full sample low-tax states high-tax states

growth in number of LICUS, 10 miles         -0.156             -0.105         0.00446        -0.00470        0.0181
                                           (0.103)            (0.135)        (0.00846)      (0.00926)       (0.0138)

Observations                                3,067              2,319           5,386          3,067          2,319
R-squared                                   0.071              0.046           0.020          0.029          0.015
Panel A instruments the "growth in number of LICUs, 10 miles" with the "log number of eligible CUs, 2008". The
"first stage" F-statistic is 28.01 (p-value=0.00). "low-tax states" have below median corporate tax rates in 2009. In
columns 3-5, the dependent variable equals 1 if a bank failed between 2012Q2 and 2015 Q4. . The growth in the
number of LICUs is the difference between the log of 1 plus the average number of LICUs within 10 miles a bank
between the two periods. Panel B repeats Panel A using OLS. All regressions include state fixed effects, and a
polynomial of median income in the census tract in which a bank is headquartered; and standard errors are clustered
(49 clusters) at the state-level. (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). The change in lending has a mean of 0.21 with a
standard deviation of 1.87.




                                                                47
Table 10: Low-income credit unions (LICUs) and the number of auto loans in a zip code at the
extensive margin

                                                      (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)

                                                      all            credit
                                                 institutions        unions     banks      non-banks
12 months before exposure                             0.0076        0.0059        0.015       0.0086
                                                     (0.0052)       (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.0072)
 6 months before exposure                             0.0061        -0.0044      0.025**      0.0088
                                                     (0.0055)       (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.0076)
 first exposure to LICU                              0.012**         0.017       0.0077      0.016**
                                                     (0.0058)       (0.012)      (0.011)     (0.0079)
 6 month after exposure                             0.017***        0.0052        0.012      0.022***
                                                     (0.0060)       (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.0076)
 12 months after exposure                           0.022***         0.020       0.0085      0.033***
                                                     (0.0067)       (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.0083)
 18 months or more after first exposure             0.029***        0.025**       0.015      0.039***
                                                     (0.0057)       (0.011)     (0.0099)     (0.0066)
 N                                                   389914         389914       389914       389914
 R-sq                                                  0.967         0.910        0.878        0.949
This table estimates the impact of first exposure to a low-income credit union (LICU) on the log number of
originated auto loans (plus 1) inside a zip code-half year unit of observation between 2009 and 2017. "first exposure
to LICU" is an indicator variable that equal 1 in the 6 month period in which a zip code first has a low-income CU
and 0 otherwise. We also include two lags and leads of this indicator variable, as well as an indicator for 18 months
and beyond from when a zip-code first gets a low-income CU. Column 1 uses the log of 1 plus the number of all
auto loans originated in the zipcode-6 month period; column 2 uses only the log of 1 plus the number of loans
originated by credit unions inside the zipcode-6 month period; column 3 uses only loans originated by banks, while
column 4 uses the log of one plus the number of loans originated by non-banks in a zipcode-6 month unit. All
regressions control for the total number of credit unions in a zip code, zip code fixed effects, and county by time
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level and are reported in parentheses * p < 0.1, ** p <0.05,
*** p < 0.01. The source of the auto loan data is the FRBNY CCP/Equifax database. The differences between
banks, non-banks and credit unions at the 18 month exposure level are significant at the 5 percent level.




                                                                48
Table 11: Low-income credit unions (LICUs) and auto-loan portfolio risk

                                                       (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                                    Credit                   Non-
                                                All institutions    unions       Banks       banks
12 months before exposure                             0.0019          0.0015     0.0016        0.0015
                                                     (0.0024)       (0.0060) (0.0055) (0.0033)
 6 months before exposure                             0.0034          0.0018     0.0018        0.0035
                                                     (0.0023)       (0.0063) (0.0056) (0.0032)
 first exposure to LICU                               0.0040*         0.0071     0.0068      -0.00036
                                                     (0.0024)       (0.0058) (0.0057) (0.0032)
 6 month after exposure                               0.0045*        0.015**     0.0069       -0.0017
                                                     (0.0024)       (0.0063) (0.0058) (0.0032)
 12 months after exposure                           0.0078***         0.013*     0.0075       0.0062*
                                                     (0.0027)       (0.0068) (0.0059) (0.0033)
 18 months or more after first exposure             0.0074***        0.011**     0.0014      0.0059**
                                                     (0.0020)       (0.0048) (0.0042) (0.0025)
 N                                                    389914         309314      336042       357848
 R-sq                                                  0.778          0.439       0.461         0.700
This table estimates the impact of first exposure to a low-income credit union (LICU) on the share of riskier loans at
the zip code level. The unit of observation is zip code by half-years and the sample period is 2009-2017. The
dependent variable is the share of new loans with below median Equifax Risk Scores within each institution type:
the ratio of new loans made by lender type to individuals with below median Equifax Risk Scores to the total
number of new loans by the same lender type. Median Equifax Risk Scores is computed at the national level at half-
year intervals. Column 1 uses all lenders; column 2 focuses only on loans originated by credit unions, column 3
computes the share for loans by banks, while column 4 uses non-banks. All regressions control for the total number
of credit unions in a zip code, zip code fixed effects, and county by time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the zip code level and are reported in parentheses * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. The source of the auto loan
data is the FRBNY CCP/Equifax database.




                                                              49
Table 12: Low-income credit unions and non-performing loans




This table examines the impact of the change in the number of low income designation of credit unions between
2010 and 2013 on the number of non-performing auto loans in 2017 at the zip code level. The dependent variable for
columns (1)-(4) is the log number of auto loans that are 30+ days past due by institution type in the second half of
2007. The dependent variable for columns (5)-(8) is the fraction of auto loans that are 30+ days past due divided by
the total number of auto loans in a zip code, by institution types in the second half of 2017. All regressions
control for the change in number of credit unions between 2010 and 2013 in a zip code and county
demographics in 2013 (percent of African American, unemployment rate, county median income, county median
income growth, poverty rate, changes in poverty rate, population size, density and growth rate). Standard errors are
reported in parentheses * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p <0.01. The source of the auto loan data is the FRBNY
CCP/Equifax database.




                                                             50
Table 13: Low-income credit unions and non-performing loans, by Equifax Risk Score quartiles




This table examines the impact of the change in the number of low income designation of credit
unions between 2010 and 2013 on the number of non-performing auto loans in 2017 at the zip code level
by Equifax Risk Score Quartiles. The dependent variable is the log number of auto loans that are 30+
days overdue by institution types in the second half of 2017. All regressions control for the change in number of
credit unions between 2010 and 2013 in a zip code and county demographics in 2013 (percent of African American,
unemployment rate, county median income, county median income growth, poverty rate, changes in poverty rate,
population size, density and growth rate). Standard errors are reported in parentheses * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p <
0.01. The source of the auto loan data is FRBNY CCP/Equifax database.




                                                              51
                                                      Appendix


Table A1: Summary Statistics of Variables in Regressions

                                                                                                   Standard
                Variables                                 Notes                       Mean
                                                                                                   deviation
 Table 3: Credit unions
     Deposits                           % change                                       1.04           4.01
     Deposits                           change scaled by assets * 100                  0.89           3.40
     Loans                              change scaled by assets * 100                  0.28           2.29
     Car loans                          change scaled by assets * 100                  0.10           1.60
     Real estate loans                  change scaled by assets * 100                  0.10           0.94
     Loans/Assets                       loans divided by assets                        0.52           0.18
     ROA                                return on assets                               0.03           1.97
     Assets                             change scaled by assets * 100                  0.01           0.03
     Marketing expenses                 change scaled by assets * 100                  2.37           2.11
 Table 4: Banks
     Deposits                           change scaled by assets * 100                  1.11           4.65
     Loans                              change scaled by assets * 100                  0.56           3.18
     ROA                                return on assets                               0.15           0.33
 Table 5: Growth in LICUs
     Loans                              % change                                       0.03           4.98
     Loans                              change scaled by assets * 100                  0.21           1.87
                                        difference between the log of 1 plus
      Growth in number of               the average number of LICUs
                                                                                       0.12           0.32
      LICUs                             within 5 miles of a bank between
                                        the two periods
 Table 8: 2SLS
     Change in C&I loans                change scaled by assets * 100                  0.04           0.23
     C&I loans / loans                  C&I loans divided by total loans               0.10           0.45
     ROA                                return on assets                               0.08           0.31
                                        sum of a bank's return on assets
                                        plus leverage divided by the
      Z-score                                                                         33.23         134.82
                                        standard deviation of the return on
                                        assets
                                        standard deviation of the return on
      ROA StDev                                                                        -0.11          0.30
                                        assets
      Non-Interest expenses             change scaled by assets * 100                  0.25           8.45

Note: This table provides summary statistics for variables used in Tables 3, 4, 5, and 8 in the main text.




                                                               52
                          Internet Appendix

Table IA1: Data Sources




                                    53
Table IA2. The Impact of Low Income (LI) Designation on Credit Unions' (CU) Outcomes, Additional
Robustness Checks

                                             (1)                    (2)                     (3)               (4)            (5)           (6)              (7)
                                                                                                                                           loans/deposit ratio
VARIABLES                              single bond CUs   multiple common bond CUs exclude pre-2008 LICUs LICU counties   LICU tracts   above median   below median


more than one year after designation      0.00197*              0.00153**               0.00137**         0.00173***     0.00181***     0.00224**        0.000505
                                          (0.00101)             (0.000730)              (0.000560)        (0.000536)     (0.000645)     (0.000922)      (0.000779)
1 quarters after designation              0.000783              0.00254***              0.00157**         0.00169***      0.00147*      0.00250***       0.000505
                                          (0.00141)             (0.000785)              (0.000653)        (0.000646)     (0.000794)     (0.000963)      (0.000994)
2 quarters after designation              0.000742              0.00334***             0.00268***         0.00286***     0.00265***     0.00268**       0.00313***
                                          (0.00153)             (0.000839)              (0.000708)        (0.000696)     (0.000827)     (0.00108)        (0.00105)
3 quarters after designation             0.00325**              0.00277***             0.00238***         0.00266***     0.00288***     0.00259**        0.00202*
                                          (0.00151)             (0.000857)              (0.000707)        (0.000698)     (0.000845)     (0.00112)        (0.00105)
4 quarters after designation             -0.000224              0.00285***             0.00190***         0.00205***     0.00262***     0.00394***      -0.000400
                                          (0.00140)             (0.000906)              (0.000722)        (0.000709)     (0.000856)     (0.00109)        (0.00107)
quarter of designation                    0.000290               0.00116                 0.00107            0.00100       0.00112        0.00147         0.000891
                                          (0.00132)             (0.000812)              (0.000652)        (0.000645)     (0.000775)     (0.000958)      (0.000992)
1 quarters before designation            -0.00195*               0.00143*               0.000391           0.000572       0.000774       0.000886       -0.000197
                                          (0.00119)             (0.000795)              (0.000617)        (0.000610)     (0.000740)     (0.000954)      (0.000900)
2 quarters before designation            -0.000741               0.00107                0.000634           0.000639       0.000660       0.000785        0.000937
                                          (0.00123)             (0.000809)              (0.000624)        (0.000612)     (0.000740)     (0.000961)      (0.000916)
3 quarters before designation             0.000588               0.000105               0.000267           0.000355       0.000154       0.00108        -0.000597
                                          (0.00129)             (0.000745)              (0.000614)        (0.000604)     (0.000700)     (0.000920)      (0.000914)
4 quarters before designation            -0.000108               0.000876               0.000234           0.000406       0.000563      -0.000106        0.00130
                                          (0.00117)             (0.000693)              (0.000568)        (0.000560)     (0.000660)     (0.000854)      (0.000851)
Observations                               57,278                122,970                 167,039            173,952       134,825         78,810          78,006
R-squared                                  0.365                  0.356                    0.326             0.315         0.352          0.398            0.321
This table extends Table 3 (main text) and estimates the difference-in-difference framework in equation (1) using
quarterly data on credit unions over the sample period 2009-2015. The dependent variable is the quarter-on-quarter
change in loans divided by the one quarter lag in assets. Columns 1 and 2 estimate separately the impact of LICU
designation for CUs that are based on single bonds versus those based on multiple bonds. Column 3 excludes all
CUs that were LICU before 2008. Column 4 restricts the sample to CUs located in counties that had at least one
LICU designation after 2008. Column 5 restricts the sample to CUs located in census tracts with median income
below that of the national median income (all income observed from 2010 census). Columns 6 and 7 estimate
separately the main specification for CUs above the median loans/deposit ratio (in 2007) and those below this ratio.
All columns include credit union and county-by-year-quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the credit
union level (7,064 clusters); and (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                                                      54
Table IA4. The Impact of Bank Market Structure on the Geographic Variation in LICUs




This table examines the impact of bank market structure in 2008 at the county-level on the 2015 Q4 ratio of low-income credit
unions to all credit unions in the county. The dependent variable in this table is the share of LICUs to all CUs in a county in 2015
Q4. All regressions include state fixed effects and standard errors are clustered at the state-level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                     55
Table IA5. Propensity Score Matching
Note: Among the sample of CUs not yet designated as LI in 2008, this table uses a logit model to predict the probability that a
CU becomes a LICU over the subsequent sample period 2009-2015. Specifically, the dependent variable equals 1 if a credit
union is designated as "low-income" over the sample period, 2009Q1-2015 Q4, and 0 otherwise. All specifications include state
fixed effects and standard errors are clustered at the state-level (* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01). All balance sheet variables
are averaged immediately before the rule change, 2007-2008. The sample consists of the cross-section of credit unions in 2009
Q1 that are not yet designated.




                                          Propensity Score Matching Overlap




This figure is based on column 4 of Table IA.3. To compute the propensity to become a LICU during the sample period, we use
the predicted probabilities from column 4 of Table IA.3. This figure shows the support of these predicted probabilities for both
LICUs and the nearest-neighbor non-LICUs.




                                                                       56
This table compares the mean of the covariates used to predict the propensity of LI designation for those institutions that become
LICUs and their nearest neighbor counterparts that did not become LICUs during the sample period. In all cases, the t-tests (and
p-values) show that the means from the two distributions are statistically identical. The average treatment effect on
the treated is 0.004 with a robust standard error of (0.0004). That is, average lending growth is about 0.4 percentage point higher
during the period in which a CU is designated as LI compared to average growth rate among matched undesignated CUs.




                                                                     57
                                           References

Aghion, P., et al. (1999). "Inequality and Economic Growth: The Perspective of the New Growth
Theories." Journal of Economic Literature 37(4): 1615-1660.
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2004). "Competition and Financial Stability." Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking 36: 453-480.
Ashenfelter, O. (1978). "Estimating the Effects of Training Programs on Earnings." Review of
Economics and Statistics 60(1).
Beck, T., et al. (2006). "Bank concentration, competition, and crises: First results." Journal of
Banking & Finance 30(5): 1581-1603.
Benmelech, E., et al. (2016). "The Real Effects of Liquidity During the Financial Crisis:
Evidence from Automobiles." The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bernanke, B. (2009). "Lessons of the Financial Crisis for Banking Supervision." Speech at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago,
Illinois.
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2003). "Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance and
Managerial Preferences." Journal of Political Economy 111(5).
Bhattacharya, S. (1982). "Aspects of Monetary and Banking Theory and Moral Hazard." Journal
of Finance 27(2): 371-384.
Black, S. E. and P. E. Strahan (2002). "Entrepreneurship and bank credit availability." Journal of
Finance 57(6): 2807-2833.
Boot, A. W. A. and A. V. Thakor (2000). "Can relationship banking survive competition?"
Journal of Finance 55(2): 679-713.
Boyd, J. and G. De Nicolo (2005). "The Theory of Bank Risk Taking and Competition
Revisited." Journal of Finance 60(3): 1329-1343.
Braggion, F., et al. (2017). "Nothing Special About Banks: Competition and Bank Lending in
Britain, 1885­1925." The Review of Financial Studies 30(10): 3502-3537.
Broecker, T. (1990). "Credit-Worthiness Tests and Interbank Competition." Econometrica 58(2):
429-452.
Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Sannikov (2014). "A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial
Sector." American Economic Review.
Carlson, M., et al. (forthcoming). "The Effects of Banking Competition on Growth and Financial
Stability: Evidence from the National Banking Era." Review of Economic Studies.
Carlson, M. and K. J. Mitchener (2009). "Branch Banking as Device for Discipline: Competition
and Bank Surviorship During the Great Depression." Journal of Political Economy 117(2).
Claessens, S., et al. (2012). "Shadow Banking: Economics and Policy." IMF Staff Discussion
Note SDN/12/12.
Cornett, M. M., et al. (2011). "Liquidity risk management and credit supply in the financial
crisis." Journal of Financial Economics 101(2): 297-312.
Dell'Ariccia, G. and R. Marquez (2006). "Lending Booms and Lending Standards." Journal of
Finance 61(5): 2511-2546.
Dick, A. A. and A. Lehnert (2010). "Personal Bankruptcy and Credit Market Competition."
Journal of Finance 65(2): 655-686.
Farhi, E. and J. Tirole (2018). "Shadow Banking and the Four Pillars of Traditional FInancial
Intermediation." Working Paper.
Favara, G. and J. Imbs (2015). "Credit Supply and the Price of Housing." American Economic
Review 105(3): 958-992.

                                                   58
He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy (2013). "Intermediary Asset Pricing." American Economic Review
103(2): 732-770.
Hellmann, T., et al. (2000). "Liberalization, Moral Hazard in Banking and Prudential Regulation:
Are Capital Requirements Enough." American Economic Review 90(1): 147-165.
Jayaratne, J. and P. E. Strahan (1996). "The Finance Growth Nexus: Evidence From Bank
Branching Deregulation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(3): 639-670.
Keeley, M. (1990). "Deposit Insurance, Risk and Market Power in Banking." American
Economic Review 80(5): 1183-1200.
Martinez-Miera, D. and R. Repullo (2010). "Does Competition Reduce the Risk of Bank
Failure?" Review of Financial Studies 23(10): 3638-3664.
Melzer, B. T. and D. P. Morgan (2015). "Competition in a consumer loan market: Payday loans
and overdraft credit." Journal of Financial Intermediation 24(1): 25-44.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2009). "The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from
the Us Mortgage Default Crisis." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4): 1449-1496.
Ordoñez, G. (2018). "Sustainable Shadow Banking." American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 10(1): 33-56.
Pagano, M. and T. Jappelli (1993). "Information Sharing in Credit Markets." Journal of Finance
48(5).
Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan (1995). "The Effect of Credit Market Competition on Lending
Relationships." Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(2): 407-443.
Rajan, R. (1994). "Why Bank Credit Policies Fluctuate: A Theory and Some Evidence."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(2).
Rajan, R. and R. Ramcharan (2015). "The Anatomy of a Credit Crisis: The Boom and Bust in
Farm Land Prices in the United States in the 1920s." American Economic Review 105(4): 1439-
1477.
Ramcharan, R., et al. (2016). "From Wall Street to Main Street: The Impact of the Financial
Crisis on Consumer Credit Supply." The Journal of Finance 71(3): 1323-1356.
Vickers, J. (2010). "Central Banks and Competition Authorities: Institutional Comparisons and
New Concerns." BIS Working Paper 331.
Vives, X. (2012). "Competition policy in banking." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 27(3):
479-497.




                                                  59
