                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MISALLOCATION UNDER TRADE LIBERALIZATION

                                            Yan Bai
                                            Keyu Jin
                                            Dan Lu

                                      Working Paper 26188
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26188


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 2019, Revised April 2020




We thank George Alessandria, Mark Bils, Oleg Itskhoki, Narayana Kocherlakota, Ezra Oberfield,
Michael Song, Kjetil Storesletten, Heiwai Tang, Fabrizio Zillibotti, Daniel Xu for their invaluable
comments, as well as seminar participants in NBER Summer Institute, NBER China meeting,
Tsinghua growth and institute, AWSOME conference of McMaster U., Philadelphia Fed Trade
Workshop, St. Louis Fed Macro-Trade Conference, IMF, Fed Board, Chinese U. of Hong Kong,
U. of Hong Kong, Hong Kong U. of Science and Technology, SHUFE, Fudan U. and NSE of
Peking University. Keyu Jin thanks ESRC award P004253/1 The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Yan Bai, Keyu Jin, and Dan Lu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Misallocation Under Trade Liberalization
Yan Bai, Keyu Jin, and Dan Lu
NBER Working Paper No. 26188
August 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. E23,F12,F14,F63,L25,O47

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper incorporates firm-level distortions into a Melitz model and characterizes welfare under
misallocation. We derive an analogue to the well-known ACR result in an economy with
distortions. We highlight a channel through which trade can reduce welfare by exacerbating
misallocation. A key statistic to infer welfare is the gap between input and output shares. Using
Chinese manufacturing data for quantitative analysis, we show that trade integration can lead to a
18% welfare loss coming from a reduction in allocative efficiency. The overall gains to trade is
substantially smaller than implied by standard calculations.


Yan Bai                                         Dan Lu
Department of Economics                         University of Rochester
University of Rochester                         232 Harkness Hall
216 Harkness Hall                               Rochester, NY
Rochester, NY 14627                             danlu@rochester.edu
and NBER
yanbai06@gmail.com

Keyu Jin
London School of Economics
k.jin@lse.ac.uk
1     Introduction

The question of how much developing countries benefit from opening up to goods trade is
a time-honoured subject, both of practical import and intellectual interest. Much has been
understood about the nature and type of gains to trade, thanks to the remarkable progress
made in the field of international trade in recent decades. Less clear, however, is why
certain developing countries have benefited from trade more than others, and why certain
countries have seemingly not benefitted much at all.1 New trade theories suggest that
developing countries have the most to gain from trade: if trade liberalization can induce
reallocation of resources from less to more productive firms, aggregate productivity and
welfare will rise in turn.

    But developing countries are different in another respect: they are also subject to preva-
lent policy and institutional distortions. Examples include taxes and subsidies to certain
firms, implicit guarantees and bailouts, preferential access to land and capital, and indus-
trial policy and export promotion policies--common themes in developing countries. In
the case of China, for instance, this explains why inefficient but politically-connected pri-
vate firms and state-owned companies (SOE) have survived and even thrived. Implicit and
explicit support for these firms combined with limited exit mechanisms for many SOEs
have weakened firm selection effects, the upshot of which is a drag on aggregate produc-
tivity. Many believe that joining the WTO can potentially alleviate some of these problems
by inviting direct competition from abroad.

    How effective is this mechanism? Can trade necessarily improve allocations? Does
trade necessarily lead to welfare gains for developing countries? These issues are far from
obvious as alluded to by Rodríguez-Clare (2018), " [a] complication that may matter for
the computation of the gains from trade is the presence of domestic distortions." This
argument that trade may exert a different impact in a second-best environment has been
an old age question posed by Bhagwati and Ramaswami (1963). Even in classic textbook
analysis, there are discussions on the "domestic market failure argument against trade",
that " [when] the theory of second best [is applied] to trade policy..., imperfections in the
    1 For
        example, Waugh (2010) shows, in large sample of countries, that poor countries do not systematically
gain more from trade.



                                                     2
internal function of an economy may justify interfering in its external economic relations"
(Krugman, Obstfeld, and Melitz (2015)). We formalize these ideas in the context of the new
trade model variety. A main contribution in this paper is to derive a general theoretical
welfare formula to analyze additional channels of trade in a second-best environment. A
second contribution is to take advantage of firm-level data to gauge how much these effects
matter.

  Our modelling framework allows for firm-specific distortions into a two-country Melitz
model. There are two dimensions of heterogeneity at the firm-level: productivity and dis-
tortions. These distortions are assumed to be exogenous output wedges or factor wedges.
They drive differences in the marginal products across firms. We deliberately do not take
a stand on where these distortions come from as various kinds of policy and institutional
distortions are legion in developing countries. In this context, contrary to the mechanism
underpinning the Melitz (2003) model and its extensions, i.e. that trade can induce a re-
allocation of resources from low productivity to high productivity firms, the presence of
distortions can bring about the opposite and exacerbate misallocation. The reason is sim-
ple: distortions (for instance, tax and subsidies) act as a veil to a firm's true productivity. A
firm may be producing in the market not because it is inherently productive, but because it
is sufficiently subsidized. A mass of highly-subsidized but not adequately productive firms
will export and expand at the cost of other more productive firms. The high productivity/
high tax firms which were marginally able to survive in the domestic market would be
driven out as the other firms gain market share and drive up costs. In other words, the
selection effect which brings about efficiency gains in the Melitz-type model is no longer
based solely on productivity; it is determined jointly by firm productivity and distortions.
Trade may thus lower the average productivity of firms.

  To formalize this argument, we derive a general welfare formula that relates to canonical
trade models, such as Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012)) and Melitz and
Redding (2015). We show that a key statistic in capturing this negative reallocation channel
in the aggregate is the gap between aggregate input share in producing domestic goods and
aggregate expenditure share on domestic goods. If the required inputs used for producing
export is greater than the output share it yields, then the reduction in allocative efficiency


                                               3
arising from a reallocation of resources, occasioned by trade, can bring about a welfare loss.

  The general formula for welfare nests several important cases. The special case in which
there is only heterogeneity in productivity, which follows a Pareto distribution, yields the
well-known result of ACR (after Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012)). Under a
more general distribution, the expression corresponds to that in Melitz and Redding (2015).
In these cases, there is always a positive selection mechanism associated with trade. The
second special case is one in which there is only heterogeneity in distortions, Pareto dis-
tributed, and this yields an analogue to ACR under misallocation. In this case, the selection
is purely driven by distortion, and welfare is always lower in an open compared to a closed
economy. Intuitively, under homogenous productivity, the efficient allocation should be
firms have identical market shares. However, with distortions, the relatively subsidized
firms produce more than in the efficient case, with the dispersion of sales (employment) re-
flecting the distortions. When opening up to trade, it is the relatively subsidized firms that
export, in turn making the firm's distribution even more skewed--reflecting a worsening
of allocation. Hence, there is always welfare loss. In this case, exporters are highly subsi-
dized, and the required inputs used for producing exports is greater than the output share
it yields. In fact, the gap between the two is a sufficient statistic for welfare loss. We also
derive sufficient conditions for welfare losses under more general distribution functions.

  In the general case where productivity and distortions coexist, they are competing in
their impact on firm selection. The relative strength of the two depends on their joint
distribution, and micro-level information still matters for welfare. The impact of allocative
efficiency arising from a reallocation of resources is captured by the input-sale gap, along
with additional structural microeconomic parameters. To our knowledge, the paper is
the first to theoretically characterize welfare loss to trade, and derive sufficient conditions
for welfare. The decomposition of welfare into a `pure technology effect' and a `resource
reallocation effect' in this instance resonates with the decomposition in the recent work
of Baqaee and Farhi (2020). Where as they focus on network effects, we focus on how
distortions determine the welfare impact of trade.

  The second contribution is to operationalize our results in the context of China. We
choose China because it is an economy saddled with distortions, and one that recently


                                              4
experienced an important trade liberalization event. We use our structural model combined
with micro data from Chinese manufacturing to conduct a quantitative analysis of the
impact of trade on welfare and aggregate productivity. The main goal is to see how much
departure there is from standard trade models that do not take into account pre-existing
domestic distortions. We run counterfactual experiments for local changes in trade cost,
as well as counterfactual experiments for domestic reforms. Our main conclusion is that
welfare gains are much smaller when taking into account distortions; that there is a TFP
loss of 3% as opposed to a TFP gain of 13.3% in the case without distortions, and that
allocative inefficiency can induce a welfare loss of 18%. Welfare gains are half of what
standard models yield.

   To further investigate the key mechanisms implied by our model, we conduct out-of-
sample tests by examining the differential patterns among exporters and non-exporters in
both the cross-section and the time series dimension, in Section 3.4. These patterns fit
broadly with predictions in the model.

   It is important to point out that in the quantitative analyses we do not use directly
empirically-measured wedges, observed correlations, or distributions in the data to as-
sess the impact of trade on welfare. The reason is that the observed statistics are not the
underlying ones: existing firms have been subject to selection and thus their observed dis-
tributions are not the true ones. The same reasoning goes for the observed correlation
between productivity and wedges. As we show in Section 3.1, the presence of fixed costs
and/or firm selection can drive a positive relationship between the two. For these rea-
sons, the approach adopted in the quantitative exercises is to estimate the underlying joint
distribution of wedges and productivity, costs of producing and exporting so as to match
the observed patterns of firms' outputs, inputs, and exports. On this basis, we evaluate
how the presence of distortions change the impact of trade on productivity and welfare,
and how much trade has contributed to Chinese growth in a decomposition exercise. This
contrasts with the reduced-form approach adopted in Berthou, Chung, Manova, and Bra-
gard (2018), which uses empirically measured revenue productivity to assess the impact
of trade reforms on aggregate productivity under misallocation.2 Our works are broadly
   2 Berthou et al. (2018) theoretically and empirically assess the impact of trade reforms for 14 European
countries and 20 industries over the period 1998-2011. They find that trade reforms have ambiguous effects


                                                    5
complementary, as we focus on theoretical analyses and a structural approach to inferring
welfare gains for China, whilst they focus on an empirical assessment of trade on aggregate
productivities for 14 European countries.

   Costa-Scottini (2018) and Ho (2010) and Berthou et al. (2018) are other papers that in-
troduce firm level distortions to trade models. Theoretically, Costa-Scottini (2018) and Ho
(2010) assume a log linear relationship, and hence perfect correlation of (log) productiv-
ity and (log) wedges. This assumption of perfect correlation is both limiting in its scope
of analysis, and also inconsonant with patterns in the data. Overall, the main departure
from these papers is both theoretical and quantitative. Theoretically, we explicitly explore
the selection and reallocation effects, while formalizing the efficiency loss amounting to a
few statistic-- in particular­ the wedge between the input and output shares (and the re-
lated hazard function). We also provide sufficient conditions for welfare loss under specific
distributions. From an empirical perspective, all three papers measure firms wedges or
productivity directly from the data using the well-known `TFPR', while we take a different
approach. We avoid employing directly empirically-measured wedges, observed correla-
tions, or distributions in the data to assess the impact of trade on welfare. Again, we
demonstrate that `TFPR' and `TFPQ' in these models do not measure directly productivity
and wedges, as they are affected by wedges, productivity and fixed costs; in addition, the
observed joint distribution is the ex-post one after selection.

   What makes our paper different from the important works of Hsieh and Klenow (2009),
Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992), Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), Bartelsman, Halti-
wanger, and Scarpetta (2009) is first of all, the open economy nature of our model, and
secondly, the endogenous mechanism of entry/exit and the attendant firm selection effect.
For our purposes, selection is vital. Trade affects resource allocation through an endoge-
nous selection of firms. Furthermore, in our work, `misallocation of resources' goes beyond
the observed misallocation among a set of operating firms. Because policy distortions also
act as a barrier to entry (and exit), there is also misallocation among potential entrants
and incumbents­ firms that should have entered the market in an efficient economy that
couldn't, and firms that should have otherwise exited but have not. This reallocation along
on measured revenue productivity in the theory, while they are positive in the data.



                                                     6
the entry/exit margin can also be significant. Empirical works have also demonstrated the
importance of entry and exit for China's growth.3

   China is well suited for the study for multiple reasons: for its prevalent State interven-
tions and policies; that a body of work has shown (see references below) that idiosyncratic
distortions explain the majority of the dispersion in marginal products; and that trade lib-
eralization has been an important recent phenomenon. Distortions in China manifest them-
selves in the form of substantial privileges of state owned enterprises over private firms,
of connected private firms, or of firms belonging to particular locations. Specific policies
that can drive these wedges include implicit subsidies such as soft budget constraints, fa-
vorable costs of capital, preferential tax treatments and implicit guarantees. Firms with
political connections having access to special deals and receiving substantial benefits are
also widely documented (see Guo, Jiang, Kim, and Xu (2013) and Bai, Hsieh, and Song
(2019)). Wu (2018) conducts an empirical analysis and finds that policy distortions can be
explained by investment promoting programs that favor such firms.

   There is also substantial evidence coming from a number of papers that these idiosyn-
cratic firm-distortions account for a large part of the observed dispersion in marginal prod-
ucts across firms in China. In principle, misallocation can arise from a variety of factors;
but different approaches to disentangle them have come to similar conclusions that policy
distortions are elemental.4

   Many of these distortions are also presumably unrelated to trade. For instance, firms
such as the car manufacturing company Chery have enjoyed easy access to land and capital
from their local governments. Foxconn, the world's largest electronics contracter manufac-
turer, has enjoyed substantial tax breaks from many provinces including industrial land at
significantly discounted prices. Tesla has recently received free land and subsidies from
   3 Brandt,   Van Biesebroeck, and Zhang (2012) find that net entry accounts for roughly half of Chinese
manufacturing productivity growth. The creation and selection of new firms in China's non-state sector has
been particularly important.
     4 These factors could be technological frictions, such as adjustment costs, information frictions, financial

frictions, or markups. Wu (2018) finds that policies account for the majority of the observed misallocation
of capital, as opposed to financial frictions. Using a different approach and modeling framework, David
and Venkateswaran (2017) find also that firm-specific distortions, rather than technological or information
frictions, account for the majority of the observed dispersions in marginal products. Bai, Lu, and Tian (2018)
disciplines financial frictions with firms' financing patterns, sales distribution and change of capital. They
find that financial frictions cannot explain the observed relation between firms' measured distortions and
size.

                                                       7
the local government of Shanghai. A recent study by Chen and Kung (2018) demonstrate
the firms that are connected with political elites were able to obtain land at 80 to 90 percent
discount over the period 2004-2016.

   For the reasons above, the baseline model in the paper is to focus on domestic policy
distortions. Still, one can ask whether some of the large dispersion of marginal products
reflects endogenous distortions--those that can potentially change with trade liberaliza-
tion. As a robustness check we examine a model of endogenous distortions with variable
markup, and ask whether trade can mitigate these distortions and the misallocation of re-
sources. Section 4.1 takes up a variable markup model. We show that these models 1)
yield some obvious counterfactual predictions on the relationship between exporters and
wedges; 2) that markup alone also explains little of the dispersion in wedges. To match the
observed correlation and dispersion one would still need to include exogenous distortions.
Moreover, the attendant pro-competitive effects in a model with endogenous markup may
be `elusive' as pointed out by Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodríguez-Clare (2018).5

   In this framework, positive firm selection is the central driving force for gains to trade.
As such, it abstracts from other types of gains to trade, such as trade-induced technologi-
cal diffusion (Alvarez, Buera, and Lucas Jr (2013) and Buera and Oberfield (2016)), adop-
tion (Perla, Tonetti, and Waugh (2015) and Sampson (2015)) and innovation (Atkeson and
Burstein (2010)). While these mechanisms in principle work to increase the gains to trade,
with its quantitative significance a subject to debate,6 it does not detract from the fact that
the distortionary impact on allocation efficiency still induces large welfare losses, which
is what we are interested in. Of course, distortions can also interact with some of these
additional channels. For instance, in a model with firm innovation, one would need to
consider the fact that distortions not only affect production decisions, but potentially also
innovation decisions. These considerations go beyond the scope of this paper but deserve
   5 This  paper makes the point that when more productive firms expand at the expense of less productive
ones, thanks to trade, the aggregate markup tends to rise. Thus, overall, trade models with endogenous
markups do not necessarily generate higher gains from trade.
    6 Perla, Tonetti, and Waugh (2015) and Atkeson and Burstein (2010), for instance, find that trade gains are

not too different from ACR gains. In Perla, Tonetti, and Waugh (2015), there is trade-induced within-firm
productivity improvements. However, their aggregate growth effects come with costs--losses in variety and
reallocation of resources away from goods production. Thus, the aggregate effect on welfare is similar to
ACR gains. Atkeson and Burstein (2010) show that general equilibrium effects limits the first-order effects on
aggregate productivity even when there is firm-level innovation.


                                                      8
further consideration. We also do not consider how trade can reduce domestic distortions,
for example if concurrent domestic reforms are requisite for joining the WTO or if quotas
are removed (see Khandelwal, Schott, and Wei (2013)). As a robustness check, however, we
allow for firms to face a different distribution of distortions when they start to export and
examine welfare and efficiency gains therein.

   Taken together, our quantitative analysis is meant to highlight the first-order effects
of a particular channel--allocative inefficiency, and also to compare it with benchmark
results in the workhorse models of international trade. It is, however, not a comprehensive
analysis of trade gains in the case of China. A key message of this paper is that in order for
developing countries to reap the full gains of trade, simultaneous or antecedent domestic
reforms aimed at reducing policy distortions may be crucial. The policy implication drawn
from this framework is consistent with works indicating that policies aimed to neutralize
domestic distortions may be complementary to trade liberalization (Chang, Kaltani, and
Loayza (2009) and Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare (2010)). It counters other claims that
trade liberalization should take precedence owing to positive firm selection (Asturias, Hur,
Kehoe, and Ruhl (2016)).7

   In sum, this paper shows that experiences of trade liberalization in developing coun-
tries should not be considered to be independent of micro-level distortions to which they
are subject. Our paper demonstrates that the presence of policy distortions have a first-
order quantitative effect on the gains to trade. The organization of the paper is as follows:
Section 2 derives a theoretical framework of trade gains under misallocation. Section 3 pro-
vides a quantitative assessment on the impact of trade liberalization under misallocation,
with various extensions of the benchmark framework. Section 4 discusses a model with
endogenous distortions. Section 5 concludes.
   7 They  show that the best sequence of reforms is to first decrease trade costs, then to improve contract
enforcement, and, finally, to decrease the cost of firm creation.The reason is that an increase in competition
leads to an expansion of productive firms and crowding out of less efficient ones. By liberalizing international
trade first so as to impose firm selection early, inefficient firms are prevented from entering later when
contract enforcement and firm entry costs are reformed. In contrast, we show that the selection mechanism
is substantially weakened in the presence of distortions.




                                                       9
2     Theoretical Framework

2.1   Baseline Model

The world consists of two large open economies, Home and Foreign, with heterogenous
firms. The two economies can differ in the size of labor and distribution of firms. Labor is
immobile across countries and inelastic in supply.


Consumers. A representative consumer in the Home country chooses the amount of final
goods C in order to maximize utility u(C ), subject to the budget constraint


                                     PC = wL +  + T ,


where P is the price of final goods, L is labor, w is wage rate,  is dividend income, and T
is the amount of lump-sum transfers received from the government.

Final Goods Producers. Final goods producers are perfectly competitive, and combine
intermediate goods using a CES production function

                                                               
                                                     -1        -1
                                Q=           q( )         d         ,
                                         


where  is the elasticity of substitution across intermediate goods, and  is the endogenous
set of goods. The corresponding final goods price index is thus

                                                               1
                                                              1- 
                                                   1- 
                                P=          p( )          d         ,
                                         


where p( ) is the price of good  in the market. The individual demand for this good is
thus given by
                                              p ( )-
                                     q( ) =          Q.
                                                 P-

Intermediate Goods Producers. There is a competitive fringe of potential entrants (in both
countries) that can enter by paying a sunk entry cost of f e units of labor. Potential entrants
face uncertainty about their productivity in the industry. They also face a stochastic revenue


                                              10
wedge  , which can be seen as a tax (>1) or subsidy (<1) on every revenue earned.8 Once
the sunk entry cost is paid, a firm draws its productivity  and  from a joint distribution,
g( ,  ) over   (0, ),   (0, ).9

   Firms are monopolistically competitive. Production of each intermediate good entails
fixed production cost of f units of labor and a constant variable cost that depends on firm
productivity. The total labor required to produce q( ) units of a variety is therefore:                   10


                                                            q
                                                   = f+       .
                                                            

( ,  ) are idiosyncratic and independent across firms. The existence of a fixed production
cost means that only a subset of firms produces--those that draw a sufficiently low produc-
tivity or high wedge cannot generate enough variable profits to cover the fixed production
cost. If firms decide to export, they face a fixed exporting cost of f x units of labor and ice-
berg variable costs of trade x , which is greater than 1. Firms with the same productivity
and distortion behave identically, and thus we can index firms by their ( ,  ) combination.

   An intermediate goods firm thus solves the following problem

                                                   pq w
                                           max       - q - wf                                                  (1)
                                             p,q      

                                              p-
subject to the demand function q =            P-
                                                 Q,   henceforward suppressing  for convenience.
From here it is clear that a revenue tax is equivalent to a tax on all input costs incurred by
the firm.

   Firms are infinitely small, and thus take the aggregate price index as given. Equating the
after-tax marginal revenue with marginal costs yields the standard result that equilibrium
   8 It is equivalent to an input wedge on all the input a firm uses.
   9 The   model equilibrium is equivalent to a stationary equilibrium of a model allowing for constant exoge-
nous probability of death  and entry cost f e /.
   10 We can easily extend the production to include capital, i.e. k  1- . The unit cost for producing q

or fixed cost is - (1 - )-1 w1- rk      where r is the rental cost of capital. In our model, we introduce
                                                  k
one heterogeneous distortions at the firm level, and our  is an output distortion, but it includes all input
distortions that increase the marginal products of capital and labor by the same proportion as an output
distortion. In the data, there are distortions that affect both capital and labor and distortions that change the
marginal product of one of the factors relative to the other. In our quantitative exercises, we include both
capital and labor, and the distortions on both factors.




                                                       11
prices are a mark-up over marginal costs:

                                               w
                                        p=        .                                            (2)
                                              -1 

Optimal profits are then


                         =  -  (  - 1 )  -1 P  Q  -  w 1-    -1 - w f .                        (3)


  It immediately follows that given the fixed cost of production, there is a zero-profit cutoff
productivity below which firms would choose not to produce, and exit the market. Thus,
a firm would choose to produce only if    ( ). This cutoff productivity level satisfies

                                                              1
                                       -1 wf                  -1       
                               ( ) =                               w   -1 .                    (4)
                                      - 1 P Q

The cutoff productivity is now a function of the firm-specific distortion, and differs across
firms facing different levels of distortions. Firms with a higher tax  will have a higher
cutoff for productivity. This means that low productivity firms that would have been oth-
erwise excluded from the market can now enter the market and survive if sufficiently
subsidized.

  With trade, firms now have the option of exporting abroad. If a Home firm exports to
the Foreign economy, it solves the following problem

                                        px q f  w
                                  max          - x q f - w f x
                                                

                                                  p-
                                                   x
                                                     
subject to the Foreign demand function q =         - Q f ,
                                                  Pf
                                                             where Pf and Q f denote the aggregate
price index and demand in Foreign. Given the same constant elasticity of demand in
the domestic and export markets, equilibrium prices in the export market are a constant
multiple of those in the domestic market:

                                                   wx 
                                   p x ( ,  ) =        ,
                                                  -1 




                                              12
The optimal profit from servicing the Foreign market,


                     x =  -  (  - 1 )  -1 P f
                                            
                                              Q f  - (wx )1- -1 - w f x ,                           (5)


yields an optimal cutoff for exporting:

                                                                    1
                                                                    -1
                                       -1                 -1
                                                   w f x x
                           
                                                                                
                           x ( ) =                                       w   -1 .                   (6)
                                     -1             Pf Q
                                                           f


Consumer love of variety, a fixed production cost and additional fixed cost of exporting,
mean that firms would never export without also selling in the domestic market. There
are, hence, two cutoff productivities relevant for the domestic economy: one for entering
the domestic market as given by (4) and one for entering the Foreign market, as given
by (6). To the extent that taxes  are constant across firms, the ratio          
                                                                       x (  ) /  (  ) is a
                                                 -1 f     
                                                x     x P Q
constant and is greater than 1 so long as         f      
                                                        Pf Q f   > 1. Analogously, firms in the Foreign
country, which draw their productivity from a distribution g f ( ,  ), are subject to two
cutoff productivities, one for servicing their domestic market, and one for exporting to the
Home economy
                                                                  1
                                                                  -1
                                      -1            wf f
                            
                                                                             
                            f ( ) =                                    w f   -1 ,                   (7)
                                    -1              Pf
                                                     Q
                                                         f

                                                                    1
                                                  -1                -1
                                      -1 w f f x x                                 
                           x f ( ) =                                      w f   -1 .                (8)
                                     -1     P Q

where w f denotes the Foreign wages, and the fixed cost of producing and exporting are
assumed to be identical in the two economies. The government's budget is balanced so
that
                                                    1
                             T=              1-            p( )q( )d ,
                                                    
where  is the endogenous set of home production.

  The equilibrium features a constant mass of firms entering Me and producing M, along
with a ex-post distributions of productivity and distortion among operational firms µ( ,  ).
The ex-post distribution µ( ,  ) is a truncation of the ex-ante productivity-distortion dis-



                                                    13
tribution, g( ,  ), at the zero-profit cutoff productivity given by Eq.4:

                                                        g ( ,  )
                                 µ ( ,  ) =                                                                     (9)
                                                    ( )  g ( ,  ) d  d 

if    ( ); and µ( ,  ) = 0 otherwise. The denominator is the probability of successful
entry, denoted as
                                                
                                    e =               g ( ,  ) d  d  .                                         (10)
                                                ( )

In equilibrium, the measure of producing firms equals the product of measure of entrants
and the probability of entering, i.e.
                                               e Me = M .

We define the probability of exporting conditional on entry as

                                                                
                                                                        g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                                                x ( )
                    x =                 µ ( ,  ) d  d  =                                 .
                                x ( )                            ( )    g ( ,  ) d  d 


  In an equilibrium with positive entry, the free entry condition requires that


                        ( ,  ) g ( ,  ) d  d  +                x ( ,  ) g ( ,  ) d  d  = w f e .               (11)
                 ( )                                  x ( )



The first term is the expected profits from domestic sales conditional on entry, multiplied by
the probability of entry. The second term is the expect profits from export sales conditional
on exporting, multiplied by the probability of exporting. The free entry condition requires
that their sum be equal to the entry costs (in terms of labor).
  The free entry condition (11), combined with optimal profit functions (3) and (5) gives
an expression for the price index P:

                                                                                                                       1
                                 1-                                            w f x         1-                       1- 
                            w
P=    M                                 µ ( ,  ) d  d  + M f                                       µ f ( ,  ) d  d          ,
   -1                ( )                                             x f ( )
                                                                                  
                                                                                                               (12)
where M and M f denote the measure of operating firms in Home and Foreign. The Foreign
price index Pf takes a similar form.



                                                   14
Goods market clearing. The assumption of a balanced trade results in

                               1-                                                    w f x    1- 
                       wx 
Pf Qf M                              µ ( ,  ) d d = P QM f                                          µ f ( ,  ) d  d  .
               x ( )                                                      x f ( )
                                                                                        
                                                                                                                   (13)

Labor market clearing. In the equilibrium, the labor market condition yields

                                                               L
                                        M=                                .                                        (14)
                                                     fe
                                                     e    + f + x f x


   Normalizing the Home country wage rate to 1, there are eleven equations, the zero cutoff
productivities for domestic production and exporting (4), (6), and its Foreign counterparts,
the free entry conditions (11) along with its Foreign counterpart, the definition of the Home
and Foreign price indices (12), and a goods market clearing/balanced trade equation (13),
along with the measure of firms (14) and its Foreign counterpart. These equations yield
the equilibrium consisting of eleven unknowns {  ( ),                  
                                                      x (  ),  f (  ),  f x (  ), P, P f , Q, Q f ,

w f , M, M f }. A detailed derivation of the model is provided in Appendix A.


Proposition 1. The allocations, entrants, and cutoff functions { Q, Q f , M, M f ,  ( ), f (  ),
         
x (  ),  x f (  ) } are independent of mean wedge ¯ . Prices { P, Pf , w f } change proportionally with
¯, 
   ¯ f , i.e. P(¯1 )/ P(¯2 ) = ¯1 /¯2 , and similarly for Pf and w f .

   The proof of the proposition is straightforward. The proposition shows that increasing
the mean of the wedges doesn't affect real variables. Hence misallocation of resources is
not because of the average wedge across firms but heterogenous wedges.



2.2    Theoretical Comparative Static

We proceed to analyze welfare and efficiency with distortions. Welfare, or consumption, is
given by:11
                                                                                                                                 1
                                           -1                          Pf Q f                             -1                     -1
   -1                          MRPL                                                          MRPL
W=    Me                                        g (  ,  ) d  d  + Me                                           g ( ,  ) d  d          ,
                        ( )    MRPL                                    P Q          x ( )
                                                                                            x MRPL
                                                                                                                   (15)
  11 Home's   welfare depends on foreign exports, which are rewritten by using the balanced trade condition.


                                                          15
where MRPL denotes the firm-specific marginal revenue product of labor, MRPL = w ,
and MRPL denote the economy-wide marginal revenue product of labor, MRPL = PQ/ L.
Hence, welfare is related to a weighted firm productivity, where the relative distortions
are the weights. In an efficient case without distortions, all firms have the same marginal
revenue product, MRPL = MRPL for any  . Hence, Equation (15) shows that the source
of welfare loss in the presence of firm-level distortions can arise from a misallocation of
resources, captured by dispersions in MRPL/ MRPL , and a misallocation caused by se-
lection and entry mechanisms captured by Me ,  , x being different from their respective

efficient levels. Change in trade cost affects the economy through selection, entry and
misallocation.

   To understand how trade costs affect welfare through changes in misallocation (which
includes selection and entry), we first present an expression for welfare in the presence of
shocks to exogenous productivity--which can be compared with Baqaee and Farhi (2020)
(henceforward BF) in the closed economy. The same reasoning can be applied to a trade
liberalization episode. In subsequent analyses, this expression is further fleshed out to
provide a formulation comparable to those in standard trade models.

   Some definitions are in order: let pi qi and                     i   be the total sales and variable labor of
firm with productivity i ,  the share of expenditure on domestic goods, and S the share
                                                                                                              
of variable labor used in producing domestic goods.12 Define ^ =  1- , so that the
firm's log operating profit is proportional to log( ^ ). Recall that a firm produces if and
only if its productivity is large enough or its wedge  is small enough, i.e.,    ( ) =
              1                                                                                                              1
  -1   wf     -1        
                                                                                                           -1         wf     -1
 -1    P Q         w -1 . Thus, the production cutoff can be rewritten as ^ =                             -1          P Q         w,
and a firm produces if and only if the combination of productivity and wedge satisfies
  12 Definition   of the domestic expenditure share:
                                                              -1
                                                    ( )            g ( ,  ) d  d 
                    =                                        P Q
                                                                                                              .
                                     -1                          f 1-                   -1
                             ( )          g ( ,  ) d  d    + Pf Q x           x ( )          g ( ,  ) d  d 

Definition of the share of variable labor used in producing domestic goods:

                                                   ( )       -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d 
                   S=                                         P
                                                                                                                  .
                                  -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d  +     f Q f 1-             -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d 
                            ( )                               P Q x           ( ) 
                                                                              x




                                                              16
^
 ^ .

   There are two important elasticities,  --the elasticity of the cumulative sales share
within the domestic market for firms above the domestic cutoff, and s --the elasticity of
the cumulative domestic (variable) labor share for firms above the domestic cutoff, both
with respect to the cutoff ^ . These elasticities are also known as the hazard functions.13

Proposition 2. In the presence of distortions,

   1. In a closed economy, the change in welfare associated with an exogenous productivity shock to
firms with productivity i is

                                               pi qi
               dlnW = -d ln P + ( - 1)               - i d ln i + s ( ^  ) -  ( ^  ) d ln ^ .
                                               PQ      L

   2. In an open economy, the change in welfare associated with an exogenous iceberg cost shock is


                 d ln W = -d ln P + - d ln  + d ln S + s ( ^  ) -  ( ^  ) d ln ^ .


   PROOF: Appendix B.1.

   Technology shocks can have two effects on welfare, in a closed or an open economy
case. The first is through a change in the aggregate price index P. A positive produc-
tivity shock or a negative trade shock lowers P and leads to a welfare gain. The second
effect is coming from a change in the resources going into each firm. If a firm is rela-
tively subsidized, its labor share is larger than its sales share. Thus, its expansion impinges
negatively on welfare. In this closed economy, a firm's positive productivity shock may
not raise aggregate productivity. This has a similar flavor to findings in Baqaee and Farhi
   13 Define   O( ^ ) as the cumulative sales share under any ^ in the domestic market,

                                                 ^  / (  -1)  -1 1 - 
                                               0                      g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                   O( ^) =            -1 1-                          ,
                                                   0             g ( ,  ) d  d 

and I ( ^ ) the cumulative variable input share in the domestic market,

                                                 ^  / (  -1)  -1 - 
                                               0                 g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                    I(^) =            -1 -                      .
                                                   0          g ( ,  ) d  d 

The elasticity s ( ^ ) is also proportional to the distribution of firm after-tax sales within the domestic market
                               d ln(1- I ( ^ ))                                               d ln(1-O( ^ ))
and is given by s (   ^ ) = - d ln      ^       . The elasticity  ( ^ ) is given by  ( ^) = -       d^       .


                                                         17
(2020), which decomposes the macroeconomic impact of microeconomic shocks to produc-
tivity and wedges, and show that the effect on output can be decomposed into a "pure
technology effect" and a "resource allocation effect". The former is the change in output
holding fixed the share of resources going to each user; the latter is the change in output
resulting from the reallocation of shares of resources across users. The difference between
BF and our closed-economy model is the endogenous firm selection and entry. If the selec-
tion mechanism is shut off in our model, then the aggregate price index -d ln P becomes
                                                                         pi qi
pi qi /( PQ), which then translates into a formula for welfare change:   PQ      + ( - 1)[ p i qi
                                                                                           PQ - L ].
                                                                                                  i


This expression says that the aggregate impact of firm i's productivity shock depends on
its sales share and the gap between its sales share and labor share. Holding fixed the labor
used by each firm, the productivity shock increases the producer's sales. But the shock also
changes relative prices, and in turn demand, which causes a reallocation of labor among
firms. If firm i is relatively subsidized, then 1/i is larger than the average level of distor-
tion, and its labor share is larger than its output share. This producer is too large relative
to the efficient allocation, and thus, reallocating labor towards this firm worsens allocative
efficiency.

   The same reasoning applies for trade cost shocks in an open economy. A shock to trade
costs induces an endogenous selection of firms that induces a shuffling of resources. As
relatively subsidized firms expand thanks to this `technology' shock, allocative efficiency
deteriorates. Thus, apart from a first-order welfare gain working through lowering the
price index, a reduction in trade costs also incurs a first-order loss through the reallocation
of resources.

   This open-economy case is more complex compared to the closed-economy setting, for
the reason that trade has a differential impact on firms. Some firms that remain domestic
producers are not directly affected by the trade cost shock, while others may be selected
into exporting. Or still yet, some firms may be ousted from producing altogether. Despite
these heterogeneous effects, a neat result arises: the gap between aggregate input share and
aggregate sales share is informative of the allocative efficiency. If the change in aggregate
domestic labor share S is greater than the change in domestic expenditure share , then the
trade cost shock could be welfare-reducing. More precisely, we can view the reallocation


                                              18
effect as arising from an intensive margin: holding selection fixed, i.e., d ln ^  = 0, the
shifting of resources among an existing set of firms is captured by (dlnS - d ln ). From an
extensive margin, where selection and cutoffs ^  change, the gap of S and  and  and s
summarize the reallocation of resources towards or away from more distorted firms (more
on this below).

  For our purposes, selection is vital. Trade affects resource allocation through an en-
dogenous selection of firms. Even in a closed economy, selection and entry both affect
the allocation of resources and welfare. This makes our exercise different from HK, apart
from the open-economy nature of this model. The number of varieties is determined by
entry and the probability of successful operating. Entry can be important because varieties
affect welfare, and entry directly affects the number of varieties. Selection and entry make
a difference also can be seen from that the special case of BF and HK, where productivities
and wedges are jointly log-normal, the joint distribution is irrelevant--only the marginal
distribution of the wedges matters. This is no longer the case when selection and entry are
taken into account, as in our framework.

  We now go one step further in understanding these reallocation effects, and how the wel-
fare expression in Proposition 2 relates to trade gains arising from canonical trade models.
We derive a general expression for changes in welfare associated with changes in trade
costs. Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012) (henceforward ACR) demonstrate
that in the absence of distortions, welfare changes across a wide class of models can be
inferred using two variables: (i) changes in the share of expenditure on domestic goods;
and (ii) the elasticity of bilateral imports with respect to variable trade costs (the trade
elasticity). Different trade models can have different micro-level predictions, sources of
welfare gains, and different structural interpretations of the trade elasticity. But condi-
tional on observed trade flows and an estimated trade elasticity, the welfare predictions are
the same. The generality of this formulation, however, relies on a certain set of macro-level
restrictions. Melitz and Redding (2015) (henceforth MR) show that under more general dis-
tribution functions for productivity, the trade elasticity is no longer invariant to trade costs
and across markets, and therefore no longer a sufficient statistic for welfare. Micro-level
information is still important for welfare.


                                              19
   In the analysis below, we first consider a fall in trade costs in an open economy equilib-
rium. The following proposition provides a general representation of welfare:

Proposition 3. (General Welfare Expression) The change in welfare associated with an iceberg
cost shock is

              1
d ln W =            - d ln        ( ACR)                                                   (16)
           s +  - 1
                     + d ln Me    ( MR)
                          
                     +       (s -  )d ln Me
                       -1
                                 s                     
                     - -1+              d ln  +  - 1 +    d ln S                ( Reallocation)
                                -1                     -1


   PROOF: Appendix B.2.

The above proposition encapsulates welfare results for three different cases:
1. Without domestic distortions, S =  and s =  . If productivity follows a Pareto
distribution with parameter  ,  =  -  + 1 and dlnMe = 0. Hence,

                                              1
                                     dlnW =     [-dln]
                                              

as in ACR.

   2. Under a general distribution function and without domestic distortions, S = , s =
 (non constants), and dlnMe = 0. Hence,

                                      1
                           dlnW =           [-dln + dlnMe ] .
                                     +  - 1

Here, the micro structure matters for  and hence welfare, as in MR.

   3. With homogenous productivity and Pareto-distributed domestic distortion 1/ with
                    -1                         -1
parameter  ,  =      (    -  + 1) and s =       (   - ). Hence,

                                        
                               dlnW =      [dlnS - dln] .
                                        -1

   In this general welfare representation, the first term is referred to as ACR, the second


                                              20
and the third term relate to entry (which captures the changes to Me ), and the fourth term
is brought about by distortions, and is referred to as a reallocation effect. Information on
the change of domestic shares (sales and variable labor), the measure of entrants, the joint
distribution of firms sales and variable inputs, and the cutoff firms (from which we know
 and s ) are sufficient for computing the associated welfare change for a local change in
trade cost.

   It's useful to examine the special cases embedded therein. If there is only heterogeneity
in productivity, Pareto-distributed (case 1), the ACR formula is recovered. The case without
distortion and under a more general productivity distribution gives rise to MR. The second
special case is that under misallocation, where there is only heterogeneity in distortions
which is Pareto distributed, an analogue formula to ACR can be obtained: the difference in
the change in the domestic labor and sales share provides a sufficient statistics for welfare.

   In the two special cases (1) and (3), firm selection is either driven solely by productivity,
or solely by distortions. The former implies that there is always a welfare improvement
when the economy opens up to trade, whereas the latter implies that there is an unam-
biguous loss (see corollary below). In the more general case, productivity and distortions
jointly determine firm selection. The resource reallocation is both one amongst existing
firms (last term), and along the entry dimension (third term). Without distortions, a firm's
share of input is equal to its share of sales, so that in aggregate, S = . In the presence
of distortions, the two are no longer equal. The gap between input and sales shares is
informative about changes in allocative efficiency. If the change in required inputs exceeds
the change in revenue it produces, i.e. dlnS < dln, it means with further opening up,
the input share used to produce for exports exceeds the export revenue share. Resources
reallocation has induced an efficiency loss.14


Corollary 1. (Welfare Loss) Under homogenous productivity and Pareto-distributed domestic
  14 We   also study the welfare expression in the Ricardian model and Armington model with distortions in
Bai, Jin, and Lu (2020). The gap between domestic input share and sales share in total expenditure is still
informative of resource reallocation. A proposition similar to Corollary 1 holds for these two models with
distortions.




                                                    21
distortion 1/ with parameter  ,

                                               
                                    dlnW =        [dlnS - dln] ,
                                               -1

and

   1. Moving from a closed economy to an open economy always entails a welfare loss, as  > S.

   2. In the open-economy equilibrium, the reallocation term is         
                                                                     (  -1) 
                                                                             [(1 -  )d ln  +  d ln S]   and
      is always negative.15

   PROOF: Appendix B.3.

   This corollary presents two important features under the special case (3). First, compared
to the closed economy, an open economy with any level of finite iceberg trade cost always
has a lower welfare-- so long as there is selection into exporting. Second, in an open
economy equilibrium, a marginal reduction of iceberg cost always brings about a negative
reallocation effect, so long as it results in a higher fraction of exporters in equilibrium, thus
worsening misallocation with the reduction in trade costs.

   The intuition for why the open economy has a lower welfare than in the closed economy
is made transparent by this special case: under homogenous productivity, the efficient
allocation for the closed economy is that firms have identical market shares. When the
economy opens up to trade, under homogenous productivity, efficient allocation is that
either all firms export or none of them export, and hence the ex-post should also be equal
market shares for all firms. However, with distortions, the relatively subsidized firms
produce more than in the efficient case, with the dispersion of sales (employment) reflecting
the distortions. When opening up to trade, it is the relatively subsidized firms that export,
in turn making the firm's distribution even more skewed--misallocation is exacerbated.
The share of labor required in producing domestic goods ends up being less than the
domestic output share. When firm selection is purely driven by distortions, allocative
efficiency deteriorates when moving from autarky to an open economy.

   Point 2 in the above Corollary focuses on a local change in trade costs in the open econ-
  15 In  the welfare expression, the second and third terms cancel out, and the welfare change is
                           s                      
   
(  -1) 
        [-d ln  -  -1+     -1 d ln  +  - 1 + -1 d ln S ] = (-1) [ - d ln  + (1 -  ) d ln  +  d ln S ], where
                                                            

the sign of (1 -  )d ln  +  d ln S is always negative.


                                                    22
omy equilibrium. The difference in the change in the share of expenditure on domestic
goods and the share of variable labor used in producing domestic goods constitutes a suf-
ficient statistics for the welfare change. This change of welfare reduces to two terms: the
standard ACR term, where -d ln  > 0, and the reallocation term, which are always neg-
ative. Overall, the change in welfare in the open economy equilibrium displays a U-shape
pattern. Hence for a marginal change in trade cost, the welfare change can be negative or
positive: for high levels of trade cost, there is a welfare loss; and for low levels of trade
cost, there is a welfare gain. The reason is that firm selection driven by distortions are
less significant when trade costs are small (at zero trade cost all firms export), and the
welfare gains dominate the losses associated with reallocation. Nonetheless, when firms
selection purely driven by distortions, open always have lower welfare than closed, and the
reallocation term are always negative.

  Having established sufficiency conditions in the special case, we can now examine a
more general case. The necessary condition for the resource allocation term to be negative
is: either s   or d ln S  d ln . Intuitively, misallocation happens when the input
elasticity is smaller than the revenue elasticity, i.e. more resources are used to produce the
same unit of revenue. The following corollary presents a sufficient condition for s  
for a more general distribution for productivity and distortions.


Corollary 2. Suppose ( , ) are jointly log-normal with standard deviations of  and  and
                           -1
correlation . When           ,      then;

  1. The cumulative variable labor share distribution stochastically dominates the cumulative sales
     share distribution according to the likelihood ratio order.

  2. The hazard functions s   and shares S   at any cutoff, hence moving from a closed
     economy to an open economy, the reallocation term is always negative.

  PROOF: Appendix B.4.

                                 -1
  Under the condition              ,        the cumulative labor share distribution stochastically
dominates the cumulative sales share distribution according to the likelihood ratio order.
Theoretically, we can prove that moving from a closed to open economy, the labor share
used to produce exports is always greater than the export share of total sales, or in other


                                                  23
words, the share of variable labor used in producing domestic goods is always smaller than
the share of expenditure on domestic goods, i.e., S  . This implies that going from a
closed to open economy d ln S is more negative than d ln .

   Intuitively, recall that cutoffs for production or exporting are related to firm profits,
which now depend on ( ,  ), and the cumulative labor share and sales share distribu-
tion are functions of different values for ^ . Since likelihood dominance implies first-order
stochastic dominance, under the above condition the cumulative labor share distribution
has more mass among higher profit firms than the cumulative output share distribution.
Thus, when the economy opens to trade, higher profit firms start to export, the share of
labor used to produce exports would exceed the export share. We illustrate this in the
numerical example in the next subsection and Figure 1.
                                                                       -1
   Note that when the correlation between  ,  is negative,                   is always satisfied,
which means moving from a closed economy to an open economy, the reallocation term
is always negative. This may sound counterintuitive at first glance. When the correlation
between  ,  is negative, less productive firms are highly taxed and less likely to export.
But as we discussed in this section, opening up to trade occasions more subsidized firms to
expand, and so the share of labor used to produce exports would exceed the export share,
making the reallocation term negative. This does not rule out, however, a direct positive
technological effect that dominates, so overall the loss is smaller than the one with a positive
correlation. Again we illustrate this in the numerical example in the next subsection (Figure
6 (a)).

   Proposition 3 applies to both symmetric and asymmetric countries and takes into con-
sideration the impact of the Foreign distribution of firms on the Home country. It also
shows the effect of domestic distortions on a Foreign country. In the case where the For-
eign economy does not have distortions, the third and fourth terms in Foreign's welfare
formula go to zero. The Foreign welfare is provided in the following proposition:

Proposition 4. (Foreign Welfare) In the case that the Foreign economy is devoid of distortions,

                                          1
                          d ln W f =            [-d ln  f + d ln Me f ].
                                       f +  - 1



                                                24
   Thus, Home's domestic distortions affect Foreign only through Foreign's  f , Me f , the
cutoffs f , and hence  f .

Discussion. Proposition 3 is useful for making transparent the key mechanism that un-
derlies how trade and misallocation affect welfare. It also easily relates to the existing
literature, such as the ACR and MR formulations. Thus, it is the main decomposition
we emphasize. However, there are various guises under which the welfare decomposition
can assume. For example, using the equilibrium conditions, we can decompose welfare
changes into domestic sales share, entry, and aggregate wedge MRPL, i.e.

                         1                                      / (  - 1 )
           d ln W =            [-d ln  + d ln Me ] +                       + 1 d ln MRPL,                (17)
                        +  - 1                                  +  - 1

where the aggregate wedge is defined as the marginal revenue product of labor, MRPL =
PQ/ L. With a constant labor, the change in the average wedge is the same as the change
of aggregate expenditure PQ, i.e. d ln MRPL = d ln PQ. Trade changes the aggregate ex-
penditure (and thus selection) and hence welfare in the economy. Equivalently, the welfare
change can be written in the following way,

                             1
                   d ln W =     [-d ln  + d ln Me -  d ln   ^  ] + d ln MRPL                             (18)
                             -1
                             1
                           =    [-d ln ] - d ln Pd + d ln MRPL,                                          (19)
                             -1

where Pd is the price index for domestic goods. We can label the first term as gains from
import, and the second term relates to loss from exit as in Hsieh, Li, Ossa, and Yang (2016).
Without distortion, d ln MRPL = 0. In our model, distortions affect domestic sales share,
entry, selection and resource allocation. The additional effect of d ln MRPL and  reflect
how selection in foreign market and domestic market change the joint distribution of wedge
and sales, i.e. the allocation of resources.16

   The change in the average wedge d ln MRPL maps onto the reallocation effect in Propo-
  16 Without   distortions, firms exit if and only if welfare Q improves. The reason is that real wage w/ P
increases as welfare improves, Q = (w/ P) L, and domestic selection depends only on w/ P. However, with
distortions, the link between firm exit and rising welfare is broken. Competition arising from trade may drive
out firms from either domestic or foreign market but still reduce welfare. A good example is the point 3 after
the Proposition 3.



                                                     25
sition 3. It links to the gap between d ln S and d ln . The aggregate wedge is a harmonic
average of firm distortions with sales as weights. It also relates to the tariff/wedge and
labor share as in Baqaee and Farhi (2019) and Edmond, Midrigan, and Xu (2018). A fall in
aggregate wedge implies welfare losses--as resources are reallocated towards more subsi-
dized firms.

  In general, all of these decompositions, (16), (17), and (19), demonstrate that for the ex-
post gains from trade, one needs firm-level data to examine the change in hazard rates 
and/or s , the response of firm entry and changes in share gap or aggregate wedge. As
discussed in MR, measuring the response of firm entry to changes in trade cost is equally
challenging to estimating a partial trade elasticity and recovering the change in trade in-
duced by a change in trade costs alone. Moreover, distortions pose an even more daunting
task for measuring the welfare gain directly using firm-level data. Hazard rates  and s
are variant and depend on the underlying joint distribution of wedge and productivity and
micro structure. Due to measurement issues and endogenous selection, we cannot directly
measure the joint distribution from the data. A detailed discussion is provided in Section
3.1. Furthermore, ex-ante welfare evaluation depends on the underlying joint distribution
of wedge and productivity and across different values for trade costs in the model as they
change the reallocation effect. We therefore will use our model to estimate the underlying
parameters and the corresponding gain or loss from trade for both ex-ante and ex-post
exercises in Section 3.


2.3   Numerical Example

To unpack the theoretical results and to provide more intuition for the mechanisms that
underpin these results, we next turn to a numerical example of the benchmark model with
symmetric countries. The joint distribution between productivity and distortions is taken
to be joint log-normal with standard deviations of  =  = 0.5 and correlation of  and 
of  = 0.8. The elasticity of substitution  = 2, and the fixed costs are f = 0.03, f x = 0.035,
f e = 0.01.

  Corollary 2 applies here as the distribution of ( ,  ) and the parameters satisfies its
conditions. We plot the cumulative variable input and sales share under any log( ^ ) in panel

                                             26
              Figure 1: Accumulated Labor Share vs Sales Share in a Market




                (a) With Distortion                         (b) Without Distortion


(a) of Figure 1. According to Corollary 2, the cumulative variable input share distribution
stochastically dominates the cumulative sales share distribution according to the likelihood
ratio order, which implies first-order stochastic dominance. In contrast, without distortions
with  = 1, these two distributions are identical as shown in panel (b) of Figure 1. When
the economy opens to trade, firms that export are those with high profit and also use a
large share of labor to produce. Overall, the share of labor used to produce exports would
exceed the export share, worsening the misallocation of resources.

  The example helps illustrate a few points. First, welfare (Eq. 15) can fall when the econ-
omy opens up to trade. Figure 2 (a) plots the level of welfare against import shares under
the alternative scenarios: the efficient case without distortions, the case with distortions,
and when the economy is closed or open. Three observations immediately follow: 1) that
there is a welfare loss in the case with distortions compared to the case without; 2) opening
up to trade leads to welfare gains in the efficient case; however, 3) opening up engenders
a welfare loss in the presence of distortions. Taking the differences between the open and
close economy in either case, with or without distortion, we plot the welfare change after
trade in Figure 2 (b). It is clear that there is welfare loss with distortions in our benchmark.

  Second, we plot the welfare decompositions according to the welfare formula (16) in Fig-
ure 3 (a), which displays the three components in our benchmark model-- the ACR term,
entry Me , and reallocation. Through the impact of technology, welfare increases with lower
trade cost, i.e the ACR term increases with the import share. Trade, however, exacerbates
the misallocation and reduces allocative efficiency. Hence, the reallocation term becomes

                                              27
                       Figure 2: Welfare and the Change from Trade

                                                                       0.2

                                                                     0.15




                                                   Gain from Trade
                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                          efficient
                                                                     0.05

                                                                        0

                                                                     -0.05
                                                                                                 bench

                                                                      -0.1
                                                                             0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2     0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4
                                                                                             Import Share

                   (a) Welfare                                                      (b) Gain from Trade


more and more negative as the import share increases. Overall, the resource misallocation
effect dominates, and the benchmark shows welfare losses with trade. In the current ex-
ample, the entry effect (the change in varieties) plays a very small role. It is negative in the
case without distortions but practically unchanged in the case with distortions. However,
the channel we emphasize 'reallocation' has a first-order impact in the case with distor-
tions. In the case without distortions, there is no misallocation and the resource allocation
term remains zero. The entry effect becomes more negative with trade, which mitigates the
increase in ACR. Overall, there is a welfare gain after trade.

  Third, the numerical example also demonstrates that using import shares to infer welfare
changes can gives rise to markedly different results when there are distortions. Figure 3
(a) shows that ACR invariably predicts gains to trade, rather than losses. Figure 3 (b)
shows that in the absence of distortions, ACR is a good approximation for welfare in the
efficient case. But using ACR under distortions leads to a large departure: under these
benchmark results there are welfare losses rather than gains. Using aggregate observables
to infer welfare gains as in ACR can thus be very misleading in the presence of distortions.

  Note that in this numerical example, the two countries are symmetric, and both face
domestic distortions. The assumption of symmetry abstracts from terms of trade effect and
highlights the role of misallocation in generating loss from trade. Specifically, Home suffers
a loss from trade is not because Home is subsidizing firms' exports and Foreign gains due
to a terms of trade effect. This symmetric example emphasizes that loss from trade comes
from the deterioration of resource allocations.

                                              28
                                                          Figure 3: Welfare Decomposition

                      0.3                                                                      0.3

                      0.2                           ACR                                        0.2
                                                                                                                ACR
    Gain from Trade




                                                                             Gain from Trade
                      0.1                                                                      0.1
                                                                 Me                                                         Efficient
                                                                                                                                              Reallocation
                        0                                                                        0

                      -0.1                                                                     -0.1                                           Me
                                                      Bench
                      -0.2                                                                     -0.2

                      -0.3             Reallocation                                            -0.3

                      -0.4                                                                     -0.4
                             0   0.1          0.2         0.3    0.4                                  0   0.1         0.2               0.3           0.4
                                           Import Share                                                          Import Share

                                  (a) With distortion                                                     (b) Without distortion


  Fourth, we can examine the selection mechanism at the micro level, which explains how
trade can reduce aggregate efficiency. In the same numerical example, Figure 4 illustrates
how distortions affect firm selection. The density of firms is shown by a heat map of firms
that lie along a positively sloped distortion-productivity line. It is clear that the productivity
cutoff for production and exports is no longer determined solely by productivity, but also
by domestic distortion. Only firms below the cutoff line can operate. In this figure, a large
mass of highly-productive firms are excluded from servicing the market altogether. As the
economy opens up, the cutoff line is shifted further downward. Even if firms have the same
level of productivity, some with higher taxes may be displaced while those with lower ones
will survive. This downward shift of the cutoffs allows for some low productivity and high
subsidy firms to survive and gain market share.

  Another way to show the impact on selection is to examine firms' market share. The two
panels in Figure 5 plot the market share of firms, both in the closed and open economy. The
left panel is the case without distortions. Without distortion, the marginal cost is the inverse
of the productivity . Firms with the same productivity level have the same marginal cost;
their market share, above a cutoff productivity, rises with their productivity. Comparing
the blue and red lines show that above the export cutoff, more productive firms have
higher market shares in the open economy than in the closed economy, demonstrating that
these firms expand under trade liberalization. This happens at the cost of displacing other
less productive firms' market share, or driving them out of the market entirely. Here, the
example clearly demonstrates that resources move from less productive to more productive


                                                                        29
                                                                               Figure 4: Cutoffs


                                      3
                                                                                                                                    .025

                                                                                                                                    .02
                                      2




                                                                                                                                           (mean) den
                                                                                                                                    .015
                              log t




                                                                                                                                    .01
                                      1




                                                                                                                                    .005

                                                                                                                                    0
                                      0




                                                 -1          -.5                 0          .5                  1         1.5
                                                                             log Productivity

                                                                             Autarky production cutoff
                                                                             Open production cutoff
                                                                             Export cutoff
                                          correlation=0.8




firms as an economy opens up to trade.

                                                                   Figure 5: Selection Effects
              0.06                                                                                     0.04


              0.05
                                                                                                       0.03
                                                                                                                                                        Open
              0.04
    Percent




                                                                                             Percent




                                                                  Open
              0.03                                                                                     0.02


              0.02

                                                                                                       0.01
              0.01

                             Close                                                                              Close
                0                                                                                        0
                 -2   -1.5       -1       -0.5        0     0.5          1       1.5    2                -1.5       -1      -0.5    0               0.5        1   1.5


                             (a) Without distortion                                                                      (b) With distortion


  The right panel shows the firm's market share in the case with distortions. Firms may
share the same marginal cost  /  and face the same potential revenues. However, their
after-tax profits may differ, and thus their market share can also differ. Consider the point
at which log( / ) is at 0. At this point, a firm with high, medium and low level of
productivity face the same marginal costs. However, the high productivity firm is also
subject to high taxes and thus low after-tax profit, and does not make the cut for production.

                                                                                            30
The medium-tax-medium-productivity firm has positive market share but loses out to the
low-tax-low-productivity firm when the economy opens up. Resources are reallocated from
the more productive to the less productive firms. Also, there is no longer a neat line up
of market shares according to productivity: there is a wide range of productivities for
which production is excluded.17 Aggregate welfare effect depends on how trade alters the
aggregate domestic labor share and sales share.

Distribution of Distortions. The distribution of distortions is an important determinant
to the gains to trade. There are two key parameters: , the correlation of  and , and  ,
the dispersion of  . Figure 6 (b) compares the gains from trade under different  , while
the other parameters remain the same as in the benchmark example. The welfare gain
(loss) from trade is always larger (smaller) when  is smaller.

   The correlation of distortion and productivity is important insofar as a higher correlation
means that more productive firms are more likely to be excluded from the market. But
reductions in welfare is possible even when the correlation is negative. The reason is
that for any given productivity, it is always the more subsidized firms that can export,
and the highly taxed ones that exit-- leading to a possible worsen of misallocation. In
fact, as shown in Corollary 2, when the correlation is negative, more productive firms are
highly subsidized. Exporters are those more productive and highly subsidized ones, hence
their labor share are larger than sales share, and the reallocation term is always negative.
Overall effects combine the positive "technology" effect and the negative reallocation effect.
Figure 6 (a) illustrates this. It compares the gains from trade for  = 0.8, under our
benchmark numerical example, and for  = -0.8, where productivity and distortion are
highly negatively correlated. Under  = -0.8, the welfare gain (loss) from trade is always
larger (smaller) than that in the case of  = 0.8. But when the import share is below 20%,
there are still losses from trade even under a negative correlation.

   In sum, the size of welfare loss after opening up depends on the correlation of  and 
and the dispersion of  . The firm level data helps us identify these parameters. Specifically,
in the quantitative section, we will use the firm-level output and use its dispersion and its
  17 This
        is also true if the distortions are input wedge on all the labor a firm uses. Firms face higher input
wedge would have a lower profit in a market.


                                                     31
                                                            Figure 6: Gains/Loss from Trade
                      0.25                                                                                         0

                        0.2                                                                                     -0.02
                      0.15




                                                                                              Gain from Trade
                                                                                                                -0.04
    Gain from trade




                        0.1
                                                            =-0.8                                               -0.06
                      0.05

                         0
                                                                                                                -0.08                              =0.5
                                                                                                                                               t
                      -0.05                                         =0.8
                                                                                                                 -0.1      t
                                                                                                                               =0.6
                       -0.1

                      -0.15                                                                                     -0.12
                              0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25      0.3   0.35   0.4                                  0.05     0.1   0.15     0.2       0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4
                                                 Import Share                                                                                 Import Share

                                     (a) Correlation Matters                                                                   (b) Dispersion Matters


correlation with firm inputs to estimate ,  , and  .



3                     Quantitative Analysis

This section presents estimates of the quantitative effects of trade liberalization when in-
cluding domestic distortions. The two countries, Home and Foreign, are calibrated to data
corresponding to China and the U.S.. The U.S. is taken to be the relatively undistorted
economy. In what follows, we first demonstrate why distortions and productivity cannot
be measured directly from the data--a customary approach adopted in past and present
works. Instead, our approach is to take the moments related to distortion and productiv-
ity in the data, use them to parameterize our model, and then estimate the welfare gain
or losses from trade liberalization. We also conduct out-of-sample tests by examining the
differential patterns among exporters and non-exporters in both the cross-section and the
time series dimension and compare the results to key implications of our model. Lastly,
we consider extensions to our benchmark model. Our aim is not to provide a full-fledged
quantitative account of China's trade liberalization experience. For that, one would need a
much richer model with a complex set of mechanisms. Instead, the main purpose is to use
China as an example to demonstrate the large quantitative and potentially qualitative dif-
ferences that may arise under a model with distortions, compared to the standard model
without distortions. After all, the presence of distortions is a prominent feature of not
only the Chinese economy, but also of many other developing countries for which trade

                                                                                         32
liberalisation is most vigorously studied.


3.1   Data and Measurement

The data for Chinese firms comes from an annual survey of manufacturing enterprises
collected by the Chinese National Bureau of Statistics. The dataset includes non-state firms
with sales over 5 million RMB (about 600,000 US dollars) and all of the state firms for the
1998-2007 period. Information is derived from the balance sheet, profit and loss statements,
and cash flow statements, which incorporate more than 100 financial variables. The raw
data consist of over 125,858 firms in 1998 and 306,298 firms by 2007.

  Our strategy is to use the observed distributions of inputs, outputs, and export partic-
ipations from Chinese firm data to estimate the joint distribution of distortions and pro-
ductivity in conjunction with other parameters in the model. We do not recover the joint
distribution directly from the data for two reasons. First, neither a firm's productivity nor
its distortions can be measured directly. Second, firm selection affects the observed joint
distribution of wedge and productivity. The observed joint distribution in the data is the
ex-post one after selection, rather than the underlying one. The importance of these two
issues merits a full elaboration below. The alternative strategy that we choose to adopt is
then detailed in Section 3.2.

  The customary way to recover a firm's productivity or distortion is to use its value-added
per input. This measurement, however, could be contaminated with the presence of dis-
tortions or fixed cost of producing. Using the first order condition of a firm's optimization
problem (1), we can write the value added per input as

                                   pq               f
                                          1-             ,                               (20)
                                                  ( ,  )

where f also includes exporting fixed cost if firm exports. If there are no wedges,  = 1,
the value added per input increases with input , which in turn increases with a firm's
physical productivity, as in Melitz. If there are no fixed costs, f = 0, the value added per
input actually measure the firm's wedges, as in HK. With both wedges and fixed costs, the
value added per input not only depends on the productivity of the firm but also on the


                                             33
true wedge  . For this reason, we cannot use the value- added per input to measure the
firm's productivity or its wedges.

   The second reason for which one cannot recover the joint distribution directly from
the data is firm selection. The observed dispersion and correlation of some measured
wedge and productivity pertains to only operating firms. Hence, it is confounded with
an endogenous selection mechanism. For instance, even if the underlying correlation were
negative, the selection mechanism can induce the observed correlation to become positive,
for the simple reason that high-taxed firms must be more productive in order to stay in the
market. The selection mechanism will strengthen any underlying correlation between the
two variables. For the same reason, the observed dispersions of the two variables are also
the ones after selection has taken place. In order to compute the impact of distortions on
welfare and productivity gains, one would need to know the underlying correlation and
dispersion, and therefore one would need micro data and a structural model to uncover it.
This is exactly the approach we adopt, detailed in the following subsection.18


3.2    Parameterization

Table 1 reports the parameter values. We set the elasticity of substitution between varieties
 to be 3, the one taken in HK. This value is consistent with the estimates from plant-level
US manufacturing data in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003). The Home labor L
is normalized to 1. Given that Foreign affects Home only though aggregate variables, we
can assume that Foreign is absent of distortions, while taking f e , f , f x , x ,  to be the same
as those in Home.

   The remaining 9 parameters are estimated jointly, to match the model moments with
their data counterparts. Table 1 reports the estimated parameters and the moments in the
data and model. The moments we choose are the ones that are most relevant and sensitive
to variations in model parameters. Clearly, every parameter matters for the general equi-
librium and affects other moments. However, there is by and large a clear correspondance
between certain parameters and moments. The parameter most relevant for matching the
  18 Note  that our approach is different from the existing literature, for example Costa-Scottini (2018) and
Ho (2010), which assume a perfect correlation of (log) productivity and (log) wedges and take the joint
distribution of average revenue product of labor and measured productivity directly from the data.


                                                     34
                                  Table 1: Parametrization and Moments

                  Panel A: Parameters                                           Panel B: Moments

       Endogenously chosen                     Value           Targeted moments                         Data   Model
       Entry cost f e                                0.2       Fraction of firms producing              0.85     0.85
       Fixed cost of producing f                   0.015       Mean-lowest 5% ln(k 1- )                 1.82     1.53
       Fixed cost of export f x                     0.12       Fraction of firms exporting              0.30     0.28
       Iceberg trade cost x                          1.5       Export intensity                         0.41     0.42
       Std. productivity                             1.2       Std. ln VA                               1.20     1.26
       Std. distortion                               0.9       Std. ln(VA/(k 1- )))                     0.93     0.84
       Corr(distortion, productivity)               0.86       Corr(ln VA, ln(VA/(k 1- )))              0.41     0.35
       Mean foreign prod µ f                         5.5       Relative GDP of U.S. to China            1.79     1.77
       Foreign labor L f                             0.2       Relative labor of US to China            0.20    0.20

       Assigned parameters
       Elasticity of substitution                      3
       Home labor L                                    1
        Note: VA denotes value added, k capital,    employment, Std standard deviation, Corr correlations.



fraction of surviving firms is the entry cost f e , as e E[ ( ,  )] = w f e . Lower entry costs in-
duces more entrants to pay the costs, and the result is a lower fraction of survivors. Next, to
identify the fixed cost f , one needs only to turn to the smallest firms, which have their profit
just about cover fixed cost. That is, the after-tax profit  = w f and w                           min   = (  - 1) w f + w f ,
and the mean of firms' labor w              mean     = ( - 1)w( f e /e + f ) + w f . Hence, the difference
between mean and lowest 5% of input helps identify f .

  We choose foreign labor L f to 0.2 to match the relative labor force of US to China. We
calibrate f x and x to match the export participation and intensity in Chinese manufac-
turing. The resulting parameter x = 1.5 is inline with the estimate of 1.7 in Anderson
and Van Wincoop (2004), and the 1.83 in Melitz and Redding (2015). The dispersions in
productivity and distortions, and their correlation are important for matching the observed
joint distribution between value-added and inputs in the data.

  In the model, labor represents inputs. However, the corresponding part in the data is
the composite inputs k          1-  ,   aggregated under a Cobb-Douglas function. This assumption
works both for the variable input and the fixed cost in the model. For a firm in industry j,
                                                                                                                         j 1-  j
its output q is produced with variable labor                    v   and capital k v using the form q j = k v               v




                                                              35
with an industry specify labor share 1 -  j . These industry labor shares come from the
U.S. NBER productivity database, which is based on the Census and the Annual Survey of
Manufactures (ASM). The reason that labor shares are not computed from Chinese data is
that the prevalence of distortions would affect these elasticities, and industry-level elastic-
ities and distortions cannot be separately identified. Different from HK, we take a firm's
total employment to measure      j   rather than the firm's wage bill. This addresses the prob-
lem that Chinese wage data implies too low of a labor share as measured by input-output
tables and the national accounts. We define the capital stock as the book value of fixed
capital net of depreciation.

  Table 1 shows that the discrepancy between our model and data moments is reasonably
small, though we underestimate the dispersion in distortions and slightly overestimate
the dispersion in size. An important variable is the correlation between value added and
VA/(k    1-  ),   Corr (ln VA, ln VA/(k   1- )).    This variable is more positive the higher is
 
  ,   where  is the underlying correlation between distortions and productivity. A higher
underlying correlation and a lower dispersion in distortions raise the observed correlation
between value added and inputs. Lastly, we choose the mean of foreign productivity µ f 
to match the relative GDP of US to China.


3.3    Implied Gains from Trade and Loss in TFP

Table 2 reports the gains from trade and efficiency losses for both Home and Foreign.
The upper panel compares welfare and TFP in the open economy to those in the closed
economy. In the benchmark estimation, the gains from trade for Home is 4.4%. Without
distortions, the gains from trade is more than doubled (9.8%). Foreign's gain from trade
is about 8.2% when Home has domestic distortions. Eliminating Home distortions allows
Foreign to benefit more--a 19% of welfare gain.

  Note that the general formulation of welfare given in Proposition 3 holds for asymmetric
countries. Thus, one can decompose the welfare change according to its main equation,
(Eq.16). In the benchmark case, the import share is 30.8%, which implies that the change
in domestic output share is -d ln  = 0.368, and the ACR term in the equation is 17.9%.
But there is a large and negative reallocation term showing up in China, amounting to

                                                   36
                                       Table 2: Welfare and TFP
                                           Open relative to close                     Decomposition
                             Welfare            TFP               Import Share      ACR    Reallocation
 Home (%)
 Benchmark                      4.4              -2.9                30.8           17.9          -18.2
 No-distortion                  9.8              13.3                20.8           11.4            0
 Foreign(%)
 Benchmark                     8.2               12.9                17.9           9.0            0
 No-distortion                18.9               13.3                 35            19.1           0
                              TFP loss: Distortion relative to no-distortion
                           Overall loss    Misallocation        Entry-selection
 Benchmark                   140.4              119.2                21.2
 Home Closed-Economy         124.2              118.7                 5.4


-18.2%. Taking only the ACR component would overestimate the gains to trade by 407%,
according to our model.19 . Moreover, if one were to ignore the presence of distortions and
followed the usual approach to ACR using a trade elasticity­ for instance of 4, estimated
in Simonovska and Waugh (2014), then the resulting welfare gains would be 9.2% ­ more
than double the gains that our model predicts. As Melitz and Redding (2015) show, trade
elasticities vary with trade costs, so whether a partial, a full or an average theoretical trade
elasticity is used will matter for the size of the ACR gain. But regardless, the ACR term is
positive no matter which elasticity is utilized. What we show here is that our `reallocation'
channel leads to a sizeable welfare loss.

   We assume here that Foreign does not face any distortions, and thus the reallocation
term for Foreign is zero according to our Proposition 3. Since Foreign has a smaller import
share than Home, one would arrive at the conclusion that more gains would accrue to
Home than to Foreign, according to ACR. But our benchmark model predicts the opposite:
Foreign has gains to trade that is almost double that of Home, whereas using conventional
ACR, Foreign's gain is only half of that of Home. Without distortions, the gains to trade
would double for both economies, suggesting that countries would gain more from trade
by undertaking domestic reforms.

   We also compare TFP before and after trade liberalization. To compute TFP, we need
  19 Note that in the decomposition in Proposition 3, the ACR component is related to the s , the elasticity
of the cumulative variable labor share within the domestic market for firms above the domestic cutoff, with
respect to the cutoff. It is much smaller than  , the elasticity of the cumulative sales share within the
domestic market for firms above the domestic cutoff, with respect to the cutoff. See corollary 3.

                                                    37
to define real GDP. As shown in Burstein and Cravino (2015), there are different ways to
construct price index and therefore real GDP. Here, we define the aggregate producer price
                              1
              -
as PPI = ( p1
            i   di ) 1- , where pi is the price charged by producer i. Our benchmark
results show that opening up leads to a 3% TFP loss. In contrast, without distortions, TFP
increases by 13.3%. Hence, contrary to the standard predictions, trade liberalization can
exacerbate rather than improve resource allocation, causing a decline rather than a rise in
TFP. As Foreign has no distortions, its TFP levels are basically the same between the two
models.

  The lower panel of Table 2 reports Home's TFP losses due to distortions, both for a
closed and open-economy case scenario. TFP loss is defined as the difference between
TFP under the case of distortions and no distortions. Different from Hsieh and Klenow
(2009), our efficient TFP considers endogenous entry. We are therefore able to decompose
the deviation of TFP from its efficient level into a misallocation effect among a fixed set of
operating firms, and a misallocation effect generated by entry and selection into producing
and export:


             log TFPe f f - log TFP = log TFPFX - log TFP + log TFPe f f - log TFPFX ,
                                                          misallocation loss                  entry and selection loss


where TFPe f f pertains to the case without distortions, TFPFX corresponds to the level in
the case without distortions among producing firms but where M,  , and x are fixed as

in a distorted economy.20

  Not surprisingly, there are large TFP losses for Home with domestic distortions than
  20 Here   are the definitions of TFPe f f and TFPFX in the closed economy,
                                                                       1                                                        1
                    -1                                                 -1                  -1                                   -1
                                                -1 e f f                                                       -1
       TFPe f f   =    Me f f                      µ       ( ) d            , TFPFX      =    M                     µ ( ) d          .
                                   e f f                                                               

and in the open economy,
                                                                                                                         1
                            -1                                                                                           -1
                                                         -1 e f f
               TFPe f f   =    Me f f                        µ      ( ) d  + M    ef f
                                                                                         ef f
                                                                                              ( )  -1 µ e f f (  ) d 
                                            e f f                                        x      x

                                                                                                                1
                                    -1                                                                          -1
                                                              -1
                          TFPFX   =    M                           µ ( ) d  + M          ( )  -1 µ (  ) d 
                                                                                    x     x




                                                                     38
without. In the closed-economy case, eliminating these distortions would increase China's
TFP by 124%. The TFP losses due to the presence of distortions are larger, 140%, in the open
economy benchmark model where China has an import share of more than 30%. Looking
at its decomposition, the majority of the losses appears to come from misallocation among
existing firms. One reason is that the share of surviving firms is high according to available
data, but the survival rate could be overestimated as the dataset includes firms only of a
certain scale. If smaller firms were observed, then it is possible that a lower survival rate
would make the losses coming from the entry and selection margin larger.


3.4   Selection through Export: Out-of-Sample Tests and Extensions

To provide a further check on the mechanisms that are highlighted, we proceed to un-
dertake a series of out-of-sample tests and extensions. In particular, one can compare the
differential patterns among exporters and non-exporters in both the cross-section and the
time series dimension in the data and in the model. In order to do so, we construct the cus-
tomary `TFPR' and `TFPQ' measures following HK, in both the data and the out-of-sample
model. Note that they relate to distortions and productivity, but are not the underlying
distortions and productivity in the model, as we have explained previously.

  We construct the TFPR with the weighted average of average revenue product of labor
and average revenue product of capital,


                    log( TFPR ji ) =  j log( ARPL ji ) + (1 -  j ) log( ARPK ji ).


Specifically, the relative average revenue product of labor ( ARPL ji ), is calculated as log p ji qij /   ij

- log ARPL j where ARPL j is the industry mean of the average product. Similarly, we
construct relative average revenue product of capital. In our model with fixed cost, the
average revenue product is a biased measurement of marginal revenue of product. Hence
TFPR is affected by the wedge, but also affected by the productivity of a firm, as shown
in equation (20). We find large dispersions in TFPR in China, similar to the levels in HK
for the year 1998 and 2007. Measured TFPR have come down over time, between 1998 and
2007, as evident in Table A-1.


                                                 39
   The TFPQ is related to the physical productivity of a firm and is measured with

                                                                               
                                                             1
                                                            1-    ( p ji q ji ) -1
                                  TFPQ ji = Pj-1 Q j                  j 1-  j
                                                                                     ,                     (21)
                                                                   k ji ji


with its deviation from the industry mean. In our model, the measured TFPQ uses the
                                        j 1-  j
similar formula but replacing k ji        ji      with total input used in a firm. Again both in the
data and the model, we use total inputs instead of variable inputs, hence TFPQ is not 
in our model, but is affected jointly by firm productivity, distortion and the selection into foreign
market.

   The first two columns of Table 3 reports the data and the model regressions of measured
TFPR on measured TFPQ and a dummy of exporters. Both the model and the data exhibit
a pattern whereby exporters face a lower TFPR. Note that the differences between exporters
and non-exporters were not targeted. There is a stronger selection effect in the model than
in the data--exporters' marginal product is about 64% lower than non-exporters in the
model, compared to 26% in the data.           21


   Exporters may face different distortions, which is absent from our benchmark model.
To examine whether Chinese firm characteristics change when they become exporters, we
examine the relationship between measured TFPR and firm export status in both cross
section and the time series dimension.

   We use the time series data to check whether distortions change when firms enter
the export market. This will help us understand whether differences between exporters
and non-exporters stem from selection or additional/different distortions when exporting.
Throughout the sample period, we sort exporters into three types: `always exporters' are
those who are exporting throughout the sample years 1998 to 2007, `starters' are those who
started to export after 1998, and `stoppers', who stop exporting sometime in the interim
years. Entry effect measures the percentage difference of TFPR for starters, between the
post- and pre-exporting entry periods. Exit effect measures percentage difference of TFPR
   21 Table A-2 investigates what factors are systematically related to TFPR for interested readers, and reports
the regression results of the TFPR of a firm on a set of variables beyond TFPQ and exporting status. The
coefficient on TFPQ is large and significant; 1 percent increase in relative TFPQ is associated with a 0.7
percent increase in relative TFPR. Moreover, more than half of the variation is explained by TFPQ alone.
Given TFPQ, exporters have lower TFPR on average.


                                                      40
               Table 3: TFPR, TFPQ, and exporting status, data vs model
                     (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)         (5)                   (6)
VARIABLES           Data       Benchmark     Data        Benchmark   Export rebate    Different  in export

entry effect                                -0.104***      -0.050       -0.103               -0.09
                                             (-12.69)
exit effect                                 0.0315***
                                             (4.574)
starter                                     -0.101***      -0.429       -0.400               -0.08
                                             (-21.74)
stopper                                    -0.0891***
                                             (-20.98)
always exporters                            -0.301***      -0.768       -0.791               -0.324
                                             (-23.47)
log(TFPQ)           0.636***     0.652       0.638***      0.653         0.654               0.613
                     (250.5)                 (254.9)
exporters          -0.264***     -0.637
                    (-24.14)
Constant           -3.258***     0.401     -3.255***       0.414         0.425               0.714
                    (-106.2)                (-107.0)

Observations        1,587,629                  1,584,242
R-squared             0.823                      0.826
Time FE                Yes                        Yes
Industry FE            Yes                        Yes
Note: Robust t-statistics in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
The dependent variable is measured average product, which is log( TFPR) in the data
and log(VA/( v + f )) in the model.




                                                    41
for stoppers, between the post- and pre-exporting exit periods. As shown in Column 3 of
Table 3, in the data, `always exporters' have a lower TFPR. Firms' measured TFPR decrease
when they start exporting and increase when they exit.

  Notice that in our benchmark model that although the firm-level distortions are exoge-
nous, the measured TFPR do change after firms start exporting-- due to the fixed costs
of exporting. Column 4 shows this mechanism. In our benchmark model, if trade costs
decreases (from their 1998 level to their 2005 level in Section 3.5), some firms would start to
export, and their measured TFPR would decrease-- as shown in the entry-effect of column
4. Both `always exporters' and `starters' have lower measured TFPR, which are consis-
tent with the data. Our benchmark model shows a relatively large selection effect since
the model does not have as large heterogeneity as in the data, and a relative small entry
effect. In reality, the change in a firm's TFPR after exporting could be driven by multi-
ple factors. For example, exporters face different distortions from non-exporters, or there
are endogenous distortions that change with trade liberalization. We proceed to explore
these possibilities. Here we consider model extensions with export rebate and allow for
different distortions when exporting. In section 4.1 we consider an example of endogenous
distortion.

  In Column 5, we introduce a 10% tax rebate after exporting. This generates further
decrease of the measured TFPR upon exporting and an even larger reallocation effect. In
this case, export subsidies from tax rebate benefit the Foreign country, and Home welfare
gains from trade decreases to 1.6% and TFP loss increases to 4.5%.

  Column 6 considers an extension that firms face different distribution of distortion when
exporting. We use the standard deviation of export intensity to discipline the dispersion
of the additional wedges when exporting. To be more precise, we estimate the mean and
standard deviation of the extra export distortions to match the standard deviation of export
intensity and the regression coefficient on always exporters. When the trade cost is reduced
as in column 4, the non-targeted coefficient on starter and the entry effect are similar to the
data. Home welfare gains from trade further decreases to 1.1% in this extension. The rea-
son is that there are additional, direct distortions on firm selection into Foreign market,
when opening up to trade. Overall, if there are different distortions associated with export-


                                              42
ing, then the quantitative exercises show that losses are larger due to larger dispersion of
wedges, larger selection and reallocation effects.


3.5   Decomposing China's Growth from 1998-2005

The rapid growth in China over the last four decades has been one of the most remarkable
phenomena the world has witnessed in recent history. In between 1998 and 2005, its real
GDP increased by 57%. Accompanying this development was a combination of domestic
reforms and opening up programs--policies that fostered trade and FDI inflows. As a re-
sult, both trade and technological progress increased over time, while domestic distortions
concurrently fell. A natural question is how much of the growth is attributed to trade over
this period. Other competing factors include technological improvement, factor accumu-
lation, and domestic reforms--that is, the allocative gains associated with a reduction in
distortions. In what follows, we perform a quantitative analysis to answer this question.
Specifically, we recalibrate the model parameters for the year 1998 and compare the implied
GDP and TFP levels to those in the benchmark year, 2005. Overall, our results attribute the
majority of China's GDP and TFP growth to technological improvement, capital accumu-
lation, and a mitigation of distortions. Trade alone contributes to only about 8% of GDP
growth.

  Table 4 reports the moments for both 1998 and 2005. The starting year is taken to be
1998, as it is the first year in which firm-level data is available, and three years before
China joined the WTO. Compared to the year 2005, trade intensity was significantly lower
in 1998, both in terms of the fraction of firms that export, and also the export intensity of
these firms. Distortions were large in the earlier years, as partly seen by the fact that the
dispersion of TFPR was about 20% higher in 1998 compared to 2005. These imply a higher
trade cost x and dispersion of distortion  in 1998-- at about 43% and 20% higher than
the level in 2005. The mean TFP in 2005 is about 45% higher than that in 1998, reflecting
technological improvements and factor accumulation over time.

  These estimates are then used to run counterfactual experiments, in order to decompose
China's growth in between 1998 and 2005. The factors considered include technological
progress, input accumulation, and the reduction of trade costs and domestic distortions. In

                                             43
                                     Table 4: Data, 1998 and 2005
                     Target Moments                         Data (1998)   Data (2005)
                     Fraction of firms producing e             0.77           0.85
                     Mean - lowest 5% for ln(K  L1- )          2.04           1.82
                     Fraction of firm exporting                0.25           0.30
                     Export intensity                          0.30           0.41
                     std of existing firms ln(VA)              1.33           1.20
                     std of existing firms ln(VA/K  L1- )      1.12           0.93
                     Corr(lnVA, ln(VA/K  L1- ))                0.47           0.41
                     Relative real GDP of US to China          2.50           1.79
                     Change of China's real GDP                               57%


each experiment, the parameters for the year 1998 remain fixed, while each of the following
parameters­ mean TFP µ  , trade cost x , or dispersion of distortion  --are allowed to
vary to its 2005 level. Table 5 shows that the increase of technology and inputs alone
lead to a 44% increase in GDP and a 46% increase in TFP. Reduction in trade costs would
independently boost GDP by 8% and TFP by only 3%. In contrast, lowering the dispersion
of distortions increases GDP by 66% and TFP by 69%.22

   A notable point of comparison is with Tombe and Zhu (2019), which, despite adopting
an altogether different approach, finds also small gains to trade. In their model that features
migration across regions and sectors in China, international trade contributes to only 7%
of productivity growth in between 2000 and 2005. In other words, international trade has
led to very little allocative benefits of labor across regions and sectors--as compared to
direct reforms that lower migration costs or reductions in internal trade costs. Their model
does not feature distortions at the firm level that can render trade's allocative benefits even
smaller. This leads us to find an even smaller effect of trade on productivity in China over
roughly the same period.

   Of course, a caveat is that trade may also help reduce domestic distortions. If, say, the
WTO requires certain kind of domestic reforms as a pre-condition for entry, then some of
the technological improvement and reductions in the level of distortions could be partially
induced by opening up policies. We do not consider this here. Also, this quantitative
  22 Note  that the contributions to GDP or TFP increase don't add up to 100% because the productivity
distribution and fixed costs have also changed from 1998 to 2005. Furthermore, there are interacting effects
on mean TFP, trade cost, and distortion dispersions.



                                                    44
exercise of course also ignores other potential channels of gains to trade, such as pro-
competition effect of trade, or potentially transfers of technology (Ramondo and Rodríguez-
Clare (2013))­though these effects may still be quantitatively small. The point we make
here is that in our benchmark framework, the contribution of trade pales in comparison to
the contribution of domestic policies and technological progress in accounting for China's
growth experience.


               Table 5: Decomposition of China's Growth between 1998-2005
                                                       Change of Real GDP   Change of TFP
        Benchmark                                             57%               56%
        Counterfactual Change from 1998-2005:
        Technology and inputs alone (Increase mean )          44%               46%
        Trade alone (Decrease x )                              8%                3%
        Distortion alone (Decrease  )                         66%               69%




4     Discussion

In this section, we explore a model with endogenous distortion arising from endogenous
markup, which has been extensively studied in the standard trade literature. We show that
the endogenous markup model runs counter with the data in that exporters in the model
face a higher markup and distortion.

    We then address the issue of mismeasurement of inputs or outputs. We also use Bils,
Klenow, and Ruane (2017)'s method that detect measurement errors and show how it re-
lates to our estimates of marginal product and average product. We show that even taking
out the standard measurement errors, there are still large distortions remaining among
Chinese firms.


4.1    Endogenous distortions

Here we build a model with endogenous markup as in Edmond, Midrigan, and Xu (2018).
The consumer's problem is the same as before.



                                                45
Final goods producer    Final goods producers are competitive and produce with interme-
diate goods with a Kimball aggregator

                                                  q
                                                        d = 1,
                                                  Q

where (·) follows Klenow and Willis (2016) specification as

                                                                                      
               q                        1                        1            (q/ Q) 
                                                   -1
                                                  
                   = 1 + ( - 1) exp                             ,      -      ,            ,        (22)
               Q                                                                 

                                                                                                 s -1 - t
 > 1,   0 and (s, x ) denotes the upper incomplete Gamma function (s, x ) =                    x t   e dt.
The demand function for each intermediate good producer is therefore given by

                                                      q( )
                                  p( ) =                        PD,                                 (23)
                                                       Q

                                                   q( )      q( )    -1
where D is a demand index, D =                      Q         Q   d     .


Intermediate good producer     The problem of an intermediate good producer is similar as
before except it faces a demand function as in equation (23). The firm will choose the price
as a markup over the marginal cost,

                                                  w
                                   p=               .        
                                         - (q/ Q)            



Note that the markup is endogenous and depends on the size of the firm, the higher the
quantity a firm sells, the higher the markup it charges. The firm's optimal production and
profit increase with  and decrease with  . Firms face the same fixed cost and exporting
costs as in the Benchmark model, hence there exists a cutoff  ( ), firms produce when
    (  ).

  To compare with the benchmark model, we choose  as 0.08 to match the aggregate
marginal product of labor of 1.45 as in Edmond, Midrigan, and Xu (2018), while keeping
other parameters the same as in the benchmark. Figure 7 plots the relationship between
the measured log( TFPR) (which again is ARPL, pq/(                v   + f ) in the model and f includes


                                                  46
         Figure 7: Measured TFPR and TFPQ in an Endogenous Markup Model



                                               0.5



                                               0.4                              closed
                          measured log(TFPR)

                                                                                     exporter
                                               0.3


                                                                 non-exporter
                                               0.2



                                               0.1



                                                0
                                                 -3   -2          -1       0          1         2        3     4
                                                                       measured log(TFPQ)



   Notes: TFPQ is measured with q/(                        v   + f ) and TFPR is pq/(               v   + f ) where   v   is the variable input.


exporting fixed cost if firm exports) and the measured log( TFPQ) (which is q/(                                                               v    + f ))
in the model). First, higher productivity firms produce more and end up with a higher
endogenous markup. The measured TFPR is therefore higher. Hence, we observe an
upward sloping line for the closed economy. Second, this upward sloping patterns also
show up in the open economy. Moreover, exporters are more productive and face a higher
wedge. Non-exporters face a more competitive market after opening up and charge a lower
markup, the TFPR is smaller. Around the exporting cutoff, exporters face a lower TFPR
due to the fixed cost of exporting. Overall, exporters face higher TFPR.

  In summary, if the observed wedges are purely driven by markups and they endoge-
nously change with trade, we should see that: 1) exporters on average have higher markups,
hence higher--rather than lower--TFPR; and given TFPQ, they should have the same TFPR;
2) measured log (TFPR) and log (VA) will be almost perfectly correlated. These implica-
tions are at odds with the regression results shown in section 3.4, where exporters face
lower TFPR. Thus, even in this extended model, similar exogenous distortions are needed
to match the observed dispersion and correlation. This is consistent with Song and Wu
(2015) and David and Venkateswaran (2017) that the heterogeneity in markup explains
very limited MPK dispersion in China. Moreover, Arkolakis et al. (2018) show that the
gains from trade in a model with endogenous markup is similar to ACR. In the current ex-


                                                                                47
tended model with endogenous markup, the excess welfare gain from trade when remov-
ing domestic distortions is 3.2%, while it is 5.4% (9.8% - 4.4%) in the benchmark model.


4.2    Detecting measurement error

With the presence of fixed costs in producing and exporting in our model, the measured
TFPR does not perfectly relate to the true wedges. In the data, there are other types of
mismeasurements in output and input, which may also generate a dispersion in the average
revenue products, and thereby affect the measured TFPR-- as shown in Bils, Klenow, and
Ruane (2017) and Song and Wu (2015). In this section, we address the issues surrounding
measurement error following the practices adopted in the literature.

   The main approach involves using panel data to estimate the true marginal product
dispersion, rather than simply employing cross-sectional data. With this method, we find
that the measurement errors are small in China, accounting for only 18% of the variation
in the average product.23 This 18% includes the mismeasurement of production inputs in
the presence of fixed cost, which is accounted for in our benchmark.

   We exploit three alternative methods to detect measurement error: average annual ob-
servations within firms, first differences over years within firms, and covariance between
first differences and average products. All three approaches point to the same conclusion:
that 1) there is a large dispersion in marginal products in China; 2) measurement error
only accounts for a small fraction of the dispersion in the measured marginal products (i.e.
average products).

   First, if measurement error were idiosyncratic across firms and over time, one can take
the time average of annual observations within firms to wash out these errors, drastically
reducing the dispersion of average products. The upper panel of Table 6 reports the statis-
tics when we take the average within firms. The average standard deviation is 1.19 for
the average product of capital and 0.96 for the average product of labor. The standard
deviations of value added and the average product of inputs are 1.19 and 0.94, where the
correlation between the two variables is 0.4. These results mimic our benchmark moments.
  23 Bils,
         Klenow, and Ruane (2017) finds measurement errors can explain about half of variation of average
products in Indian, and about 80% of that in the U.S, but little for China.



                                                   48
In particular, the dispersions of average products of inputs are still high. This implies that
measurement errors of the iid type cannot explain the observed dispersions in the average
products.


                                 Table 6: Detecting Measurement Errors

                                Average annual observation within firm
        std(ln(APK)) std(ln(APL)) std(lnVA) std(ln(VA/ I ))              corr (lnVA, ln(VA/ I ))
        1.19              0.96        1.19          0.94                           0.4
                                                        First level differences
                                     2001           2004                          2007
            std(ln( VA/ K ))          1.82          1.78                          1.76
            std(ln( VA/ L))           1.68          1.60                          1.61
                                           Regression
                                                   (1 -  )
                                    0.53         -0.0997
                                    (34.58)       (-20.65)
        Note: This table reports three ways to detect measurement errors.
        The upper panel reports the average annual levels within firms.
        The middle panel reports the ratio of first differences as another measure of marginal product,
        where VA denotes the first difference of value added.
        The lower panel reports regression coefficient as in equation (24).
        Robust t-statistics in parentheses.


  Second, as pointed out by Bils, Klenow, and Ruane (2017), the dispersion of first differ-
ences reflect the true distortion if marginal products are constant over time. Calculating
the first differences of value added            VA, capital      K, and labor       L, and then taking the
ratio      VA/ K and          VA/     L gives us an alternative measure of marginal products. The
1% tails of both ratios are trimmed, and the results are displayed in the middle panel of
Table 6 for the year of 2001, 2004, and 2007. The dispersions are even higher than those in
Table A-1 for the measured average product of inputs.

  Moreover, the alternative measured marginal products are highly correlated with aver-
age products. Figure 8 plots the ln( VA/                I ) against the benchmark average product of
input ln(VA/ I ) where I is the composite of inputs, I = K  L1- , where each dot corre-
sponds to one of 100 percentiles of ln(VA/ I ). The regression coefficient at the firm level is
0.72, see Table A-3. Note that without measurement errors, the two measures are perfectly
correlated. For the case with only measurement error, the two measures have no correla-


                                                       49
tion. Hence, the high correlation between the alternative measure and the average products
suggest small measurement errors and a large distortion-induced misallocation.

               Figure 8: Measured Marginal Product using First Differences vs TFPR


                                     2
                                     1
                                 log(VA/I)
                               -1    -20




                                                                        data
                                                                        All measurement error
                                                                        No measurement error
                                     -3




                                             -3   -2   -1           0      1            2
                                                            log(VA/I)




  Lastly, we follow Bils, Klenow, and Ruane (2017) and run the following regression to
further quantify the extent to which measured average products reflect marginal products:


               VAi =  · log( TFPRi ) +  ·              ^i - (1 - ) · log( TFPRi ) ·
                                                       I                                        ^i + Ds +  i
                                                                                                I               (24)

where        VAi and      ^i are the growth rate of measured value added and inputs respectively,
                          I
and log( TFPRi ) is the measured average products. The underlying assumption here is that
the measurement errors are additive. The variable of interest in the regression is , the
                                                                              2
                                                                             ln
variance of distortions relative to that of TFPR:  =                       2
                                                                                
                                                                           ln(TFPR)
                                                                                        . The regression coefficient
for  is 0.53 and for the interaction of log( TFPRi ) and                       ^i is -0.0997. Both are significant,
                                                                               I
and the robust t-statistics are reported in Table 6. The implied  is therefore 0.81. Hence,
81% of variation in TFPR or average products is accounted for by distortion  and 19% is
due to measurement errors. The results are robust if we weight the observations with their
share of aggregate value added or if we control for higher orders of ln( TFPR) to allow for
stationary shocks to firms productivity and distortions. See the Appendix E for details.24

  In summary, the three alternative ways of sifting out measurement errors using panel
data all point to the result that the dispersion in the average product of inputs are mainly
driven by distortions rather than measurement error typically conceived.
  24 Bils,   Klenow, and Ruane (2017) also considers the following extension to allow for stationary shocks to

                                                            50
5     Conclusion

This paper evaluates the impact of trade liberalization when the economy is subject to
firm-level distortions. Given its prevalence and importance in developing countries, it is
reasonable to ask how trade might affect welfare when these distortions are taken into
account. This paper shows theoretically and quantitatively that opening an economy may
in fact reduce allocative efficiency and exacerbate the misallocation of resources, by helping
firms that are more subsidized (rather than those who are more productive) to expand. The
findings in these papers, nevertheless, in no way disclaims the potential wide variety of
sources and the magnitude of gains to trade beyond what is conventionally modelled and
taken up in the current framework. But it does highlight that these losses could be sizeable
and comparable to major sources of welfare gains. We use Chinese manufacturing data
in a period of the economy's rapid integration to demonstrate quantitatively that standard
calculations for welfare may grossly overestimate the gains.

    The paper serves as a first attempt to understand the interactions between trade and
idiosyncratic firm level distortions on a theoretical level. The assumption of exogenous
distortions is both reasonable empirically but also helpful in laying bare the key theoretical
mechanisms on their interaction with trade. Of course, the next step would be to examine
more thoroughly how trade might partially change the distribution and nature of these
distortions. Extensions of the work are inherently numerous and promisingly fruitful. One
can examine how distortions interact with other channels of gains to trade, such as inno-
vation. One can also examine a dynamic model and the sequence of trade and domestic
reforms. Our work joins the growing body of work and interest on why developing coun-
tries' experience with trade liberalization might have been so curiously diverse and uneven.
Our work hopefully lends itself as one explanation to such a question.
firms productivity and distortions:

                           VAi =  · log( TFPRi ) +  ·  I^i - (1 - ) · log( TFPRi )
                               +  · [log( TFPRi )] + (1 - ) · [log( TFPRi )]2 I
                                                 2                            ^i
                                                  3                         3
                               +  · [log( TFPRi )] + (1 - ) · [log( TFPRi )] I ^i .




                                                     51
References
Alvarez, Fernando E, Francisco J Buera, and Robert E Lucas Jr. 2013. "Idea flows, economic
  growth, and trade." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Anderson, James E and Eric Van Wincoop. 2004. "Trade costs." Journal of Economic literature
  42 (3):691­751.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2018.
  "The elusive pro-competitive effects of trade." The Review of Economic Studies 86 (1):46­80.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2012. "New trade mod-
  els, same old gains?" American Economic Review 102 (1):94­130.

Asturias, Jose, Sewon Hur, Timothy J Kehoe, and Kim J Ruhl. 2016. "The interaction and
  sequencing of policy reforms." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 72:45­66.

Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Tomas Burstein. 2010. "Innovation, firm dynamics, and inter-
  national trade." Journal of political economy 118 (3):433­484.

Bai, Chong-En, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Michael Song. 2019. "Special deals with
  chinese characteristics." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bai, Yan, Keyu Jin, and Dan Lu. 2020. "How different domestic frictions affect trade." Tech.
  rep., working paper.

Bai, Yan, Dan Lu, and Xu Tian. 2018. "Do Financial Frictions Explain Chinese Firms? Saving
  and Misallocation?" Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Baily, Martin N, Charles Hulten, and David Campbell. 1992. "The distribution of produc-
  tivity in manufacturing plants." Brookings Papers: Microeconomics 187:249.

Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi. 2019. "Networks, Barriers, and Trade." Tech.
  rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

------. 2020. "Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium." Tech. rep., Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics.

Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. 2009. "Measuring and analyzing


                                              52
  cross-country differences in firm dynamics." In Producer dynamics: New evidence from micro
  data. University of Chicago Press, 15­76.

Bernard, Andrew B, Jonathan Eaton, J Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum. 2003. "Plants
  and productivity in international trade." American economic review 93 (4):1268­1290.

Berthou, Antoine, John Jong&Hyun Chung, Kalina Manova, and Charlotte Sandoz Dit
  Bragard. 2018. "Productivity,(mis) allocation and trade." Tech. rep., Mimeo.

Bhagwati, Jagdish and Vangal K Ramaswami. 1963. "Domestic distortions, tariffs and the
  theory of optimum subsidy." Journal of Political economy 71 (1):44­50.

Bils, Mark, Peter J. Klenow, and Cian Ruane. 2017. "Misallocation or Mismeasurement?"
  Working paper, University of Rochester.

Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang. 2012. "Creative accounting or
  creative destruction? Firm-level productivity growth in Chinese manufacturing." Journal
  of development economics 97 (2):339­351.

Buera, Francisco J and Ezra Oberfield. 2016. "The global diffusion of ideas." Tech. rep.,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Burstein, Ariel and Javier Cravino. 2015. "Measured aggregate gains from international
  trade." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (2):181­218.

Chang, Roberto, Linda Kaltani, and Norman V Loayza. 2009. "Openness can be good for
  growth: The role of policy complementarities." Journal of development economics 90 (1):33­
  49.

Chen, Ting and James Kai-sing Kung. 2018. "Busting the "Princelings": The Campaign
  Against Corruption in China's Primary Land Market." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  134 (1):185­226.

Costa-Scottini, Lucas. 2018. "Firm-Level Distortions, Trade, and International Productivity
  Differences." Working paper, Brown University.

David, Joel M and Venky Venkateswaran. 2017. "The sources of capital misallocation."
  Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                              53
Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2018. "How costly are markups?"
  Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Guo, D, K Jiang, BY Kim, and C Xu. 2013. "The political economy of private firms in
  China." Journal of Finance 61 (6):2597­2635.

Harrison, Ann and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2010. "Trade, foreign investment, and in-
  dustrial policy for developing countries." In Handbook of development economics, vol. 5.
  Elsevier, 4039­4214.

Ho, Giang T. 2010. "Trade Liberalization with Idiosyncratic Distortions: Theory and Evi-
  dence from India." Working paper.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J Klenow. 2009. "Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in
  China and India." The Quarterly journal of economics 124 (4):1403­1448.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Nicholas Li, Ralph Ossa, and Mu-Jeung Yang. 2016. "Accounting for the
  new gains from trade liberalization." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Khandelwal, Amit K, Peter K Schott, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2013. "Trade liberalization and
  embedded institutional reform: Evidence from Chinese exporters." American Economic
  Review 103 (6):2169­95.

Klenow, Peter J and Jonathan L Willis. 2016. "Real rigidities and nominal price changes."
  Economica 83 (331):443­472.

Krugman, Paul R, Maurice Obstfeld, and Marc J Melitz. 2015. "International economics:
  theory and policy."

Melitz, Marc J. 2003. "The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate
  industry productivity." econometrica 71 (6):1695­1725.

Melitz, Marc J and Stephen J Redding. 2015. "New trade models, new welfare implica-
  tions." American Economic Review 105 (3):1105­46.

Perla, Jesse, Christopher Tonetti, and Michael E Waugh. 2015. "Equilibrium technology
  diffusion, trade, and growth." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                             54
Ramondo, Natalia and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2013. "Trade, multinational production,
  and the gains from openness." Journal of Political Economy 121 (2):273­322.

Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson. 2008. "Policy distortions and aggregate produc-
  tivity with heterogeneous establishments." Review of Economic dynamics 11 (4):707­720.

Rodríguez-Clare, Andrés. 2018. Globalization, And the Gains from Trade in Rich and Poor
  Countries. Princeton University Press.

Sampson, Thomas. 2015. "Dynamic selection: an idea flows theory of entry, trade, and
  growth." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (1):315­380.

Simonovska and Waugh. 2014. "Trade Models, Trade Elasticities, and the Gains from
  Trade." .

Song, Zheng and Guiying Laura Wu. 2015. "Identifying capital misallocation." Tech. rep.,
  Working paper.

Tombe, Trevor and Xiaodong Zhu. 2019. "Trade, migration, and productivity: A quantita-
  tive analysis of china." American Economic Review 109 (5):1843­72.

Waugh, Michael E. 2010. "International trade and income differences." American Economic
  Review 100 (5):2093­2124.

Wu, Guiying Laura. 2018. "Capital misallocation in China: Financial frictions or policy
  distortions?" Journal of Development Economics 130:203­223.




                                            55
        Online Appendix to "Misallocation Under Trade
                       Liberalization"
                                  by Yan Bai, Keyu Jin, and Dan Lu



A       Model Derivation

Closed Economy Equilibrium. In a closed economy, the free entry condition requires that
the present value of producing equals the entry cost. The probability of entry e is given
by
                                                    
                                      e =                 g ( ,  ) d  d  ,                                (A.1)
                                                    ( )

and the distribution of operating firms µ( ,  )

                                                    g ( ,  )          g ( ,  )
                               µ ( ,  ) =                           =
                                                 ( ) g ( ,  ) d  d       e


if    ( ); and 0 otherwise. Let the per-period expected profit conditional on producing
be
                                                    
                               E[ ( ,  )] =                ( ,  ) µ ( ,  ) d  d  .
                                                    ( )

The free entry condition is given by


                                             e E[ ( ,  )] = w f e .                                       (A.2)


The optimal profit function (3) combined with the above expression in the free entry con-
dition yields an equation for P,

                  -1
 PQ         -1
        P              w 1-                   -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d  - w f              g ( ,  ) d  d  = w f e .
                                   ( )                                            ( )
                                                                                                          (A.3)

     Let Me be the measure of new entrant. The labor market clearing condition requires

                                                       q
                                         L = ME          + f + Me f e ,
                                                       


                                                        56
                                                                                 q
where the average labor demanded by firms E                                          + f is given by

                                               q                                q
                                       E         +f =                             + f µ ( ,  ) d  d  .
                                                                      ( )       

In a stationary equilibrium, the number of entrants equals number of exits, such that
e Me = M and
                                                                                L
                                                              M=                        .                                               (A.4)
                                                                            fe
                                                                            e    +f

  Open Economy Equilibrium. Optimal prices and cutoff functions are straightforward
analogues of the closed economy case. The free entry condition for Home and Foreign
implies

                          -1                                                                       
  PQ           -1
           P                   w 1-                      -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d  - w f                    g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                                ( )                                                ( )
                                   -1                                                                                
       Pf Q f            -1
 +                  Pf                  (x w)1-                          -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d  - w f x                     g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                                             x ( )                                                 x ( )


                                                                                                                              = w f e . (A.5)



                            -1                                                                              
  Pf Q f            -1               -
               Pf                 w1
                                   f                         -1  -  g f (  ,  ) d  d  - w f f                    g f ( ,  ) d  d 
                                                  f ( )                                                  f ( )

                                -1                                                                                
       PQ           -1
 +              P                    (x w f )1-                        -1  -  g f (  ,  ) d  d  - w f f x                  g f ( ,  ) d  d 
                                                           x f ( )                                               x f ( )


                                                                                                                             = w f f e . (A.6)




  It follows that the aggregate prices of Home and Foreign are
                               
                                                                                                                            -1                 
                         1-                           (  )  -1 g (  ,  ) d  d                                     (  ) (    ) g f ( ,  ) d  d 
                                                   ( )                                                              
P 1-  =                         Mw1-                                                   + M f (x w f )1-
                                                                                                               xf
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                               
               -1                                    ( ) (
                                                           g ,  ) d  d                                                  (  ) g f ( ,  ) d  d 
                                                                                                                      f



                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                 
                         1- 
                                                       ( ) f 
                                                             (  )  -1 g f (  ,  ) d  d                                 (  )  -1 g (  ,  ) d  d 
                                                                                                                  ( ) x 
   -                            M f w 1- 
P1
 f   =                                     f                                                + M(wx )1-               
                                                                                                                                                .
               -1                                        
                                                                  g f ( ,  ) d  d                                          g (  ,   ) d  d 
                                                            f ( )                                                    ( )




                                                                           57
  Next we derive the measure of operating firms at Home and Foreign M and M f . Let Me
be the measure of new entrant, e be the entry probability given by (A.1), and x be the
export probability conditional on entry

                                                                           
                                                                                  g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                                                           x ( )
                     x =                       µ ( ,  ) d  d  =                                   .
                                   x ( )                                     (  ) g ( , t ) d  d 


  The expected per-period profit includes the profit from both domestic production and
international production,


                             ( ,  ) µ ( ,  ) d  d  +                             x ( ,  ) µ ( ,  ) d  d 
                      ( )                                               x ( )

                 E + x E x


where µ x ( ,  ) = µ( ,  )/x . Using the average profits, free entry, stationary equilibrium
condition, we have

                                                                   L
                       M=                                                                                                      (A.7)
                                                   fe                              g ( , ) d  d 
                                                                           x ( )
                                                                  +f+                           f
                                                                                   g ( , ) d  d  x
                                             (  ) g ( , ) d  d              ( )



and
                                                                   Lf
                      Mf =                                                                               .                     (A.8)
                                              fe                             (  ) g f ( , ) d  d 
                                                                            xf
                                       
                                            g   ( , ) d  d 
                                                                  +f+                               fx
                                        ( )   f                              (  ) g f ( , ) d  d 
                                           f                                 f




  Finally the assumption of a balanced trade results in

                             1-                                                                    w f x     1- 
                    wx 
Pf Qf M                            µ ( ,  ) d d = P QM f                                                           µ f ( ,  ) d  d  .
            x ( )                                                                  x f ( )
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                              (A.9)




                                                              58
B     Proofs

B.1     Proof for Proposition 2

Proof. (1) In a closed economy, from the labor market clearing condition,

                                             1
                        Me              ( )-1 P-1 PQg( ,  )d d = L,
                                     ( )     

we get

                                                                                           1
  d ln W = d ln Q = -d ln P - d ln Me - ( - 1)d ln P - d ln                         ( )  -1 g (  ,  ) d  d  .
                                                                                 ( )       
                                                                                                        (A.10)

    From the price index,

                                                           
                             P 1 -  = Me                  ( )  -1 g (  ,  ) d  d  ,
                                                    ( )    


                                              i  -1
                                   ( - 1)(  )       g ( i ,  ) d 
         (1 - )d ln P = d ln Me +            -1                    d ln i -  ( ^  )d ln ^
                                     ( ) (  )    g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                        pq
                      = d ln Me + ( - 1) i i d ln i -  (       ^  )d ln ^
                                        PQ

    where
                                                       i  -1 
                               p i q i = Me       (     ) P Qg( i ,  )d ,
                                                      

    Substitute (1 - )d ln P into equation (A.10):

                                                      pi qi
                d ln W = -d ln P + ( - 1)[                  - i ]d ln i + (s -  )d ln ^ .
                                                      PQ      L

where
                                                   i  -1 1 
                                i   = Me      (     )     P Qg( i ,  )d .
                                                         



    (2) To derive the effect of trade cost shock, we use the following equilibrium equations,

                                                        59
(a) Free entry condition:


    w 1-  P  Q                      -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d  + P f
                                                                     1- 
                                                                 Q f x                         -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d 
                        ( )                                                          x ( )

     =   (  - 1 )1-  ( w f e + w f H + w f x Hx )


   where H =            ( )   g( ,  )d d and Hx =                          g ( ,  ) d  d  .
                                                                   x ( )

(b) The labor market clearing condition:

                                                                L
                                               Me =                           .
                                                       ( f e + H f + Hx f x )

(c) Price index:
                       
                                                                                            -1                     
                                          -1                                             ( ) g f ( ,  ) d  d 
                                  ( ) (  )     g ( ,  ) d  d                        (  )
   P1- = con p ×  M
                                                                                 xf
                                                                   +   Mf                   
                                                                                                                   
                              w  -1       (  ) g ( ,  ) d  d              (x w f )-1              g
                                                                                             f ( ) f
                                                                                                     (  ,  ) d  d 


   combines with trade balance:

                                         1-                                                   w f x     1- 
                             wx 
   Pf Qf M                                     µ ( ,  ) d d = P QM f                                          µ f ( ,  ) d  d  .
                   x ( )                                                          x f ( )
                                                                                                 

   we get

                                                              Q
                                                             Pf
       1-                   1-                  -1              f 1-                                   
   P         = con p Me w                    ( ) g( ,  )d d +  x                                      ( )  -1 g (  ,  ) d  d  ,
                                          ( )                P Q                                 x ( ) 



   where con p is a constant that depends on the model parameters.

(d) Cutoff of producing:
                                                                            1
                                          ( ) = conv × P-1 ( PQ) 1-  -1
                                                                                  



                                                                                                                
   where conv is a constant that depends on the model parameters. ^ =  1- and
                                     1
    ^  = conv × P-1 ( PQ) 1- .
    




                                                         60
 (e) Definition of domestic share :

                                              Pf Q f 1- 
                               1-             P Q x                         -1  1-  g (  ,  ) d  d 
                                                                  x ( )
                                  =
                                
                                                            ( )     -1  1-  g (  ,  ) d  d 


  (f) Definition of the share of variable labor used in producing domestic goods S:

                                               Pf Q f 1- 
                                     1-S       P Q x                      -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d 
                                                                  x ( )
                                         =
                                      S                     ( )     -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d 


  Define O to be the cumulative sales share in the domestic market,

                                                    ^  / (  -1)  -1 1 - 
                                                  0                      g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                 O( ^) =                 -1 1-                          .
                                                      0              g (  ,  ) d  d 

Similarly define I the cumulative variable input share in the domestic market,

                                                    ^  / (  -1)  -1 - 
                                                  0                 g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                     I(^) =              -1 -                       .
                                                      0             g (  ,  ) d  d 

  The elasticities below are also known as the hazard functions. The elasticity related to
variable inputs, or the hazard function for the distribution of log labor size, which is also
proportional to the distribution of firm after-tax sales within the domestic market, is given
                d ln(1- I ( ^ ))
by s ( ^) = -       d ln ^       ,   and  ( ) = ^    / (  -1) ,


                                                   (  )  -1  -  g (   (  ),  )   (  ) d 
                               s ( ^ )=                      -1  -  g (  ,  ) d  d 
                                                                                         .
                                                      ( ) 


  The elasticity related to sales, or the hazard function of the distribution of log sales
                                                                    d ln(1-O( ^ ))
within the domestic market, is given by  = -                              d^       ,   and

                                                     ( )      -1 g (   (  ),  )   (  ) d 
                                                    
                                 ( ^ )=                         -1                           .
                                                        ( ) (  )   g ( ,  ) d  d 




                                                             61
Let  with a superscript x refer to the corresponding elasticity within foreign market:


                        x       ( x (  ))
                                             -1  1-  g (   (  ),  )   (  ) d 
                                                          x          x
                          =                      -1  1-  g (  ,  ) d  d 
                                                                              .
                                          (  ) 
                                        x



Differentiating the above system of equations and combining items

                                                        x
          d ln( PQ) = (1 - )d ln P - d ln Me + (Ss + Sx s ) d ln ^  - S x ( 1 -  - s
                                                                                   x
                                                                                     ) d ln x
                            sx         P Q
                   + S x (1 +   )d ln                                                  (A.11)
                          -1           Pf Q f
                                         
(1 -  -  )d ln P = d ln Me - d ln  +  d ln( PQ)                                        (A.12)
                                       -1
                                1
         d ln ^  = -d ln P -        d ln ( PQ)                                         (A.13)
                             -1
           -d ln  = (1 - )(1 -  - x
                                    )d ln x + (1 - )( - x
                                                          )d ln ^
                                   x
                                            P Q
                   - (1 - )(1 +       )d ln                                            (A.14)
                                   -1      Pf Q f
                                    x
           -d ln S = (1 - S)(1 -  - s                       x
                                      )d ln x + (1 - S)(s - s )d ln ^
                                   x
                                   s        P Q
                   - (1 - S)(1 +      )d ln                                            (A.15)
                                   -1      Pf Q f

Because


                 (1 - )d ln P = d ln Me - d ln  -  d ln ^                              (A.16)

                     d ln( PQ) = (1 - )d ln P - d ln Me + d ln S + s d ln ^            (A.17)


We get
                  d ln Q = -d ln P + (-d ln  + d ln S) + (s -  )d ln ^ .




                                                62
B.2     Proof for Proposition 3

Proof. Solving the system of equations (A.11-A.15), we get Proposition 3

                       1
          d ln Q = -         d ln     ( ACR)                                               (A.18)
                    s +  - 1
                       1
                  +          d ln Me    ( Redding)
                    s +  - 1
                       1        
                  +                (s -  )d ln Me
                    s +  - 1  - 1
                       1                    s                    
                  +            - -1+              d ln  +  - 1 +                 d ln S
                    s +  - 1               -1                    -1


  1. Without domestic distortions, S =  and s =  . If productivity follows a Pareto
                                                                                      1
distribution with parameter  ,  =  -  + 1 and dlnMe = 0. Hence, dlnW =                    [-dln]
as in ACR.

  2. Under a general distribution function and without domestic distortions, S = , s =
 , but they are not constant, and dlnMe = 0. The reallocation term is zero, hence, dlnW =
  1
 +  - 1   [-dln + dlnMe ]. Micro structure matters for  (  ) and welfare as in MR.
  3. With homogenous productivity and if domestic distortion 1/ follows a Pareto dis-
                                         -1                         -1
tribution with parameter  ,  =            (   -  + 1) and s =        (      - ), hence dlnW =
 
 -1   [dlnS - dln]. Changes in the share of expenditure on domestic goods and the share of
variable labor used in producing domestic goods are sufficient statistics for welfare change.




B.3     Proof for Corollary 1
                                         -1                       -1
Proof. Under the special case,  =         (   -  + 1) and s =      (    - ), and the change of
welfare becomes dlnW =      
                            -1   [dlnS - dln].

  1. Welfare change from close to open:

  Because domestic shares are

                                  Q                                    -1
                                 Pf f        -1 f     P  Q  -  -1
                                        1- x      x
                         =              x (            Q )
                                                                  +1
                                 P Q             f    Pf  f


                                                 63
                                 Q                                         -1
                                Pf f       -1 f P  Q  - 
                                      1- x     x
                          S=         x  (         Q )
                                                       +1                       ,
                                 P Q
                                            f    Pf f

                                                  -1 f     
                                                 x     x P Q
as long as there is selection to export, i.e.,     f     P       > 1,  > S. Intuitively, with realloca-
                                                          f Qf
tion purely driven by distortions, in the open economy, the input share used to produce for
exports exceeds the export share. d ln S is more negative than d ln  from closed to open.
Hence the open economy has an unambiguously lower welfare than in the closed economy.

  2. The reallocation term is always negative:

  In the welfare expression of Prop 2, the second and third terms cancel out, and the wel-
                                                        s                           
fare change becomes       
                       (  -1) 
                               [-d ln  -    -1+          -1   d ln  +  - 1 +         -1   d ln S] =      
                                                                                                      (  -1) 
                                                                                                              [-d ln  +
(1 -  )d ln  +  d ln S], where the reallocation term is (1 -  )d ln  +  d ln S.

                                              (1 - )(1 -  - x)
                       -1
d ln  = -(1 - ) 1 -  -    ( -  + 1)) d ln x +                         
                                                               d ln( Pf Q f / P Q)
                                                    -1

                                              +1       -1 P  Q
                                  = (1 -  )      d ln x 
                                                       Pf Q f

                                -1                               x)
                                                  (1 - S)(1 -  - s
 d ln S = -(1 - S) 1 -  -          ( - ) d ln x +                          
                                                                    d ln( Pf Q f / P Q)
                                                         -1

                                                    -1 P  Q
                                    = (1 - S) d ln x 
                                                    Pf Q f

Substitute for d ln  and d ln S, the reallocation term is

                                            2 (1 - S) - ( 2 - 1)(1 - )       -1 P  Q
              (1 -  )d ln  +  d ln S =                                 d ln x 
                                                                             Pf Q f


Substitute for  and S, it can be shown that  2 (1 - S) - ( 2 - 1)(1 - ) > 0, hence as long as
the trade cost reduction induces larger fraction of exporters, the reallocation term is always
negative. Q.E.D.


B.4    Proof for Corollary 2
                                                                                                         1
                                                                      
                                                                                            -1   wf      -1
Proof. Recall the producing cutoff is given by  ( ) = ^   -1 where ^ =                     -1    P Q          w.
Recall I ( ^ ) and O( ^ ) where I is the cumulative input/labor share in the domestic market,

                                                   64
and O is the cumulative sales share in the domestic market.
                                                          
                                                        ^  -1  -1 - 
                                                      0            g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                      I(^) =              inf  -1 -
                                                         0        g ( ,  ) d  d 

                                                          
                                                       ^  -1  -1 1 - 
                                                     0                g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                     O( ^) =             inf  -1 1-
                                                                                     .
                                                        0           g (  ,  ) d  d 

Let i ( ^) = I (^ ) and o ( ^) = O (^ ). The hazard functions s and  are

                                                    d ln(1 - I ( ^ ))     i( ^)
                                         s = -                        =            ,
                                                         d ln ^         1 - I(  ^)

                                                   d ln(1 - O( ^ ))     o( ^)
                                          = -                       =            ,
                                                        d ln ^        1 - O(  ^)
         i( ^)
When     o( ^)
                 increases with ^ , i.e. I is likelihood ratio dominates O, then

                           1 - I(  ^)              i( ^)                o( ^)      1 - O(  ^)
                                      =                  d^                   d^ =            ,
                             i( ^)             ^
                                                   i( ^)            ^   o( ^)        o( ^)

that is, s   .
                                                              
  Let x = log , y = log  , then x = ^+                        -1 y .    Under joint-normal distribution of ( x, y),
define
                                     i( ^)           exp( x (    ^ , y) - y) g( x (  ^ , y), y)dy
                      V(^)                 =
                                     o( ^)         exp( x ( ^ , y ) + (1 -  ) y ) g ( x ( ^ , y), y)dy
where
                                                 1                      x2  y2 2 xy
                            g( x, y) = exp -                               + 2-                .
                                             2(1 - 2 )                   2       
                   -1
When                 ,     V (^ )  0. Then the cumulative labor share distribution stochastically
dominates the cumulative sales share distribution according to the likelihood ratio order,
and the hazard functions satisfy s  d .

  Furthermore,

                         1- I ( ^)
                    d ln 1-O( ^)         d ln(1 - I ( ^ )) d ln(1 - O( ^ ))
                                     =                    -                 = - s + d  0
                       d ln ^                 d ln ^            d ln ^


                                                               65
then, it follows
                                   1 - I(^x)  1 - O( ^x)
                                          
                                                      
                                   1 - I(^ )  1 - O( ^ )
and S  . Moving from a closed economy to an open economy, the reallocation term is
always negative. Q.E.D.



C      Data: TFPR and TFPQ

We find large dispersions in measured TFPR in China, similar to the levels in HK for the
year 1998 and 2007. Measured TFPR have come down over time, between 1998 and 2007,
as evident in Table A-1. There is also greater dispersion in the average product of capital
than there is in the average product of labor.

    We next turn to investigating further what factors are systematically related to measured
TFPR. Table A-2 reports the regression results of TFPR of a firm on a set of variables. The
coefficient on firm TFPQ is large and significant; 1 percent increase in relative TFPQ is
associated with a 0.7 percent increase in relative TFPR. Moreover, more than half of the
variation in TFPR is explained by TFPQ alone. The positive relationship is consistent with
the predictions of our model as showing in the model regression. The same is true for the
results on exporters: given TFPQ, firms must have lower taxes on average in order to export,
and have a lower TFPR. TFPR differences are also systematic related to firm characteristics:
state-owned enterprises and Foreign-owned firms are subject to lower TFPR on average,
given TFPQ.


                          Table A-1: Dispersion of ARPK and ARPL

                                       1998 2001 2004 2007
                             std(ARPK) 1.348 1.306 1.241 1.185
                             std(ARPL) 1.184 1.039 0.940 0.923


Relationship between TFPR and TFPQ.

    To show graphically, we next plot the relationship between TFPQ and TFPR in Figure
A-1.



                                              66
                            Table A-2: TFPR Regressions
                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
VARIABLES       ln( TFPR)    ln( TFPR)    ln( TFPR)    ln( TFPR)     ln( TFPR)     ln( TFPR)

ln( TFPQ)       0.574***      0.630***     0.635***      0.635***      0.635***       0.639***
                 (243.5)       (235.9)      (243.2)       (241.6)       (248.4)        (261.6)
Age                                                    -0.00165***   -0.00163***   -0.00148***
                                                         (-9.736)      (-10.10)       (-10.05)
SOE                                                                   -0.100***     -0.0930***
                                                                       (-4.577)       (-4.481)
Foreign owned                                                         -0.230***      -0.156***
                                                                       (-25.96)       (-24.60)
Exporters                                                                            -0.213***
                                                                                      (-24.96)
Constant        -3.502***     -3.296***    -3.236***    -3.209***     -3.131***      -3.129***
                 (-243.5)      (-106.2)     (-89.23)     (-87.12)      (-75.08)       (-77.04)

Observations    1,587,629     1,587,629 1,479,528       1,478,648    1,478,648     1,478,648
R-squared         0.739         0.812        0.822        0.823        0.831         0.837
Time FE            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Industry FE        No            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Location FE        NO            NO           YES          YES          YES           YES
                             Robust t-statistics in parentheses
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                   Figure A-1: Measured TFPR and TFPQ




                                            67
D     Equilibrium under Endogenous Markup

A closed-economy equilibrium consists of aggregate ( P, Q, M) that satisfy:

                                                                           e L
                      M=
                                      /            ^ (q
                                                      ^)        q ^                                  ^)
                                                                                              d  (  ,q
                             Q       0                                              ^ ),  )
                                                                             g( ( , q                   ^
                                                                                                dq d  d q
                                                               ^ 
                                                              -q


                       /
                                             
                           ^ (q
                              ^)        ^
                                        q ^
                                          q                    ^)
                                                         d ( , q
              Q                                  ^ ),  )
                                          g( ( , q                   ^ = e f + f e
                                                                  d dq
                  0                  -q
                                      ^                    dq

                       M         /        ^ (q
                                             ^)                                          ^)
                                                                                   d ( , q
                                                     ^) g (  (  , q
                                                    (q            ^ ),  )                      ^ = 1,
                                                                                            d dq
                       e    0                                                        dq
where
                                                        /          ^ (q
                                                                      ^)
                                   e =                                            ^ ),  ) d  d q
                                                                           g( ( , q            ^
                                                   0

and                                                                                           
                                         q            -1                        1 - (q/ Q) 
                                                    =    exp                                       .
                                         Q                                           

  The open equilibrium consists of unknowns ( P, Q, M, Pf , Q f , M f , w f ) that satisfy:

                                              wx   
                                                      ^x ) Pf D f
                                                  =  (q  
                                            ^x 
                                           -q            



                                                               
                                                              ^x
                                                             x q^x
                                                              q 
                                         x =                       Q f - f x w,
                                                                    
                                                         -q
                                                          ^x        


where we get the zero profit cutoff. The free entry condition becomes:

                                                
                                          ^
                                          q ^
                                            q
                                              Q - f g ( ,  ) d  d 
                                                                                                            (A.19)
                            ( )          -q
                                          ^         
                                                      
                                                 ^x
                                               x q ^x
                                                   q 
                       +                            Q f - f x g(  x ,  )d d  = f e
                                                           
                                x ( )      -q
                                            ^x             




                                                                       68
The labor market clearing condition is:

                                                         e L
     M=                                                                                                                     (A.20)
                            q ^                                                         ^x
                                                                                      x q
                  ( )         Q      g ( ,  ) d  d  +                                   Qf            g ( ,  ) d  d 
                          -q
                           ^                                     x ( )      -q
                                                                             ^x




        M                                          Mf
                            ^) g ( ,  ) d  d q
                           (q                ^+                           ^ x f g f ( ,  ) d  d  = 1
                                                                          q                                                 (A.21)
        e           ( )                            e f         x f ( )



    For Foreign,

                                                           
                                      ^f
                                      q 
                                         q^f
                                             Q f - f  g f ( ,  ) d  d                                                       (A.22)
                          f (  )   -q ^f   

                                                             
                                       ^x
                                       q 
                                          f      ^
                                                 q
                                                x xf
                        +                            Q - f x  g f ( ,  ) d  d  = f e f
                              
                              x f ( )  - q       
                                          ^ 
                                              xf




                                                         e L f
 Mf =                                                                                                                       (A.23)
                               ^
                               q                                                           ^x f
                                                                                         x q
                f ( )          Qf    g f ( ,  ) d  d  +                ^                          Q                     ^
                                                                                                        g f ( ,  ) d  d q
                                                                  x f (q)
                                                                                          
                        -q
                         ^ f                                                   -q
                                                                                ^x
                                                                                   f



         Mf                                              M
                             q^f g f ( ,  )d dq
                                              ^+                              ^ x ) g ( ,  ) d  d  = 1
                                                                             (q                                             (A.24)
         e f        f ( )
                                                         e        x ( )


Finally, the goods market clearing condition is:
                                                                                                            
 M                 wq ^                      Mf                                                      ^x f
                                                                                                  wf q
                        Q f g ( ,  ) d  d  =                                                              Q  g f ( ,  ) d  d 
 e       x ( )    -q
                   ^                         e f                         x f ( )      -q
                                                                                       ^x           
                                                                                          f
                                                                                                                            (A.25)



E     Regressions for measurement errors




                                                          69
     Table A-3: Measured Marginal Products using First Differences vs TFPR
                  (1)          (2)                                (3)
VARIABLES      log( VAI )   log( VAI )                         log( VAI )


log( TFPR)      0.718***     0.715***                           0.718***
                 (135.3)      (158.6)                            (135.3)
Constant        1.410***     0.331***                           1.410***
                 (78.31)      (17.49)                            (78.31)

Observations     624,659       624,699                               624,659
R-squared         0.173         0.269                                 0.173
Time FE            Yes           Yes                                   Yes
Industry FE        Yes           Yes                                   Yes
                                  Robust t-statistics in parentheses
                                   *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Specification (2) weights all the observations with the absolute value of composite input growth.
     Specification (3) weights all the observations with the share of aggregate value added.




                                               70
                     Table A-4: Estimate Measurement Error
                               (1)          (2)                     (3)
VARIABLES                       VA           VA                      VA

log( TFPR)                  0.0376***    0.0144***               0.0616***
                             (22.62)      (9.170)                  (16.07)
[log( TFPR)]2                                                   -0.0128***
                                                                  (-6.110)
[log( TFPR)]3                                                   0.00152***
                                                                  (4.008)
  input                     0.530***     0.523***                0.524***
                             (34.58)      (33.03)                 (31.13)
log( TFPR) ×      input     -0.0997***   -0.0954***             -0.0893***
                             (-20.65)     (-19.16)               (-6.420)
[log( TFPR)]2 ×     input                                        -0.00611
                                                                  (-0.919)
[log( TFPR)]3 ×     input                                        0.00108
                                                                  (1.040)
Constant                    -0.0207***   0.0551***              -0.0241***
                             (-3.125)     (8.231)                (-3.592)

Observations                1,106,982 1,106,914                   1,106,982
R-squared                      0.044       0.042                    0.044
Time FE                         Yes         Yes                      Yes
Industry FE                     Yes         Yes                      Yes
                            Robust t-statistics in parentheses
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Specification (2) weights all the observations with the share of aggregate value added.




                                            71
