                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                SYNERGIZING VENTURES

                                         Ufuk Akcigit
                                        Emin Dinlersoz
                                      Jeremy Greenwood
                                     Veronika Penciakova

                                     Working Paper 26196
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26196


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, the National Bureau of Economic Research, the
Federal Reserve System, or the Board of Governors and its staff. The Census Bureau's Disclosure
Review Board and Disclosure Avoidance Officers have reviewed this data product for
unauthorized disclosure of confidential information and have approved the disclosure avoidance
practices applied to this release (DRB Approval Numbers DRB-B0058-CED-20190605, DRB-
B0116-CDAR-20180816, DRB-B0102-CDAR-20180711, CBDRB-2018-CDAR-067, CBDRB-
2018-CDAR-063).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ufuk Akcigit, Emin Dinlersoz, Jeremy Greenwood, and Veronika Penciakova. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Synergizing Ventures
Ufuk Akcigit, Emin Dinlersoz, Jeremy Greenwood, and Veronika Penciakova
NBER Working Paper No. 26196
August 2019
JEL No. G24,O31,O32,O40

                                         ABSTRACT

Venture capital (VC) and growth are examined both empirically and theoretically. Empirically,
VC-backed startups have higher early growth rates and initial patent quality than non-VC-backed
ones. VC-backing increases a startup's likelihood of reaching the right tails of the firm size and
innovation distributions. Furthermore, outcomes are better for startups matched with more
experienced venture capitalists. An endogenous growth model, where venture capitalists provide
both expertise and financing for business startups, is constructed to match these facts. The
presence of venture capital, the degree of assortative matching between startups and financiers,
and the taxation of VC-backed startups matter significantly for growth.


Ufuk Akcigit                                    Jeremy Greenwood
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Chicago                           University of Pennsylvania
1126 East 59th Street                           Perelman Cntr for Pol Sci and Econ
Saieh Hall, Office 403                          133 South 36th Street Philadelphia,
Chicago, IL 60637                               PA 19104-6297
and NBER                                        and NBER
uakcigit@uchicago.edu
                                                Veronika Penciakova
Emin Dinlersoz                                  Research Department
Center for Economic Studies                     Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
U.S. Census Bureau                              1000 Peachtree St. NE
4600 Silver Hill Road                           Atlanta, GA 30309-4470
Washington, DC 20233                            veronika.penciakova@atl.frb.org
emin.m.dinlersoz@census.gov
1       Introduction
Most ...rms are born small, stay small, and engage in little innovation throughout their
lifetimes.1 Only a few become large, successful businesses that generate breakthrough in-
novations and contribute signi...cantly to aggregate productivity growth. The uctuations
these large ...rms experience also matter for aggregate volatility.2 Venture capital (VC) is
a potential catalyst that can take startups to the right tail of the ...rm-size and innovation
distributions, and turn them into engines of growth. What role does VC play in the making
of productive and innovative ...rms? To what extent do the synergies between entrepreneurs
and venture capitalists matter for ...rm and aggregate outcomes? How critical is VC for the
growth of the economy as a whole? Answers are provided empirically and through the lens of
a macroeconomic model of innovation and growth where venture capitalists match with and
nurture startups. The analysis suggests that the presence of venture capital in an economy,
the degree of assortative matching between venture capitalists and startups, and the taxes
applicable to VC-backed enterprises, matter signi...cantly for growth.
    Certain key events in the early stages of ...rms are the precursors of subsequent high
growth. For instance, having a patent or a trademark early on is strongly predictive of the
ultimate success of startups, as measured by rare events such as an IPO or a high-value
acquisition-- e.g., Fazio et al. (2016). Patenting and R&D activity are positively correlated
with measures of ...rm growth-- e.g., Foster, Grim, and Zolas (2016). Furthermore, initial
...rm size is a good indicator of the ultimate success of a ...rm (Brown et al. (2017)). More
generally, ex ante di¤erences among startups appear to be important in understanding ex
post ...rm outcomes at any ...rm age. Early characteristics of planned businesses predict
well the ultimate formation of a business and its initial size (Bayard et al. (2018)), and its
subsequent dynamics (Pugsley, Sedlacek, and Sterk (2017)). This paper contributes to the
literature by establishing, both empirically and theoretically, that VC backing of startups
in early stages is not only a key ingredient of eventual ...rm success, but also a signi...cant
contributor to aggregate innovation and productivity growth.
    1
      The median startup in the U.S. barely grows over time (see, e.g., Decker at al. (2016) and Choi (2017)).
    2
      Gabaix (2011) analyzes this "granular hypothesis"and ...nds that the shocks experienced by the top 100
...rms in the "fat" right tail of the ...rm-size distribution account for a sizable fraction of year-to-year GDP
   uctuations.


                                                       1
   To motivate the model and its analysis, the empirical analysis combines micro data on
...rms that receive VC funding, using the VentureXpert dataset, with data on all employer
...rms in the U.S., taken from the U.S. Census Bureau for the period 1980-2012. The life-
cycle dynamics of VC-funded versus non-VC-funded ...rms are studied to understand the
di¤erences between them in terms of innovativeness, survival, and growth. Several key
observations emerge. First, despite the fact that VC-backed startups are subject to higher
initial selection, failure rates, and dispersion in growth outcomes, they are much more likely
than non-VC-backed ones to eventually land in the right tail of the ...rm size and innovation
distributions. In other words, VC appears to contribute disproportionately to the making of
large and successful ("superstar") ...rms. The dominance of such ...rms in the U.S. economy
has been increasing.3 Yet, the various mechanisms by which superstar ...rms emerge are not
well understood. The ...ndings here suggest that VC plays a critical role in taking startups
to stardom.
   Second, the synergies between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs matter for how far
a VC-backed startup can go. The empirical analysis suggests strong evidence of assortative
matching between entrepreneurs and ...nanciers-- the latter is composed of venture capital-
ists and others, such as banks. Startups that have more promising growth and innovation
prospects tend to be funded by venture capitalists. Moreover, ...rms backed by venture capi-
talists with more experience and higher funding capabilities also tend to achieve signi...cantly
higher growth.
   Third, VC involvement is critical for both ...rm-level and aggregate innovation. The
data on ...rm-level patenting activity and patent quality reveals that VC disproportionately
targets more innovative startups and spurs further innovation, with startups backed by more
experienced venture capitalists engaging in better innovation. Innovation by VC-funded
...rms, especially the highly successful ones, imposes large productive externalities on the rest
of the economy. This externality is evident in the disproportionately high level of citations
to patents generated by successful VC-funded ...rms, which is one of the key contributions of
such ...rms to growth.
   3
    The consequences include the reallocation of labor to these ...rms, accompanied by a rising industry
concentration of sales and a fall in labor'
                                          s share of income-- see, e.g., Autor et al. (2017).



                                                   2
    Motivated by the empirical ...ndings, a macroeconomic model is developed to match salient
features of VC in the U.S. data. In the model, venture capitalists nurture talented entrepre-
neurs by providing the necessary ingredients, advice and money, to bring a startup to the
market. The framework stresses the complementarity between a talented entrepreneur'
                                                                                  s skill
and a venture capitalist'
                        s. Not all talented entrepreneurs can ...nd a venture capitalist to back
their startup. As a result, they turn to more traditional sources of ...nancing, such as banks.
Banks provide a limited amount of expertise for a startup. For a talented entrepreneur,
matching with a venture capitalist, as opposed to a bank, will result in a higher probability
of success, a greater level of funding for startup research and development, and a higher
productivity. Entrepreneurs starting more mundane enterprises are more likely to use bank
...nancing. The opportunity cost for a venture capitalist is too high to mentor this type of
startup. The model is calibrated using key micro-level moments from the empirical analysis.
The calibrated model is used to assess how assortative matching between entrepreneurs and
venture capitalists and the taxation of startups a¤ect economic growth.
    The empirical analysis adds to the large literature on the e¤ects of VC funding on ...rm
performance. In early work Kortum and Lerner (2000) studied the impact of VC funding
on ...rm-level innovation between 1983-1992 and documented a signi...cant impact. Puri and
Zarutskie (2012) ...nd that VC-backed ...rms exhibit higher growth and higher rates of IPO and
M&A activity, compared to otherwise similar ...rms. Some prior evidence suggests that VC
monitoring of startups matters. For instance, Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend (2015) show
that venture capitalists'on-site involvement with the ...rms they fund generates both a higher
level of innovation and a higher likelihood of success.4 More recently, Wong (2019) ...nds that
a large portion of the variation in the duration of venture capital involvement across startups
can be attributed to unobserved venture capitalist and match-speci...c e¤ects. These ...ndings
point to potentially large treatment e¤ects associated with venture capitalists' mentoring
and monitoring of startups. The analysis here also o¤ers further evidence of such e¤ects.
    The empirical work extends the prior literature in a number of dimensions. The selection
of startups by venture capitalists based on the early innovation potential is explored, as
    4
     Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend (2015) exploit an exogenous reduction in VC oversight costs due to
the opening of new airline routes that makes it easier for venture capitalists to visit their portfolio companies.



                                                        3
well as the e¤ects of VC treatment on innovation. In addition, a distinguishing aspect of
the analysis is its focus on the e¤ects of assortative matching between entrepreneurs and ...-
nanciers. The presence and extent of synergies between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs
is assessed. The analysis also quanti...es the disproportionately large innovative externalities
generated by VC-backed ...rms using citations to the patents applied for by these ...rms. Fi-
nally, the analysis here uses, in addition to the discrete measures of success for ...rms (such
as IPO and M&A), continuous measures of ...rm growth and innovation to de...ne thresholds
for success by the end of a typical VC contract.5
    This paper contributes to the endogenous growth literature (e.g., Aghion and Howitt
(1992), Klette and Kortum (2004), Lentz and Mortensen (2008), and Romer (1990)) by
introducing VC ...nancing into a model with endogenous technological progress. Ates (2014),
Greenwood, Sanchez, and Wang (2019), and Opp (2019) are earlier attempts in a similar
direction. Ates (2014) and Opp (2019) develop stylized Schumpeterian models of VC. In Ates'
(2014) and Opp'
              s (2019) analyses the research and development decisions by entrepreneurs
are limited in the sense that they do not choose how far to launch their endeavor ahead of the
pack. Also, the likelihood of success does not depend on the level of development funding.
Greenwood, Han, and Sanchez (2018) model VC from a dynamic contract perspective. Their
analysis focuses on the VC funding-round process. They don'
                                                          t explicitly model a banking
sector as is done here. Ates (2014), Greenwood, Han, and Sanchez (2018), and Opp (2019)
do not spotlight the initial selection process between di¤erent types of entrepreneurs and
...nanciers, and the associated transition from ex ante promise to ex post success; that is, the
unique set of facts assembled here. These papers also do not utilize data on ...rm growth and
innovation in the early stages of privately-held startups to assess venture capital selection
and treatment e¤ects.
    The current analysis also relates to two recent themes in the literature. First, it highlights
the importance of ...nancing for innovation and superstar ...rm creation. Therefore, it connects
    5
     In particular, the likelihood of a venture capitalist taking a ...rm to the right tail of the ...rm-size and
innovation distributions (90th percentile) within 10 years is assessed. The rationale for doing so is that even
though a surviving VC-backed ...rm may not reach an IPO or M&A stage, it can still achieve substantial
growth and innovation on average, compared to non-VC-backed ...rms. Furthermore, among the ...rms that
are involved in IPO or M&A activity, the heterogeneity in performance can be more ...nely captured by
continuous measures of ...rm growth. Measuring success in this fashion accounts for the contribution of all
VC-backed ...rms to economic growth and aggregate productivity.


                                                       4
with research by Autor et al. (2017), that documents the rise of superstar ...rms and their
consequences for inequality. Bloom et al. (2017) and Gordon (2017) have argued that
new ideas and innovations are getting harder and more expensive to generate. The current
analysis highlights the importance of a good match between ...nanciers and inventors, as well
as the taxation of startups, for bringing new ideas to life. Second, a strand of literature
stresses the importance of ...nance for economic development (e.g., Antunes, Cavalcanti, and
Villamil (2008), Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011), Castro, Clementi, and MacDonald (2004),
Cole, Sanchez, and Greenwood (2016), Erosa (2001), Gopinath et al. (2017), Levine (2005),
Midrigan and Xu (2014), Moll (2014)). This work has typically focused on developing
countries, and does not study whether di¤erent forms of ...nance (such as VC versus bank
funding) matters for ...rm-level and aggregate innovation and growth.



2     Some Stylized Facts on VC-Funded Firms
To what extent does VC matter for turning startups into engines of growth and innovation
in the economy? Empirical analysis is carried out to o¤er evidence on both the selection and
treatment e¤ects associated with venture capitalist involvement in a ...rm. This involvement
may include, in addition to ...nancial support, providing management advice and mentoring,
industry expertise, and business network connections. These factors can lead to potentially
di¤erent trajectories of growth and innovation for VC-funded ...rms.
    The ...rst goal of the empirical analysis is to explore the nature of selection by venture
capitalists, based on key observable startup characteristics such as size, growth, and innova-
tive activity. If venture capitalists tend to pick more promising projects to fund and nurture,
there should be a disproportionate presence of VC among larger, faster growing faster, and
more innovative startups.
    The second goal is to understand the role that VC plays in catapulting ...rms to the right
tail of the ...rm size and innovation distributions. How much does VC matter for a startup'
                                                                                          s
survival, growth, and innovation? To investigate such e¤ects, the outcomes of VC-funded
...rms are compared with those of a control group composed of non-VC-funded ...rms, which
are chosen to match closely the funded ...rms on a number of key observable characteristics


                                              5
at the time of VC funding.
   Finally, the empirical analysis also investigates the degree to which assortative matching
and synergies prevail among venture capitalists and startups. Some venture capitalists may
be better than others at identifying and nurturing promising startups. That is, the extent of
selection and treatment by venture capitalists may depend on both the type of startup and
the type of venture capitalist. Are startups with better growth and innovation prospects
disproportionately targeted by more able venture capitalists? Do startups funded and sup-
ported by more capable venture capitalists achieve better outcomes? Answers are provided
by studying the outcomes of startups backed by high- versus low-quality venture capital-
ists, where quality is measured using various characteristics of venture capitalists, such as
expertise.


2.1       Data

To carry out the analysis, several datasets are brought together-- see Appendix 11 for details
on the construction of the dataset in the analysis, as well as supplemental information
on all ...gures and tables. The main dataset that enables the tracking of ...rms over time
is the U.S. Census Bureau'
                         s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The LBD contains
longitudinally-linked information for each employer business in the U.S. starting in 1976,
based on administrative data in the Census Bureau'
                                                 s Business Register (BR). Firms, and
their constituent establishments, are observed in the LBD starting from the time of their ...rst
appearance as an employer business in administrative records. The LBD contains annual
measures of employment, age, and payroll for both ...rms and establishments, and an annual
revenue measure at the ...rm level for a large fraction of ...rms.6
   Firms that receive VC funding are identi...ed using the Thomson Reuters'VentureXpert
database, which contains information on the dates of VC funding, the funding amount,
and the identity of the venture capitalists. Firms in the VentureXpert dataset are ...rst
matched with the Census Bureau'
                              s Business Register (BR) using name and address matching
techniques, and then linked to the LBD using unique ...rm and establishment identi...ers. To
include measures of innovation, the U.S. Census Bureau'
                                                      s patent-...rm crosswalk is used to
   6
       Data on revenue starts in 1997.


                                                6
identify ...rms with patenting activity.7 Citations for each patent are also incorporated from
USPTO'
     s PatentsView. In addition, Standard&Poor'
                                              s Compustat database is linked with
the LBD to identify publicly-listed ...rms. The data set tracks all employer ...rms during the
period 1980 to 2012.
    An important feature of the assembled dataset is that ...rms can be tracked over their
entire life cycle, starting from their birth, as identi...ed by the year of their ...rst employment
record, all the way to their death, which happens if the ...rm ceases to exist as an employer.
Other key events in a ...rm'
                           s life cycle are also observed: the ...rst injection of funds by a
venture capitalist, the ...rst patent application, and an IPO or an M&A event. IPO events
are identi...ed using the Compustat database. M&A activity is identi...ed using a set of
criteria based on how the ownership of the ...rm and its establishments changes from one
year to another.8 The main ...rm outcomes in the analysis are survival, employment, and
innovation as reected by patenting activity and patent citations.9


2.2     Which Firms do Venture Capitalists Select?

Very few startups grow quickly and become successful ...rms, while most grow slowly or fail.
Venture capitalists pick startups to fund and nurture very early during their formation. The
age distribution of VC-backed startups at ...rst VC funding is shown in Figure 1. Age is
measured by the number of years since a startup ...rst appears in the LBD as an employer
business (birth). Negative age values correspond to cases where a startup receives funding
even before it is ...rst observed as an employer business.10 The striking feature of Figure 1 is
the spike at age zero. About 42 percent of VC-funded ...rms receive their ...rst funding in their
   7
       The patent-...rm crosswalk is a result of merging the USPTO'  s patent database with the LBD. We thank
Nick Zolas for providing this crosswalk. See also Graham et al. (2015).
     8
       For details on identifying IPOs and M&As, see Section 11. We thank Joonkyu Choi and Javier Miranda
for their assistance on identifying M&A in the Census microdata based on their methodology.
     9
       The results using revenue are brie  y mentioned as an alternative to employment when appropriate. For
...rm size, employment is the preferred measure in the analysis, since annual revenue data is available starting
only in 1997.
    10
       Firms outside of the age range in Figure 1 are not included to prevent the disclosure of con...dential
information-- they account for a small fraction of all ...rms that receive VC funding. In addition, the trunca-
tion of age at -5 guards against potential matching errors. Startups that receive VC funding 6 or more years
before they hire their ...rst employee are rare, and such cases may be more likely to indicate false positives
in the name and addess matching procedures. Similarly, startups that receive VC funding after age +5
constitute a small fraction of all ...rms.


                                                       7
Figure 1: The distribution of ...rm age in the year of ...rst VC funding. Age 0 corresponds
to the ...rst time that a startup is observed as a business with employee(s). Ages -5 to
-1 correspond to startups for which the year of ...rst VC funding occurs before the ...rst
observation of the startup as an employer.


...rst year as an employer business. There is also a considerable fraction of startups (about
15%) that receive their ...rst funding before they hire their ...rst employee (age < 0).11,12
    Figure 2 plots the probability of ever-receiving VC funding by employment growth quin-
tiles, where the quintiles are based on growth during a startup'
                                                               s ...rst three years as an em-
ployer business.13 The probability of funding jumps nearly two hundred-fold as one moves
from the lowest quintile to the highest. This sharp rise suggests that venture capitalists tend
to select ...rms that exhibit relatively high growth in their early phases.14
    The relationship between a startup'
                                      s probability of receiving its ...rst VC funding within
...ve years of its ...rst patent application and the quality of its early patents is plotted in
Figure 3. The quality of early patenting is measured by the total number of citations for all
   11
      Most likely, these ...rms receive VC funding at a stage when they are still non-employers; i.e., businesses
with no payroll/employees. Recent work by Bento and Restuccia (2019) highlights the contribution of
non-employer businesses to business dynamism in the United States.
   12
      For the rest of the analysis, startups that receive VC funding before age zero are treated as having
received funding at age zero. This approach is necessary because several key variables (e.g., employment and
patenting) for the subsequent analysis are available only for employer ...rms starting at age zero.
   13
      The employment growth rate for the ...rst three years of a ...rm'   s life-cycle is measured as g = 2
(empt+2 empt )=(empt+2 + empt ), where t is the year a startup is ...rst observed as an employer business.
   14
      A similar conclusion emerges when growth is measured in terms of revenue instead of employment.



                                                       8
Figure 2: Firm employment growth and the probability of VC funding at any point in the
...rm life-cycle. Employment growth is the 3-year growth rate for a startup, starting from the
...rst year of observation as an employer.


patents within (up to) three years after the ...rst patent (and before any VC funding). Figure
3 suggests that VC funding is concentrated in startups with relatively high early innovation.
The probability of receiving VC funding for startups in the bottom quintile of the patent
quality distribution is only about 1 percent, but rises to nearly 6 percent in the top quintile.
Note that the probability of VC-funding is overall much higher for the case of startups that
have a patent (Figure 3), compared with all startups considered in Figure 2. The former
sample (startups with early patent activity) is much smaller and represent a highly selective
group of innovating ...rms, resulting in much higher rates of VC funding overall.
     Table 1 presents some statistics on startups in their year of ...rst VC funding. The average
employment at funding is normalized to one for VC-funded startups that are in the top decile
(    90th percentile) of the ...rm employment distribution in the ...rst funding year. For non-
VC-funded startups, the hypothetical age at ...rst funding is set to the average age at which
a VC-funded ...rm receives funding.15 From the numbers in Table 1 it can be calculated that
at the time of funding the average employment of VC-funded ...rms is about 3 times larger
    15
       The average age at VC funding is calculated using the age distribution of VC-funded ...rms in the year
of ...rst VC funding, assuming a VC-funding age of zero for ...rms that receive VC funding before age zero.




                                                     9
Figure 3: The quality of a ...rm'  s early patenting quality and the probability of VC fund-
ing. The ...gure is conditional on having a patent. Patenting quintiles pertain to the quality
distribution for startups' early patenting activity, measured within (up to) three years of
a startup' s ...rst patent and before any VC funding. Patent quality is the number of cita-
tions received, demeaned by average citations in patent class, excluding self-citations. The
probability of VC funding is measured within 5 years of the ...rst year of patenting.


than that of non-VC-funded ...rms.16 VC-funded startups in the top decile of the employment
distribution are about 43 percent larger than the non-funded ...rms that are also in the top
decile. There is not a big di¤erence, however, in the average employment of funded versus
non-VC-funded ...rms in the bottom 90 percent (                      90th percentile).17
      There is strong evidence that the initial match between a ...nancier and a startup is highly
assortative in nature: better startups tend to match with venture capitalists disproportion-
ately. One way to see this is to look at the fraction of VC-funded ...rms that are in the
     16
          The ratio of the average sizes is given by r = (EV C =NV C )=(EN on- V C =NN on- V C ); which can be written
as
                                                 (EV C =E )=(NV C =N )
                                                                               ;
                                             (EN on- V C =E )=(NN on- V C =N )
where E is the total employment and N is the total number of ...rms. From Table 1, EV C =E = 0:25% +
0:04% = 0:3%; NV C =N = 0:03%+0:07% = 0:1%; EN on- V C =E = 57:8%+41:9% = 99:7%; and NN on- V C =N =
10:7% + 89:2% = 99:9%: Therefore, the ratio r is given by (0:3=0:1)=(99:7=99:9) = 3:0:
   17
      A caveat to these comparisons of startup sizes at the time of VC funding is that most startups at this
stage are very small, and there is not a very large variation in size across ...rms within the top 10 percent or
within the bottom 90 percent. Firm sizes diverge as startups grow and selection takes place, as discussed
below.




                                                            10
top decile, and compare it with the corresponding fraction for the non-VC-funded ones. As
shown in Table 1, these fractions are pV C = 0:326 and pN on             VC   = 0:107; respectively. The
observed odds ratio is therefore (0:326=0:674)=(0:107=0:894) ' 4: Random matching would
imply pV C = pN on    VC   = 0:10; or an odds ratio of 1: To assess formally the di¤erence between
the groups, a two-sample test of proportions (the null H0 : pV C                 pN on   VC   = 0 versus the
alternative HA : pV C        pN on   VC   > 0) is implemented where standard errors are adjusted
for clustering within each venture capitalist. This adjustment is necessary, because in many
cases a venture capitalist matches with many ...rms, and among these matches the assump-
tion of independence (the standard assumption in a test of the equality of proportions) is
unlikely to hold. The two-sample test rejects the null hypothesis in favor of the alternative
at a signi...cance level much higher than 1%, suggesting the presence of strong assortative
matching between startups and ...nanciers.18
    Overall, the patterns in Figures 2, 3, and Table 1 suggest the presence of a high degree
of selection in VC funding. Among startups in the economy, venture capitalists choose
those that are on average larger, and exhibit higher early-stage employment growth and
innovation. Furthermore, venture capitalists select these startups very early in their life-
cycles, as indicated by the ...rm age distribution at the time of ...rst VC funding (Figure 1).
This timing is consistent with venture capitalists'reliance on their experience and expertise
in assessing the promise of a startup almost immediately upon its inception.19




2.3     How Much do Venture Capitalists Matter?

Next, consider the e¤ects of venture capitalist involvement on the post-funding evolution of
a startup.20 To assess the magnitude of these e¤ects, the selection of startups by venture
  18
      In addition, both of the individual hypotheses, pV C = 0:10 and pN on V C = 0:10; are rejected in favor
of the alternatives pV C > 0:10 and pN on V C > 0:10:
   19
      Anecdotal evidence suggests that venture capitalists may even target early stage projects with no
business plan at all. See, for example, the interview "Venture capitalism: Investing today in the compa-
nies of tomorrow" by Ryssdall and Hollenhorst in NPR'      s Marketplace, which features venture capitalist
Ann Miuro-Ko'    s investment of $1M in an early project that consists of merely a few math papers written
by a Stanford professor. (https://www.marketplace.org/2018/08/28/tech/corner-o¢ ce/venture-capitalism-
investing-today-ideas-tomorrow)
   20
      One caveat is that no direct measures of VC involvement are available, such as the presence of a venture
capitalist on the management board of a funded ...rm or the amount of time spent by a venture capitalist on


                                                     11
                Statistics for Firms-- Year of First VC Funding
                                     Share of (%)                                                    Average
                    Firms             Empl        Firms by funding type                             Empl (Rel)
 Type             90th     90th    90th     90th    90th     90th                                   90th     90th
 VC funded     0:03     0:07    0:25     0:04     32:6    67:4                                   1:00     0:05
 Non-VC funded 10:7     89:2    57:8     41:9     10:7    89:4                                   0:70     0:06

Table 1: A ...rm's type refers to whether or not it is in the top decile (90th percentile) for
employment at the time of ...rst VC funding. Average employment is measured with respect
to the VC-funded ...rms in the top decile. Non-VC-funded ...rms are assigned a hypothetical
age of funding equal to the average age at ...rst funding for VC-funded ...rms. All ...gures are
rounded for disclosure purposes.


capitalists must be taken into account. To control for selection based on observables, a
group of non-VC-funded ...rms that closely match VC-funded ...rms on a number of key
characteristics are identi...ed. A coarsened exact matching is implemented to form a control
group for VC-funded ...rms. Because there is a large number of potential matches in the
constructed dataset, it is possible to ...nd exact matches for any VC-funded ...rm based on
many of the key characteristics. Each ...rm that received ...rst VC funding in a given year is
matched with non-VC-funded ...rms in the same year that is of the same age, in the same
narrowly de...ned employment bin, operates in the same 4-digit NAICS industry, has the same
multi-unit/single-unit ...rm designation, and is located in the same state.21 The treated and
control groups are then used to perform an event study that considers employment and the
quality-adjusted patent stock as the key outcome variables-- see Appendix 11.3.4 for further
details on the construction of event study samples.
    Figure 4 plots the evolution of (ln) average employment for VC-funded ...rms and their
matched counterparts. The data points in Figure 4 are relative to the (ln) average employ-
ment of VC-funded ...rms at the time of ...rst VC funding (t = 0), which is normalized to 1.
The two types of ...rms are followed up to 10 years after they receive VC funding, and up
to 3 years before that point-- that is, only the ...rms that receive VC at ages 1, 2 or 3 are
included.22 The horizon of 10 years is chosen to approximate the duration of VC contracts,
mentoring an entrepreneur.
   21
      The main ...rm size measure, employment, cannot always be matched exactly conditional on other match
criteria, especially for relatively large VC-funded ...rms. Instead, a coarser matching based on employment
bins is considered.
   22
      After ...rst funding, ...rms are followed until the point where they fail, get involved in an M&A or IPO,


                                                      12
Figure 4: The evolution of average employment before and after ...rst VC funding date:
VC-funded ...rms versus non-VC-funded controls. The observations are relative to average
employment (normalized to 1) for VC-funded startups in the year of ...rst VC funding, t = 0.


which is about a decade.
    The two groups exhibit virtually identical trajectory of average employment before VC
funding, indicating that the matching algorithm does a decent job of accounting for the
pre-VC-funding trends. The funded ...rms, however, grow, on average, much more following
...rst funding. Average employment increases by approximately 475 percent by the end of
the horizon for VC-funded ...rms, whereas growth is much more modest for the matched
non-VC-funded control group (about 230 percent). Based on these di¤erential growth rates,
the treatment by venture capitalists accounts for up to nearly half of the growth experienced
by VC-funded startups.23
    The failure rate of VC-funded ...rms in the 10 years following funding is slightly larger
than that of the non-funded ...rms (36 percent versus 34 percent). The growth rates of VC-
funded ...rms, conditional on survival, exhibit considerable dispersion. These rates are also
or the 10th year after VC-- whichever occurs the earliest. That is, the samples are not balanced panels; the
evolution of average employment is in    uenced by selection due to ...rm failure, M&A, or IPO. In addition,
...rms that receive VC funding at age zero are excluded, since these ...rms have no observations for the pre-VC
period for a proper event study. Last, all ...rms that report zero employment are excluded from the analysis
for both groups.
    23
       Although not reported, the patterns are similar if revenue is considered as a measure of ...rm size. Note
that revenue is not used as a variable in selecting the control group.


                                                      13
Figure 5: The distribution of the employment growth rate, measured 10 years after ...rst
VC-funding, for both VC-funded and all non-VC-funded ...rms (not just the ones that are
matched with VC-funded ...rms). The ...gure is conditional on survival.


very di¤erent from those of non-VC-funded startups. The kernel density estimates for the
growth rates of employment conditional on survival 10 years after VC funding are plotted
in Figure 5 for VC-funded and all non-VC-funded ...rms.24 The growth-rate distribution for
VC-funded ...rms is negatively skewed, with a large mass of ...rms beyond the growth rate
of 100 percent, and a peak density around the growth rate of 200 percent. In contrast,
non-VC-funded ...rms have a much more symmetric growth-rate distribution that is centered
slightly above zero.25 The dispersion of growth rates is also higher for VC-funded ...rms. VC
involvement is associated with more dispersed, but on average much higher, employment
growth rates conditional on survival.26
    The evolution of innovative activity, as measured by the (ln) quality-adjusted patent
stock, is shown in Figure 6.27 The treatment and control groups underlying this ...gure are
   24
      This is done in a manner similar to footnote 13.
   25
      The relatively low median 10-year growth rate for non-VC-funded ...rms is consistent with earlier ...ndings
that indicate a very low average growth rate for startups in the U.S. economy-- see, for example, Decker et
al. (2016) and Choi (2018).
   26
      The growth patterns are similar if revenue is used instead of employment as the outcome measure.
   27
      This ...gure only includes ...rms that receive VC funding at ages 1 and 2 only, compared to Figure 4,
which also includes ...rms that receive funding at age 3. The reason is that the control group for ...rms that
receive VC funding at age 3 is much smaller and only contain a small number of ...rms that have patents,
leading to a very large con...dence interval for the average patent stock.


                                                       14
Figure 6: The evolution of the average quality-adjusted patent stock before and after ...rst
VC funding date: VC-funded ...rms versus non-VC-funded controls. The observations are
relative to the average patent stock (normalized to 1) for VC-funded ...rms in the year of VC
funding, t = 0.


restricted to ...rms with patents, but the two groups are not matched based on patent quality
similarity ­as matching based on this criterion turns out to yield no close matches for many
treated ...rms. As in Figure 4, the observations are relative to the (ln) average patent stock
of VC-funded ...rms at the time of funding (t = 0), which is normalized to 1: Pre-VC trends
for the two groups do not di¤er substantially, again indicating a close match based on the
same criteria used in the employment case-- even though patent stock similarity is not one
of the criteria. The post-VC trends indicate that VC-funded ...rms experience, on average,
a much higher growth in their patent stock. The VC-funded ...rms' average patent stocks
grows by about 1; 100 percent, as opposed to about 440 percent for the control group. These
rates suggest that up to 60 percent of the growth in the patent stock can be attributed to
treatment by venture capitalists.
   The results indicate strong post-funding e¤ects associated with VC involvement. VC-
backed ...rms achieve on average better outcomes in terms of employment and innovation,
after controlling for selection based on observables. Consequently, VC-backed startups are
much more likely to make it into the right tail of the ...rm employment and innovation



                                             15
distributions, compared with non-VC-funded ones.28 Overall, venture capitalists appear to
play an important role in fostering successful ...rms and increasing skewness in ...rm outcome
distributions.


2.4      Heterogeneity in Venture Capitalist Involvement

Are the e¤ects of venture capitalist involvement larger for more experienced venture capi-
talists? To answer this question, venture capitalists in the sample are ...rst divided into two
groups: low versus high quality. A venture capitalist is labelled "high quality"if the number
of deals it is involved in over the entire sample period is in the 90th percentile of the distri-
bution over the total number of deals by venture capitalists, and "low-quality"otherwise.29
This quality measure is meant to capture the experience or expertise of a venture capitalist.
Alternative de...nitions of quality are also considered, as discussed below. Then, VC-funded
...rms are divided into two mutually exclusive groups: those funded by high-quality venture
capitalists and those funded by low-quality ones. A startup is the in the high quality group
if 50% or more of the venture capitalists that fund the startup in its ...rst year of funding are
considered high quality. This rule is adopted because some startups are funded by multiple
venture capitalists, but the data does not provide details on the lead venture capitalist, or
the one with the highest funding contribution.30
    Figure 7 plots the evolution of (ln) average employment of ...rms by venture capitalist
quality. Observations are relative to the (ln) average employment level of startups funded
by high-quality venture capitalists measured at the time of ...rst funding (t = 0), which is
normalized to 1. In the pre-funding periods (t < 0); the trajectories for the two groups are
similar, but at t = 0 the average employment is higher for startups funded by high-quality
venture capitalists. In the years following VC funding (t > 0), ...rms funded by high-quality
   28
      Some additional statistics on the superior performance of VC-backed, relative to non-VC-backed, ...rms
are presented in Section 6.
   29
      It is common for VC-funded ...rms to receive funding from multiple venture capitalists. Based on the
venture capitalist quality/experience measure constructed, if 50 percent or more of a ...rm'       s funders are of
high quality, the ...rm is considered to be funded by high-quality venture capitalists. If instead, more than 50
percent of its funders are of low quality, it is considered to be a ...rm funded by low-quality venture capitalists.
   30
      In the following analysis, the sample of VC-funded ...rms is larger than the one used to generate Figures
4 and 6, because the latter consider only the VC-funded ...rms for which close matches within the set of
non-funded ...rms are available. In addition, some VC-funded ...rms have missing funding information, which
generates additional di¤erences from the samples used in Figures 4 and 6.


                                                        16
Figure 7: The evolution of average employment before and after ...rst VC funding, by the
quality of the venture capitalist. The observations are relative to the average employment
(normalized to 1) for startups funded by high-quality venture capitalists in the year of ...rst
VC funding, t = 0.


venture capitalists also grow signi...cantly more on average. Following a notable jump at
t = 1; the gap between the trajectories continues to open up. By the end of the horizon,
average employment grows by about 400 percent in the high-quality group, and by about
320 percent in the low-quality group.
    A similar picture emerges when the event study is repeated for the (ln) average quality-
adjusted patent stock, as shown in Figure 8.31 While the di¤erence between the ...rms funded
by high-quality versus low-quality venture capitalists is small for the periods before funding
(t < 0), a gap appears at t = 0, which grows over time after funding. By the end of the
horizon, the average patent stock grows by nearly 50-fold for the high-quality group, and by
only about 19-fold for the low-quality group.32
    There is also some evidence that the quality (experience) of a venture capitalist matters
  31
      Note that the pre-VC period extends to 3 periods in this ...gure, compared to only 2 periods in the
analysis associated with Figure 6. The reason is that in the latter analysis the control group is very small
and does not include a large enough number of patenting ...rms for t < 2.
   32
      The ...ndings in Figures 7 and 8 are qualitatively similar when revenue is considered as an alternative
outcome. Many of the results are also similar when alternative measures of quality for venture capitalists
are considered-- for instance, when quality is measured by total all-time funding by a venture capitalist, by
average funding per year, or by the average number of deals per year.



                                                     17
Figure 8: The evolution of the average patent stock before and after ...rst VC funding, by the
quality of the venture capitalist. The observations are relative to the average patent stock
(normalized to 1) for startups funded by high-quality venture capitalists in the year of ...rst
VC funding, t = 0.


beyond just the amount of initial funding provided. To assess such e¤ects that are not directly
observed, the employment of a startup in the year of failure, an M&A event, or at 10 years
after funding (whichever occurs ...rst) is projected on the initial amount of VC funding and
a dummy variable that indicates backing by a high-quality venture capitalist-- this variable
controls for venture capitalist-speci...c ...xed factors in a reduced form. Employment and age
at the time of funding are also included to control for the initial characteristics/conditions of
startups that may reect selection as well as entrepreneurial ability. Because some startups
fail or get involved in M&A before the end of the 10-year horizon, the number of years from
...rst funding is also added to proxy for the duration of venture capitalist involvement-- this
variable takes on a value of at most 10 depending on the timing of failure or M&A activity.
Finally, industry and year ...xed e¤ects (associated with the year of failure or M&A, or with
the 10th year after ...rst funding) are included to control for variation across sectors, and
economy-wide factors at the time of measurement that can inuence ...rm outcomes.
   Results from alternative speci...cations are shown in Table 2. In all speci...cations, the
initial funding level has positive and highly signi...cant coe¢ cients, which imply that a 1



                                               18
           Employment Outcomes and Quality of Venture Capitalists
                                      Employment at 10 years from funding (ln)
Independent Variables                     1        2       3           4
High-quality funder (dummy)           0:253    0:260    0:292       0:274
                                       (0:030) (0:029) (0:028)      (0:028)
Equity at ...rst funding (ln)         0:414    0:368    0:352       0:347
                                       (0:013) (0:012) (0:012)      (0:012)
Employment at ...rst funding (ln)              0:267    0:278       0:249
                                               (0:008) (0:008)      (0:008)
Age at ...rst funding                                   0:074       0:082
                                                        (0:006)     (0:006)
Years since ...rst funding                                          0:146
                                                                    (0:004)
Industry F.E.                            Yes     Yes      Yes         Yes
Year F.E.                                Yes     Yes      Yes         Yes
N                                      14; 000 14; 000 14; 000      14; 000
  2
R                                       0:17     0:23     0:24        0:30

  Table 2: Standard errors clustered by industry are in parentheses. The high-quality funder
  dummy equals 1, if 50in the top decile of the distribution of the total number of deals made
  by venture capitalists. The omitted category is the low-quality funder. The regressions
  include a constant, and industry and year ...xed e¤ects. All ...gures are rounded for disclosure
  purposes.

  percent increase in initial funding is associated with about a 0:35 to 0:41 percent increase
  in ultimate employment. Startups that are larger at the time of funding also tend to be
  even larger at the end of the observation period. The key coe¢ cient estimates, associated
  with the dummy for high-quality venture capitalists, all indicate a positive association be-
  tween high quality and ultimate employment. In particular, controlling for the funding level
  and other observables (speci...cation 4), startups backed by a high-quality venture capitalist
  are estimated to end up with approximately 32 percent larger employment.33 This ...nding
  suggests that ...rms matched with higher quality (experience) venture capitalists have better
  outcomes, even conditional on the amount of initial funding.34



      Overall, the empirical ...ndings suggest both strong selection and treatment e¤ects as-
    33
       The estimated e¤ect is given by e0:274 1 ' 0:32:
    34
       The conclusions from Table 2 also apply to alternative measures of quality for a venture capitalist. For
  various quality measures used, there is a positive association between the ultimate employment of a startup
  and the quality of the venture capitalist associated with that startup.


                                                       19
sociated with venture capitalist involvement. VC funding is concentrated in ...rms that
are younger, larger, and that have better growth and innovation prospects. Outcomes of
VC-funded ...rms in terms of ...rm size and innovation are much better than those of non-
VC-funded ...rms that are otherwise similar to VC-funded ...rms based on key observable
characteristics. Moreover, it is not just the funding level that matters-- startups that are
backed by high quality venture capitalists achieve better outcomes even after controlling for
initial funding infusion. In other words, there is considerable heterogeneity in the treatment
e¤ects associated with venture capital.35 The next section proposes a model that can account
for many of the stylized facts presented so far.



3        The Model
Every period s new entrepreneurs approach ...nanciers to acquire funding for startups, where
s is exogenous. Entrepreneurs come in two ex ante types, i 2 fh; lg, namely high or low.
High-type entrepreneurs are more likely to develop a successful project, have a higher level
of synergy with a ...nancier, and attain a higher level of productivity than low-type entre-
preneurs, other things equal. There are 2 types of ...nanciers, f 2 fv; ng; namely, venture
capitalists, v , and non-venture capitalists, n, the latter corresponding to traditional ...nancial
institutions, such as banks. Out of the s new startups, sn are ...nanced by banks and sv by
venture capitalists. A venture capitalist nurtures startups by providing both expertise and
funding. A traditional ...nancial institution o¤ers a much more limited amount of expertise.
In the equilibrium being modeled, sv < s so that not all new entrepreneurs can be ...nanced
by venture capitalists; some must go to traditional ...nancial institutions. The analysis will
focus on balanced growth paths. Speci...cally, aggregate productivity, x, will grow at some
endogenous gross rate, gx > 1, which in turn results in wages, w, growing at another constant
endogenous rate, gw > 1.
     A successful venture is one that starts producing. Funded startups face two sources of
    35
     This view is further supported by recent studies that directly aim to estimate the unobserved venture
capitalist and match quality e¤ects using funding duration data. For instance, Wong (2019) ...nds that
about two-thirds of the variation in venture capital funding duration is attributable to venture capital and
match-speci...c unobserved e¤ects.



                                                    20
                                        Ex ante Matching
                              Financing       Entrepreneurs, fraction
                                              High        Low
                                                v       v         v
                              VC Funded         h       l = 1     h
                                                n      n          n
                              Non-VC Funded     h      l  = 1     h

Table 3: By construction the numbers in a row sum to one. The number of VC-funded
startups in the ex ante high are low states are sv v       v v
                                                    h and s l , while the corresponding
numbers for non-VC-funded startups read sn nh and s
                                                    n n
                                                      l.



uncertainty regarding success. First, a startup may fail. Second, even if it succeeds, the
startup can enter either a high or low ex post state for production, represented by j 2 fh; lg.
An entrepreneur who begins in ex ante state i and then who transits to ex post state j will
be referred to as type (i; j ). There are synergies between an entrepreneur and a ...nancier.
The synergy between a type-f ...nancier and a type-(i; j ) entrepreneur is represented by
 f
zij , for f = v; n and i; j = h; l. A reasonable conjecture might be that venture capitalists
                                                                      v     n
provide more nurturing for startups. Hence, it should transpire that zij > zij for i; j = h; l.
Additionally, because the high states are better than the low ones, it might be reasonable to
              f     f       f     f
presume that zhj > zlj and zih > zil , for f = v; n. The z '
                                                           s will be estimated in Section 6, so
the validity of these suppositions can be examined.
     The matching process between entrepreneurs and ...nanciers is a random process, and
                                                            v
potentially assortative in nature. The fraction             h   of the projects ...nanced by venture capi-
                                                                                                v             v
talists are with ex ante high-type entrepreneurs, while the remaining fraction,                 l   =1        h,
                                                                                                         n
are with low-type ones. The corresponding fractions for non-VC funding are given by                      h   and
 n          n
 l   =1     h.   The matching process is summarized by Table 3. There is positive assortative
                     v       n
matching when        h   >   h,   which turns out to be the case in the U.S. data-- based on the
statistical tests done in Section 2.2 and Table 1.




3.1       Successful Ventures

The output, of
             ij , of a successful ex post type-(f; i; j ) startup is



           of      f f        f      f
            ij = (xij zij ) (kij ) (lij ) ; with   +    +       = 1, for f = v; n and i; j = h; l:           (1)

                                                       21
       f       f
where kij and lij are the amounts of capital and labor used in production, xf
                                                                            ij is the ...rm'
                                                                                           s
                            f
level of productivity, and zij is the synergy level between the entrepreneur and ...nancier.
In the analysis xf
                 ij will be an endogenous variable that will be a function of the amount of

research the startup does. This variable will be matched up with the patenting activity of
the various types of startups. There is no production in the incubation period before success
occurs.
    A producing ...rm can freely rent capital at the rate r and hire labor at the wage rate w.
It does so to maximize pro...ts. The rental price for capital incorporates a depreciation rate
of 1    d. The pro...t function associated with this maximization problem is


               xf   f
                ij zij (1    )[( ) ( ) ]1= = maxfof   ij
                                                                  f
                                                                rkij      f
                                                                        wlij : s.t. (1)g,   (2)
                                r w           f f
                                             kij ;lij



for f = v; n and i; j = h; l. Along a balanced growth path wages will grow at some (endoge-
nous gross) rate, gw . As can be seen from the pro...t function, rising wages operate to reduce
the pro...ts of an enterprise as it ages. The present value of the pro...ts from a successful
venture in the current period is

                                        X
                                        1
                                                s
                              xf   f
                               ij zij       ( =
                                                    )t (1     )[( ) ( ) ]1=                 (3)
                                        t=0 gw
                                                                 r w
                              xf   f
                               ij zij I ( ), for f = v; n and i; j = h; l ,



where s is the survival rate for a ...rm. The value from a successful venture turns out to be
linear in xf   f
           ij zij .




3.2       Startups

The productivity level of a type-(f; i; j ) startup, xf
                                                      ij , is endogenous. The more ambitious a

new enterprise is at the time of inception, or the higher productivity, xf
                                                                         ij , is relative to the

current level of aggregate productivity, denoted by x, the greater is the initial research cost.
The state-speci...c research cost for a startup is speci...ed by the function

                xf
                 ij    xf
                        ij          f
              R( ) = w( ) =(        ij );   with > 1, and for f = v; n and i; j = h; l:
                 x      x

                                                      22
                f
The higher      ij   is, the lower will be cost of research. This parameter will be estimated for
the various type of startups in Section 6.
    The likelihood that a startup will be successful depends upon the amount of development
                                      f
funding it receives. Let              ij   denote the odds that a type-(f; i; j ) venture will be successful.
                                                                                   f
These odds can be secured with a funding level of D(                               ij ),   where

                             f                 1             f       f
                     D(      ij )   = w(           f
                                                        1)   ij =    ij ;   for f = v; n and i; j = h; l:
                                           1       ij


                                                                         f
The cost of developing a project drops with                              ij .   This parameter will also be estimated a
type-(f; i; j ) startup in Section 6.
    R&D is done separately for each ex post state, j = h; l, before the realization of the
state is known. A type (f; i) startup will only enter the ex post high state, h, with the
productivity/synergy combination xf       f
                                  ih and zih , with probability
                                                                                                   f
                                                                                                   ih   < 1. So, a contingency
plan for the low state, l, is also developed. Of course, an all or nothing strategy for the
high state could be pursued, which would involve setting xf
                                                          il =
                                                                                                   f
                                                                                                   il   = 0, but this will never
be done. The entrepreneur must seek outside funding to cover these R&D startup costs,
R(xf
   ih =x) + D (
                     f         f            f
                     ih ) + R(xil =x) + D ( il ),       where again there are two mutually exclusive sources
for startup funding, f = v; n.



4     Decision Problems

4.1       VC-Financed Startups

Suppose that an ex ante type-i entrepreneur receives funding and mentoring from a venture
capitalist. The entrepreneur and the venture capitalist sign a contract, which stipulates that
the entrepreneur must pay the venture capitalist pv
                                                  ih if the project is successful in the high

state and pv
           il if it lands in the low state. The probabilities of success in the high and low
          f           f
states,   ih   and    il ,   are also speci...ed by the contract, as are the productivities, xv       v
                                                                                              ih and xil .




                                                                    23
The terms of the agreement are prescribed by the following Nash Bargaining problem


                               v
           max
   v ; v ,xv ;xv ,pv ;pv
                           [   ih   xv   v      0
                                     ih zih I ( ) +
                                                       v
                                                       il   xv   v      0
                                                             il zil I ( )
                                                                                 v
                                                                                 ih   pv
                                                                                       ih
                                                                                               v
                                                                                               il   pv
                                                                                                     il      Ei ]
   ih il ih il ih il

                               v                            xv
                                                             ih             xv
                                                                             il
                       [       ih   pv
                                     ih +
                                            v
                                            il   pv
                                                  il   R(       )     R(        )     D(    v
                                                                                            ih )     D(      v
                                                                                                             il )    V ];
                                                             x              x
                                                                                                                                             (P1)


where Ei and V are the threat points of the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist, respec-
tively.36 Here        is the market discount factor, or the reciprocal of the risk-free gross interest
rate on saving and lending by consumers. This is used to discount the payo¤s to both parties
for each ex post state j = h; l. The term in brackets on the ...rst line presents the expected
reward to the entrepreneur, net of his threat point, while the term on the second line gives
the same thing for the venture capitalist.
    The upshot of the above Nash Bargaining problem is the following three ...rst-order con-
ditions:
                                             xv   v      0
                                              ij zij I ( ) = D1 (
                                                                         v
                                                                         ij );   for j = h; l;                                                  (4)

                                             v v        0
                                                                  xv
                                                                   ij
                                             ij zij I ( )   = R1 ( )=x; for j = h; l;                                                           (5)
                                                                   x
and

                                     xv
                                      ih        xv
   v
   ih   pv
         ih +
                 v
                 il   pv
                       il = R(           ) + R( il ) + D( v               v
                                                             ih ) + D ( il )
                                      x         x
                                              1
                                            + [ v    xv z v I ( 0 ) + v     v v       0
                                                                       il xil zil I ( )
                                              2 ih ih ih
                                                                 xv          xv
                                                            R( ih ) R( il ) D(                            v
                                                                                                          ih )      D(   v
                                                                                                                         il )   +V          E i ]:
                                                                  x           x

The ...rst condition implies that the probability of success for each ex post state j is chosen
                                                                                                                                     v
in the ...rst-best manner. A marginal increase in the state-j success probability,                                                   ij ,   raises
the discounted value of a successful venture by xv   v      0
                                                 ij zij I ( ), which is the marginal bene...t.

  36
     Silveira and Wright (2016) build a canonical search model of the process where entrepreneurs are
matched with venture capitalists. Upon meeting, the parties bargain in Nash fashion over each one's invest-
ment and how to split the proceeds. Their analysis is entirely theoretical in nature and does not focus on
the process of innovation and growth.



                                                                    24
                                                          v
Development costs move up by D1 (                         ij ),      which represents the marginal cost. So, the marginal
                                         v
bene...t from increasing                 ij   equals its marginal cost. The next condition sets for each state
                                                                                                                                     v v        0
j the discounted expected marginal bene...t from an increment in productivity,                                                       ij zij I ( ),

equal to the marginal cost of research, R1 (xv                v
                                             ij =x)=x. Thus, xij is also set in a ...rst best

manner. The third condition speci...es the venture capitalist'
                                                             s expected discounted payment,
 v
 ih        pv
            ih +
                    v
                    il   pv                                             v           v
                          il . It is equal to his R&D startup costs, R(xih =x) + R(xil =x) + D (
                                                                                                                                 v          v
                                                                                                                                 ih ) + D ( il ),
                                                                                                                           v
plus one half of the expected surplus, net of the di¤erence in threat points, or [                                         ih    xv   v      0
                                                                                                                                  ih zih I ( )+
 v
 il    xv   v      0
        il zil I ( )       R ( xv
                                ih =x)        R(xv
                                                 il =x)        D(      v
                                                                       ih )        D(      v
                                                                                           il ) + V    Ei ]=2.37 The upshot of the ...rst
two conditions is summarized by the following lemma.

                                                                         v
Lemma 1 (The Impact of Synergy) The higher the ex post state-j synergy, zij , between an
ex ante type-i entrepreneur and the venture capitalist, the more ambitious a project will be
as reected by:

      1. a higher level of productivity, xv
                                          ij ;


                                                              v
      2. a higher likelihood of success,                      ij ;   and

      3. a higher level of funding, R(xv
                                       ij =x) + D (
                                                                                   v
                                                                                   ij ),


for j = h; l.

Proof. See Appendix 12.
       Now, an ex ante type-i entrepreneur can always go to a bank for funding. So, his threat
point, Ei , is given by maximized value of the bank startup problem (P2) presented below.
Now, suppose that a venture capitalist has only one draw in the matching scenario. Then he
will have no outside option. Thus, his threat point is given by V = 0. Therefore, the venture
capitalist'
          s expected pro...ts from a contract with ex ante type-i entrepreneur, Vi , are

               v
 Vi = [        ih    xv   v      0
                      ih zih I ( ) +
                                         v
                                         il   xv   v      0
                                               il zil I ( )       R ( xv
                                                                       ih =x)              R(xv
                                                                                              il =x)     D(   v
                                                                                                              ih )   D(   v
                                                                                                                          il )     Ei ]=2; (6)
      37
     Jovanovic and Szentes (2013) build a model of venture capital that focuses on characterizing and mea-
suring the excess returns earned by venture capitalists, due to the latters'scarcity. Their analysis abstracts
from innovation and growth.




                                                                              25
which represents half of the surplus from the enterprise net of the entrepreneur'
                                                                                s threat
point.38


4.2         Non-VC-Financed Startups

A banker lends to an ex ante type-i entrepreneur at the market discount factor ii (which
is the reciprocal of the gross interest rate). This discount factor di¤ers by a startup'
                                                                                       s ex
                                                                                                                                     n
ante type, i, and takes into account that the startup might fail with probability 1                                                  ih
 n
 il .    When a startup fails, the entrepreneur defaults on the loan'
                                                                    s interest and principal,
         n
[D (     ih )   + R(xn
                     ih =x) + D (
                                          n
                                          il )   + R(xn
                                                      il =x)]=ii . The gross interest rate charged by banks, 1=ii ,

will be determined by a zero-pro...t constraint for bankers. If bankers can raise funds at the
risk-free rate 1= , then
                                                  n         n
                                                  ih   +    il       1        1                1
                                                                 =       or      =        n         n
                                                                                                           :                          (7)
                                                       ii                     ii   (      ih   +    il )

Therefore, the gross interest rate charged by banks, 1=ii , is decreasing in the success probabil-
         n        n                                                                                                             n         n
ity,     ih +     il .   Equivalently, the gross interest rate is increasing in the failure rate, 1                             ih        il .

Clearly, 1=ii > 1= or ii < .
        Now, the entrepreneur'
                             s maximization problem is

                                                                 n n n          0        n n n          0
                           Ei =           max
                                     n ; n ;xn ;xn
                                                            f    ih xih zih I ( )   +    il xil zil I ( )
                                     ih il ih il

                                            n           n        xn
                                                                  ih             xn
                                                                                  il               n              n
                                      (     ih   +      il )[R (     )   + R(        ) + D(        ih )    + D(   il )]=ii g;        (P2)
                                                                   x             x

subject to (7). Here the entrepreneur takes into account how his business plan for the
startup inuences the gross interest rate that he pays. The two sets of ...rst-order conditions
associated with the above maximization problem are:


                                                 xn   n      0
                                                  ij zij I ( ) = D1 (
                                                                               n
                                                                               ij );   for j = h; l;                                  (8)
    38
       The division of pro...ts between the entrepreneur and venture capitalist plays no role in the analysis. As
can be seen from the ...rst-order conditions (4) and (5), the division of pro...ts doesn' t a¤ect the choices for
 v         v
 ij  and x ij .




                                                                          26
and
                                                    n n        0
                                                                                 xn
                                                                                  ij
                                                    ij zij I ( )        = R1 (       )=x; for j = h; l:                         (9)
                                                                                  x
                                                                   n
These two e¢ ciency conditions for                                 ij    and xn
                                                                              ij have the same generic form as (4) and (5).
                      n
The values for        ij   and xn
                                ij will di¤er from
                                                                           v
                                                                           ij   and xv                           n      v
                                                                                     ij for two reasons. First, zij 6= zij . Second,

the cost functions for research and development di¤er; i.e., within the R and D functions,
 n         v          n             v
 ij   6=   ij   and   ij   6=       ij .   This will discussed further in Section 6.



5          Balanced Growth
To start with, denote the gross growth rate for aggregate productivity, or x, by gx                                           x0 =x.
De...ne the average level of productivity for a type-f ...nanced venture in the ex post high
state, j = h, by


                       xf
                        h = (
                                           f f   f
                                           h hh xhh       +    f
                                                               l
                                                                        f f        f f
                                                                        lh xlh )=( h hh     +   f
                                                                                                l
                                                                                                    f
                                                                                                    lh );   for f = n; v:


The fractions of all successful startups in the high state that have type-f funding are

                                                                   f f        f f
                           f                           sf (        h hh + l lh )
                           h    =             v    v       v        v          n n              n n
                                                                                                         , for f = n; v:       (10)
                                     sv (     h    hh + l
                                                                            n
                                                                    lh ) + s ( h hh         +   l lh )


In a similar vein, the average level of productivity over all startups in the ex post low state,
j = l, is given by

                                           sv (   v v v
                                                  h hl xhl +
                                                                     v v v
                                                                     l ll xll )    + sn (   n
                                                                                            h
                                                                                                n n      n n n
                                                                                                hl xhl + l ll xll )
                               xl =                                                                                 :          (11)
                                                   sv ( v  v
                                                        h hl        + v    v
                                                                       l ll )      + sn (   n
                                                                                            h
                                                                                                n      n n
                                                                                                hl + l ll )

      Next, de...ne the following growth factors for the above three ex post classes of enterprises

                                                   f      xf
                                                           h                                           xl
                                                  gh         ; for f = v; n; and gl                       :
                                                          x                                            x

The g '
      s are determined by the choice problems (P1) and (P2), and must be constant along a
balanced growth path. For this to be the case, the xf
                                                    ij '
                                                       s have to grow over time at the same
                                                   f
rate as x. Additionally, the                       ij '
                                                      s   must be constant. Can a balanced growth path exist where


                                                                                27
entrepreneurs are choosing di¤erent levels of innovation? If so, what determines the growth
rate for the aggregate level of productivity, gx ?
    Now, suppose that the aggregate level of productivity in the current period, x, reects
the average productivities of each of the above three classes of enterprises as well as their
mass in the set of producing startups. Speci...cally, let x0 read

                                                    v                n                    v   n
                                    x 0 = c( v  v h
                                             h xh ) (
                                                          n n
                                                          h xh )
                                                                     h   ( l xl )1        h   h   ;                      (12)

                                               v     n     v             n
where c is a constant term and 0 <             h;    h;    h   +         h   < 1. This law of motion depends upon
both the extensive (the '
                        s) and intensive (the x'
                                               s) margins of the three ex post categories
of startups. The aggregate level of productivity'
                                                s gross growth rate, gx , will be

                                                               v                      n       v       n
                                       x0    c( v   v h   n n h
                                                 h xh ) ( h xh ) ( xl )
                                                                       1                      h       h
                               gx         =
                                        x                    x
                                          v v v     n n n         v    n
                                     = c( h gh ) ( h gh ) (gl )1 h h :
                                                h        h                                                               (13)

         v
because gh       xv      n
                  h =x, gh          xn
                                     h =x, and gl         xl =x. Therefore, the gross growth rate in the
aggregate level of productivity, or gx , is just a geometric average of the average rates of
innovation by each type of enterprise, or the g '
                                                s, weighted by their respective masses, the
 '
 s. The extent to which high-type VC-funded enterprises propel the economy forward is
             f      f           f
governed by gh ,    h,   and    h,   for f = ; n:
    Next, the market discount factor, , is given by

                                                                   =( + )
                                                    = =gx                    ;                                           (14)


where     is the representative agent'
                                     s subjective discount factor and                                     is the coe¢ cient of
relative aversion.39 If the depreciation factor on capital is d, then the rental rate, r, will be
   39
      That is, in the background there is a representative consumer/worker who inelastically supplies one
unit of labor and has a lifetime utility function (in period 1) of the form
                                              1
                                              X
                                                    t 1 1
                                                       ct          =(1           );
                                              t=1

where ct is his consumption in period t.




                                                          28
given by
                                                          r = 1=               d:                                (15)

   How is the wage rate determined in general equilibrium and at what gross rate will it
grow along a balanced growth path? To address this question, ...rst note that there are
eight types of enterprises producing: viz., ex ante high- and low-type startups that evolve
into ex post high- and low-type ...rms, which were initially ...nanced by venture capitalists
and non-venture capitalists. Recall that each period there are sv ...rms funded by VC and
sn by non-VC sources. Let #f
                           ij refer to the number of current startups that will turn into

type-(f; i; j ) enterprises in the subsequent period. It can be deduced that


                              #f
                               ij =
                                          f f
                                          ij s
                                                     f
                                                     i,   for f = v; n and i; j = h; l:


Now, the survival rate for an operating ...rm is s. Thus, the numbers of t-period-old type-
(f; i; j ) enterprises that will still be around are


                     #f       t f
                      ij;t = s #ij ; for f = v; n; i; j = h; l ; and t = 0; 1;                               :


Here, an age-0 enterprise is one that just starts producing in the current period.
   Next, the generic demand for labor by a type-(f; i; j ) enterprise, arising from the ...rst-
order condition for labor, is

                                   =             ( + )=
                   f
                  lij =                                      xf   f
                                                              ij zij ; for f = v; n and i; j = h; l:
                          r              w

Hence, the labor demanded by an enterprise that came on line t periods ago is

                               f
                                                   =                  ( + )=
                                                                                    xf
                                                                                     ij    f
                                                                                                   f
                                                                                                  lij
                              lij ;t =                                           t+1
                                                                                          zij =    t+1
                                                                                                         ;       (16)
                                             r               w                  gx                gx

since xf       f    t+1
       ij;t = xij =gx . Thus, the total demand for labor by type-(f; i; j ) enterprises reads


                          X
                          1                            X
                                                       1                     f
                                                                            lij       #f   f
                                                                                       ij lij
                                   #f     f
                                    ij;t lij;t   =           s   t
                                                                     #f
                                                                      ij    t+1
                                                                                =              :
                           t=0                         t=0
                                                                           gx     gx (1 s=gx )


                                                                      29
The labor-market clearing condition appears as

                                  X XX                 #f   f
                                                        ij lij
                                                                = 1;
                                                    g (1 s=gx )
                                 f =v;n i=h;l j =h;l x


Therefore, the solution for wages is given by
                                          P          P              P
                             =( + )
                                            f =v;n         j =h;l     j =h;l   #f   f f
                                                                                ij zij xij        =( + )       =( + )
              w=                      [                                                      ]             x            :   (17)
                         r                                gx (1      s=gx )

Focus on the right-hand side of the above equation. Along a balanced growth path, the
#f  s, xf
 ij '   ij '
           s, zij
               f
                  s, and gx will all be constant. The only thing growing is x. Therefore, wages
                  '
grow at the gross rate
                                                   x0       =( + )
                                          gw = (      )              = gx=(     + )
                                                                                      :                                     (18)
                                                   x
   The gist of the above discussion is summarized by the de...nition below.

De...nition 1 (Balanced Growth) The following characterizes a balanced growth path:

                                                     f
  1. R&D by VC-backed startups, or                   ij    and xf
                                                                ij for i; j = h; l , is determined by the Nash

     Bargaining problem (P1), taking as given , Ei , r, w, gw , V , and x.

                                                             n
  2. R&D by non-VC-backed startups, or                       ij   and xn
                                                                       ij for i; j = h; l , and the threat point for

     entrepreneurs, Ei , solve the bank ...nance problem (P2), taking as given , i, r, w, gw ,
     and x.

                                                                                                                             f
  3. The wage rate, w, clears the labor market in accordance with (17), taking as given                                      ij ,

     xf
      ij , and sf , for f = v; n and i; j = h; l , and gx . The gross growth rate in wages, gw , is

     pinned by (18) given gx .

  4. The market discount factor, , and the rental rate on capital, r, are speci...ed by (15)
     and (14), assuming a value for gx . The gross interest rate on bank loans, 1=ii , is
                                                                               n                 n
     determined by (7), conditional on values for ,                            ih ,   and        il .


  5. The threat point for a venture capitalist is simply V = 0.

  6. Aggregate productivity, x, and its gross growth rate, gx , are speci...ed by (12) and (13).

                                                              30
    From the above analysis of the balanced growth path, it can be seen that a corporate
income tax will have no impact on economic growth. This transpires because it acts as
                                                            f
an equiproportionate reduction in all synergies, or on the zij '
                                                               s. This operates in the same
manner as a once-and-for-all reduction in aggregate productivity.

Lemma 2 (Neutrality of a Uniform Corporate Income Tax on Long-Run Growth) Suppose
the government levies a corporate income tax at rate                      on all producing enterprises, with all
revenue is rebated back to consumers/workers in the form of lump-sum taxes. There is no
e¤ect on long-run growth; i.e., on gx and gw .

Proof. Again, see Appendix 12.



6        Matching the Model with U.S. Census Data
The model is now confronted with stylized facts computed using data from the U.S. Census
Bureau'
      s LBD, the USPTO'
                      s PatentsView, and VentureXpert. The length of a period is
taken to be 10 years. The baseline level of aggregate productivity, x, can be innocuously
normalized to one; hence, x = 1. Some of the parameters in model are standard in macro-
economics. These are assigned common values. Parameters unique to the current study
are calibrated in the recursive fashion discussed below. The calibration procedure uses facts
for the average growth rate of the U.S. economy, the number of ...rms per worker in the
economy, and the ratio of non-VC-funded to VC-funded startups. The ex ante matching
                                   f
probabilities, or the four         i's   in Table 3, can be computed using data from the U.S. Census
Bureau and VentureXpert. Likewise, the success odds for type-(f; i; j ) ventures, or the eight
 f
 ij '
    s,   can be calculated using the same data. For each funding source, f , these amount
to the transition probabilities of going from ex ante state i to ex post state j . Due to
disclosure restrictions imposed by the Bureau for reasons of con...dentiality, facts can only
be used for the average employment of type-(f; j ) ...rms; that is, for the four observations
 f        f f f          f   f f        f f        f   f
lj =(     h hj lhj   +   l   lj llj )=( h hj   +   l   lj );   for f = v; n and j = h; l. (In other words, the
data cannot also be categorized by the ex ante type i of enterprise.) Likewise, facts can only
be used for the average patenting activity of type-(f; j ) ...rms. These restrictions impose

                                                               31
                            Ex Ante Matching Probabilities (%)
                            Type           90th       90th
                            VC Funded     32.55      67.45
                            Non-VC Funded 10.64      89.36

Table 4: The data sources are discussed in Section 2.1. A ...rm'  s type refers to whether or
not it is in the top decile for employment at the time of initial VC funding. These are the
 f
 i's used in the benchmark calibration. All ...gures are rounded for disclosure purposes.


some limitations on the structure that can be calibrated. Given the saturated structure of
the model, there is exact identi...cation of the parameter values unique to this study. In
fact, all but one of the parameters can be pinned down using analytical expressions that
connect observations to parameter values. The last parameter requires simulating the model
to match a desired data target.


6.1    Number of Startups, sn and sv
                                                                                               f
From the U.S. data the success rates for the eight types of startups are known. That is,       ij

can be assigned the value ef
                           ij , for f = v; n and i; j = h; l . A     over a variable denotes that
                                                                                               f
its value for calibration purposes can be assigned directly from U.S. Census data. Let         j

represent the fraction of all initial startups that were funded by source f and ended up in
ex post state j . It can be shown that

                        f
                        j   = ef  f     f f
                               h ehj + el elj < 1; for f = v; n and j = h; l:               (19)

      f
The   j's   are known since the ef
                                 i's and ef
                                          ij '
                                             s are. They lie below one because most startups
fail. The ex ante matching probabilities in the U.S. data are reported in Table 4. Ven-
ture capitalists fund a higher percentage of high-type ...rms than do other ...nanciers-- this
assortative match was discussed in Section 2.2.




                                                 32
   In the United States the number of entrepreneurs (employer businesses) per worker is 4.3
percent. Therefore, it should transpire that

                             sv (   v
                                    h   +   v
                                            l)+ sn (      n
                                                          h   +   n
                                                                  l)
                                                                       = 0:043;
                                            (1 s)

where s is the survival rate for a producing ...rm. Additionally, the ratio of non-VC to VC-
                                                                          ]
funded startups can be calculated from the U.S. data, so that a value for s n =sv is pinned


down. Hence, using the above equation


                    sv = 0:043                       v
                                                         + ev      ]n v        n       n
                                    (1      s)=[(    h      l ) + (s =s )(     h   +   l )],



                                                              ]
This equation can be used to back out values for sv and sn = (s n =sv )sv .




                                              f
6.2    Growth in Startup Productivities, the gj '
                                                s

The model is calibrated so that the benchmark economy grows at 1.8 percent a year. This
implies a target growth rate for aggregate productivity, gx , given by


                                         gx = 1:01810         ( + )=
                                                                       :


   Data on patent stocks is used to identify the innovation rates of ...rms. As discussed,
stylized facts for patenting activity can only be reported at the level of type-(f; j ) ...rms;
i.e., it cannot be broken down by the initial type, i, of the enterprise. So, the calibration
procedure will impose the restriction that xf     f
                                            hj = xlj                       xf
                                                                            j , for f = v; n and j = h; l .

The observed innovation rates for a type-(f; j ) enterprise relative to a type-(v; h) ...rm are
                f
represented by ej . Then,
                                            f
                                 xf  e v
                                  j = j xh , for (f; j ) 6= (v; h).

                                        f
The spillover parameters, or the        j's,    are computed from the shares of type-(f; j ) ...rms in
total patent citations. The distribution of patent citations by ...rm type in the United States
is displayed in Table 5. On this account, ev               n
                                           h = 0:2622 and eh = 0:3917.




                                                     33
                                     Patent Citations (%)
                                 Type             90th    90th
                                 VC Funded      26.22    2.67
                                 Non-VC Funded 39.17    31.93

Table 5: Again, the data sources are discussed in Section 2.1. A ...rm's type refers to whether
or not it is in the top decile for employment 10 years after VC funding. The ...rst column
gives the numbers used for v         n
                              h and h . All ...gures are rounded for disclosure purposes.



   From equation (13) it then follows that

                                           v eh      v
                                                          n e n en      v  n
                                                                 h e 1 eh eh ;
                                 gx = cxv
                                        h( h) (           h h) ( l)


                                  f
where equation (10) de...nes      h   and by using (11) it is easy to deduce that

                                                 v v e    v               n n e            n
                                sv ( e v  v                   n  n n
                                       h ehl + el ell ) l + s (eh ehl + el ell ) l
                                                                                   :
                        l
                                   sv ( e v  v     v v
                                          h ehl + el ell ) + s (eh ehl + el ell )
                                                              n  n n      n n


                            v
                       el        n en
Now, choose c = 1=[( v
                     h) (        h ) ],
                                    h     an innocuous normalization. Then,

                             v                          gx
                            gh = xv
                                  h =         n n                        (recall x = 1):
                                          ( e h ) e h ( e l )1 e h e h
                                                                 v   n




Therefore,
                                              f
                                       f
                                      gj = ej gh
                                               v
                                                 , for (f; j ) 6= (v; h).


                       f
6.3    Synergies, the zij '
                          s
                                                                                       f
The relative employments of ...rms are used to identify the synergy parameters or the zij '
                                                                                          s. Let
ef
ej denote the observed employment of a type-(f; j ) ...rm relative to a type-(v; h) one. There

are four of these. As was discussed earlier, unfortunately employment cannot categorized by
the ex ante type i of an enterprise. Given this only four unique synergy parameters can be
                                                                           f     f              f
backed out using U.S. Census data from the calibration procedure. So, set zhj = zlj            zj in
                                                         v
the calibration procedure. The four synergy parameters, zh ; zlv ; zh
                                                                    n
                                                                      , and zln , are pinned down
                        v
as follows. First, set zh = 1. Then, using the labor demand functions (16) and the data on




                                                         34
                      ef
relative employments, ej , the following holds


                                                       xv  v
                                                        h zh             xv
                                                                          h 1
                                                                    =(           ef
                                                                            ) f =ej;
                                                       xf  f
                                                        j zj
                                                                          f
                                                                         xj zj

so that
                                                f         xv
                                               zj =(       h
                                                                 ef
                                                               )=ej , for (f; j ) 6= (v; h).                                                  (20)
                                                          xf
                                                           j

The wage rate, w, can be now determined at the calibration point using (17).


                                                                                                                              f           f
6.4          The E¢ ciencies of Research and Development, the                                                                 ij '
                                                                                                                                 s,       ij '
                                                                                                                                             s,
             and

The desired values for the startups' productivities and success rates, xf
                                                                        ij and
                                                                                                                                f
                                                                                                                                ij ,   can be
achieved by backing out the constant parameters for the research and development functions,
 f               f
 ij '
    s   and      ij '
                    s,   so that the model hits these targets. In particular, the ...rst-order condition
        f
for     ij   states that

                                                                    1                           1
                                       xf   f      0
                                        ij zij I ( ) = w [                             (                     1)]=   f
                                                                                                                    ij ;
                                                               (1    ef
                                                                      ij )
                                                                           2               1        ef
                                                                                                     ij


so that
                                  f                   1                      1
                                  ij   = fw [                        (                         1)]g=[ xf   f      0
                                                                                                       ij zij I ( )]:                         (21)
                                                (1    ef
                                                       ij )
                                                            2            1       ef
                                                                                  ij

Following a similar procedure for xf
                                   ij '
                                      s gives


                                                f        xf
                                                          ij
                                                ij   = w( )          1
                                                                         =[x ef   f
                                                                              ij zij                 I ( 0 )]:                                (22)
                                                          x

Since there are eight values for the ef
                                      ij '
                                         s, there will be eight unique value for the                                                   f
                                                                                                                                       ij '
                                                                                                                                          s   and
 f
 ij '
    s   (even though there are only four unique values for the xf
                                                                ij '
                                                                   s). The backed-out parameter
                  f          f
values for        ij   and   ij   depend upon the elasticity parameter                                       in the research cost function.
The determination of is discussed now.
      Henrekson and Sanandaji (2018) report that Canada had a tax rate on VC-funded star-
tups of 32 percent and a VC-investment-to-GDP ratio of 0.04 percent. Their numbers for the

                                                                         35
United States are 15 and 0.20 percent. This implies a tax elasticity of   ln(0:20=0:04)= ln(0:15=0:32) =
2:12. The parameter is ...t to match this elasticity.


6.5    The Model'
                s Fit

The calibration targets for the United States and the model'
                                                           s ...t for these targets are shown
in Table 7, with the parameter values used being presented in Table 6. As can be seen,
over the time period in question GDP grew at 1.8 percent a year. The model matches this
number. A VC-funded startup is much more likely to be highly successful than a non-VC-
funded one. A VC-funded venture that starts out in the top decile of employment has a 33
percent chance of making it into the top employment decile 10 years later, as Table 7 shows.
This compares with 23.77 percent of non-VC-funded ...rms. A VC-funded startup that begins
in the bottom 90 percent of the employment distribution still has a 23.77 percent chance of
making it to the top, compared with only 1.68 percent for a non-VC-funded ...rms. Recall
from Table 4, though, that a VC-funded ...rm is much more likely to start out in the top
decile than a non-VC-funded one; viz., 32.55 versus 10.64 percent. This is due to selection.
The unconditional probabilities for VC-funded and non-VC-funded ...rms ending up in the
high and low states are presented in Table 8. It can be seen that VC-funded ...rms have 26.81
and 9.06 percent chances of ending up in the high and low states, while for non-VC-funded
startups the numbers are 3.58 and 31.71 percent. Conditioned on success, VC-funded ...rms
have a much higher likelihood of winding up in the high state (74.75 percent) relative to
non-funded ones (10.15 percent). The failure rates for both types of startups are very high,
64.1 and 64.7 percent.




   A VC-funded startup that makes it into the top 10 percent of ...rms has a much higher
employment than a non-VC-funded ...rm. The latter'
                                                 s employment is only 16 percent of
the former'
          s. The employment levels of both types of startups, should they end up in
the bottom 90 percent, are much smaller. Still, a VC-funded ...rm has 1.6 times the level
of employment of a non-VC-funded ...rm. On average a VC-funded ...rm has 38.02 times


                                               36
                                     Calibrated Parameter Values
Parameter Values                 Description                  Identi...cation
Consumers
b = 0:95                             Discount factor-- annualized              7% risk-free rate
Firms
   = 1=3 0:85 = 0:283                Capital's share                           Standard
   = 2=3 0:85 = 0:567                Labor's share                             Standard
1 d = 0:07                           Depreciation rate-- annualized            Standard
s = 0:96                             Firm survival rate-- annualized           Expected life of Compustat ...rms
Research
  v                     v
  hh = 41:270; hl = 37:540           VC Research e¢ ciency, xv  ij             VC pat./succ. rates, U.S. data
  v                 v
  lh = 57 : 49;     ll  =  23  : 610
  n                  n
  hh = 1:616; hl = 0:341             Non-VC Research e¢ ciency, xn    ij       Non-VC pat./succ. rates, U.S. data
  n                    n
  lh = 18 : 780  ;     ll = 0  : 193
  = 3:5                              Research cost elasticity, xv        n
                                                                 ij and xij    Canada/U.S. Tax elasticity
Development
  v                   v
  hh = 0:002; hl = 0:042             VC Development e¢ ciency, v     ij        VC pat./succ. rates, U.S.data
  v                  v
  lh = 0:001   ;     ll  = 0 :071
  n                   n
  hh = 0:006; hl = 0:249             Non-VC Development e¢ ciency, n      ij   Non-VC pat./succ. rates, U.S. data
  n                  n
  lh = 0:000   ;     ll  = 0: 597
Synergies
 v
zh  = 1:00; zlv = 0:042              VC                                        Empl. Ratios, U.S. data
 n                n
zh = 0:801; zl = 0:083               Non-VC
Ex ante Matching Odds                                                          U.S. Data
  v                v
  h = 0:326; l = 0:675
  n                n
  h = 0:106; l = 0:894
Growth Externality
 v              v
 h = 0:26; l = 0:03                  Exponent on VC innovation                 Citation distribution, U.S. Data
 n              n
 h = 0:39; l = 0:32                  Exponent on non-VC innovation
Model Period                         10 years                                  VC contract durations

              Table 6: The parameter values used to replicate the data targets in Table 7.




                                                         37
                              Calibration Targets
 Target                                U.S. Data                                Model
 Economic growth-- annualized             1.80                                   1.80

                           f
 Success Rates, %-- the    ij '
                              s          Top 10% Bottom 90%            Top 10% Bottom 90%
 VC funded
   ex ante top 10%                       33.11        6.48             33.11       6.48
   ex ante bottom 90%                    23.77        10.30            23.77       10.30
 Non-VC funded
   ex ante top 10%                       19.53        18.83            19.53       18.83
   ex ante bottom 90%                    1.68         33.24            1.68        33.24

                              ef
 Employment, Relative %-- the ej's Top 10% Bottom 90%                  Top 10% Bottom 90%
 VC funded                          100.00     0.59                     100.00     0.59
 Non-VC funded                       16.23     0.36                      16.23     0.36

                              f
 Patenting, Relative %-- the ej '
                                s        Top 10% Bottom 90%            Top 10% Bottom 90%
 VC funded                                100.00    14.09               100.00    14.09
 Non-VC funded                             20.27     4.33                20.27     4.33

 Firms per Worker, %                                4.30                         4.30
 Ratio non-VC to VC Startups                      1,035.34                     1,035.34
 Tax Elasticity                                      2.1                         2.05

Table 7: See Section 2.1 for the data sources. Average employment and patent stocks are
measured with respect to VC-funded ...rms in the top 10 percent. Patenting is measured
using a quality-adjusted patent stock. Transition probabilities (the success rates) give the
likelihood that an ex ante type-i ...rm ends up as an ex post type-j ...rm 10 years after funding,
for i; j = top 10 percent, bottom 90 percent.



                  Unconditional Success Probabilities (%)
                       By state     By statej failing Overall                      Failure
                           f            f    f    f    f     f                        f      f
                           j            j =( h + l )   h + l                     1    h +    l
    Type             90th      90th   90th       90th
    VC Funded      26.81      9.06   74.75      25.25  35.87                        64.13
    Non-VC Funded   3.58     31.71   10.15      89.85  35.29                        64.71

Table 8: Success probabilities when not conditioning on the initial type of startup, U.S. data
and model. The ...gures are computed by using equation (19) and the information in Tables
4 and 7.



                                                 38
                            Rates of Innovation, Annualized %
                           Rate of Innovation Top 10% Bottom 90%
                           VC funded           29.23      6.23
                           Non-VC funded       10.17      -5.59

Table 9: Annualized rates of innovation for each type of ...rm as measured by their percentage
distance from the frontier at the time of startup, 100 [(xf
                                                          ij =x)
                                                                 1=10
                                                                      1]. All ...gures are rounded
for disclosure purposes.


[= (0:75      100 + 0:25    0:59)=(0:10   16:23 + 0:90    0:36)] the employment of a non-VC-
funded one. Only a small number of startups are funded by venture capitalists. Speci...cally,
there are 1,035.34 non-VC-funded startups for every VC-funded one. Yet, while VC-funded
...rms account for only 0.1 percent of all startups, 10 years after ...rst funding these ...rms
account for 3.7 percent of total employment [= 0:36      38:02=(0:36    38:02 + 1035:34    0:35)].
Hence, their punch far exceeds their weight.
   Likewise, the patenting stock of a VC-funded startup in the top 10 percent of ...rms is
much greater than that for a non-VC-funded ...rm. Non-VC-funded startups have only 20.27
percent of the patents that VC-funded startups have, even when they resolve into the top
decile of ...rms. VC-funded ...rms in the bottom 90th percentile of ...rms still have 3 times
the patent stocks of non-VC-funded ...rms. As with employment, VC-funded ...rms have an
outsized share of innovation. Though they account for 0.1 percent of startups, they account
for 1.2 percent of patenting activity ten years post funding. Last, in the United States
there are 23 workers (1=0:043) for every ...rm, which the model matches in addition to above
statistics.
   Table 9 shows that in the calibrated equilibrium most innovation in the economy is driven
by VC-funded ...rms that make it into the top 10 percent. In fact, non-VC-funded startups
that don'
        t make it into the top decile of ...rms drag down the average level of productivity
in the economy in the sense that even after they innovate they lag behind the aggregate
level of productivity in the economy at the time of their inception. Additionally, they make
up 89.77 percent of the ...rms in the economy, whereas VC-funded ...rms in the top decile
comprise only 0.07 percent.




                                               39
6.6        Interpretation of Backed-Out Parameter Values

The backed-out parameter values are reasonable, albeit there are anomalies. As can be seen
from Table 6, the synergy level between an entrepreneur and the ...nancier is highest for
                                                   v    f
VC-funded ...rms in the ex post high state; i.e., zh > zj , for all (f; j ) 6= (v; h). Also, synergy
                                                                         f
levels are always higher in the high state as opposed to the low state, zh > zlf , for all f . The
synergy between entrepreneurs and ...nanciers is very low in the ex post low state. Somewhat
surprisingly, it is lowest for VC-funded ...rms; i.e., zlv < zln . The reason is that non-VC-funded
...rms in the low state do almost no innovation; i.e., their productivity level, or xn
                                                                                     l , is very

small. Therefore, to match employment for these ...rms, the synergy level must be raised a
little to compensate-- in line with calibration equation (20). Of course, VC-funded ...rms in
the ex post low state are still better than non-VC-funded ones because zlv xv    n n
                                                                            l > zl xl .

      The development parameters also reveal reasonable rankings in general. First, it is more
costly to achieve success in the ex post high state versus the low one. This is reected by
                            f           f
the fact that               ih   <      il ,   for all f and i, where a higher value for                      represents a lower cost.
Second, if a ...rm starts out in the ex ante low state, as opposed to the high state, it is harder
                                                                           f             f
to end up in the ex post high state; i.e.,                                 lh   <        hh ,   for all f . Still, it is more expensive
for a ...rm starting out as a high type to achieve success in the low state as opposed to one
                                                                    f            f
starting out as a low-type one; that is,                            hl   <       ll .   This occurs because the observed odds of
winding up in the low state are smaller for ex ante high-type ...rms. Hence, the calibration
                                                                                                                                     f
procedure places a high cost on this transition-- see (21)-- which is achieved by lowering                                           hl
                     f
relative to          ll .

      Last, the research parameters look reasonable, but again there are some exceptions. First,
the cost of doing research is lower for a VC-funded ...rm than for a non-VC-funded one; that
      v        n
is,   ij       ij   for all i; j . Thus, it is easier to do research when backed by a venture capitalist,
perhaps because they lend expertise. Second, for a VC-backed ...rm the cost of researching
an ex post high idea starting out from the ex ante low state is lower than for the ex ante high
                    v            v
state; i.e.,        lh   >       hh .   This is an artifact of the Census data disclosure restriction on reporting
patenting activity that imposed the constraint xv     v                           v     v
                                                lh = xhh , when almost certainly xlh < xhh .
                v     v                                    v             v
Now, note that zlh = zhh and that                          lh   <        hh .   Given the low success rate when starting out



                                                                            40
from the ex ante low state it must transpire that, to get the same level of patenting as the ex
ante high state, the research costs in the ex ante low state must be lower-- as (22) dictates.



7          No Venture Capital Thought Experiment
How important is the presence of venture capital for the economy? To answer this ques-
tion, venture capital is shut down. To do this, set the synergy parameters for VC-backed
                                                                v    n
enterprises equal to the ones for non-VC-backed ones, implying zj = zj . Likewise, ...x the
values for the research and development cost parameters for VC-funded ...rms to those for
                                            v        n           v        n
non-VC-funded ...rms; i.e., set             ij   =   ij   and    ij   =   ij .   This renders VC-backed ...rms the
same as non-VC-backed ones. Last, since both types of ...rms are the same now, in the
law of motion for aggregate productivity, or equation (13), set the spillover parameter for
VC-funded startups in the ex post high state equal to that of non-VC funded ones, so let
 v           n         v       n 40
 h    =      h   and   h   =   h.     This experiment is equivalent to requiring all ...rms to use bank
...nancing, and shuts down all VC treatment e¤ects on the economy.
      The results of this experiment is reported in Table 10. Not surprisingly, growth falls from
1.8 percent annually to 1.30. The drop in the growth rate derives from two key features of the
baseline. First, the success rates of entering into the ex post high state for non-VC-backed
startups are lower than for VC-backed ones. Second, the level of patenting activity in the
high state for non-VC-backed startups is much lower than for VC-backed ones. Requiring
all ...rms to use bank ...nancing leads to a large welfare loss of 9.25 percent in terms of
consumption.




8          Matching Thought Experiment
How much does the observed ex ante match between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists
matter for growth? Suppose instead that there is perfect assortative matching between
entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. Out of s startups, sn are funded by banks and sv by
     40
          In similar fashion, renormalize the constant term c by ...xing ev    n
                                                                          h = eh .



                                                            41
                    No Venture Capital Thought Experiment
                                          Baseline     No Venture Capital
            Variable
            Growth                        1.80         1.30
            C.V.                          0            -9.25
            VC ...rms, high
              fraction, v h               0.73         0
                            v      v
              patenting, xhh and xlh      12.99, 12.99 2.58*, 2.57*
                         v      v
              success, hh and lh          33.11, 23.77 19.00*, 1.61*
            VC share of all patenting     1.28         0
            Non-VC ...rms, high
              fraction, n h               99.28        100
                            n      n
              patenting, xhh and xlh      2.63, 2.63   2.58, 2.57
                         n      n
              success, hh and lh          19.53, 1.68 19.00, 1.61
            Non-VC share of all patenting 98.72        100.00

Table 10: The experiment reports what happens when venture capital is shut down. The
entries with the asterisks show what VC-backed startups look like when they are degraded
to resemble non-VC-backed ones. These startups are now counted as non-VC-backed ones.


venture capitalists. There will be :1    s entrepreneurs in the top decile of projects. The
situation is illustrated by the lefthand panel of Table 11. Now, the maximum number of
matches between startups in the top 10 decile and venture capitalists is v      minfsv ; :1   sg,
where s = sn + sv . Therefore, the probability of a venture capitalist funding a startup in
the top decile is v=sv . When venture capitalists are in short supply, as in the simulation,
these odds would be 100 percent; here v = sv matches will occur between entrepreneurs in
the top decile and venture capitalists. In general, there will be sv      v venture capitalists
left over. They will now have to fund startups below the top decile. The odds of such a
match happening are given by (sv     v)=sv . In the simulation, the pool of venture capitalists
is exhausted by entrepreneurs in the top decile (because sv = v). Therefore, this situation
doesn'
     t happen. Returning to the general case, there could potentially be :1         s    v high-
quality entrepreneurs that are left unfunded by venture capitalists. Thus, the probability of
a match between a high-quality entrepreneur and a bank is (:1      s   v)=sn . Since sn projects
will be funded by banks, they can fund sn   :1    s + v startups lying outside of the top decile.
Therefore, the probability of a bank funding a low-quality entrepreneur is (sn :1 s + v)=sn .




                                             42
                           Ex Ante Matching Probabilities
                          Data          Perfect      Perfect Assort.               Random
                                      Assortative    with More VC
 Type                 90th     90th   90th      90th   90th     90th             90th      90th
 VC Funded           32.55    67.45 100.00      0    100.00     0               10.00     90.00
 Non-VC Funded       10.64    89.36  9.91    90.09     0      100.00            10.00     90.00

Table 11: The ex ante matching probabilities observed in the data (...rst panel), when match-
ing is perfectly assortative (second panel), perfectly assortative matching with an increased
supply of venture capitalists (third panel), and completely random (last panel). The numbers
used are reported as percentages.


   The movement to perfect assortative matching increases growth from 1.80 to 1.96 percent--
see the second panel of Table 12. Virtually all of the uptick in growth derives from a move-
ment along the extensive margin. That is, from an increase in the fraction of VC-funded
...rms that are operating in the ex post high state. This fraction moves up from 0.73 to
0.91 percent. This is partially o¤set by a decline in the fraction of non-VC-funded ...rms
producing in this state. The percentage increase in VC-funded ...rms is however much larger.
E¤ectively, the number of non-VC-funded ...rms barely moves from its baseline. Observe that
the success and patenting rates increase a little. This occurs because in equilibrium the wage
rate drops slightly. So, the increase in growth comes from an increase in the fraction of ...rms
in the high state that are funded by venture capitalists. The contribution of VC ...rms to
patenting activity also rises from 1.28 to 1.55 percent. This increase has a noticeable impact
                                                      v
on growth due to the sizeable spillover coe¢ cient,   h,   on VC-funded ...rm patenting activity
in the high state. While the increase in growth might seem modest, it leads to a signi...cant
welfare gain as measured by the compensating variation for a move from the baseline econ-
omy to the one with perfect assortative matching. A person would be willing to give up
2.73 percent of his consumption in each and every period along a balanced growth path in
the new regime in order to e¤ect the move, at least when assuming logarithmic utility (and
when the initial level of consumption in both regimes is assumed to be the same.)
   Recall that venture capitalists are in short supply in the baseline equilibrium. Now,
suppose that one could increase the supply of venture capitalists so that all ...rms in the top
decile could be funded by VC. The third panel of Table 11 shows the resulting matching
probabilities. Growth would now pick up from 1.80 to 2.05 percent, which would be worth

                                              43
4.41 percent in terms of consumption­the third panel of Table 12. One might have expected
an even larger welfare gain, but the impact is dampened due to a rise in wages in general
equilibrium. This is reected in the lower levels of patenting and success rates for both VC-
and non-VC-...nanced ...rms. So, all of the uptick in growth comes from the fact that more
...rms are ...nanced by venture capitalists. VC-funded ...rms have higher levels of patenting
and success rates than non-VC-funded ...rms, which allows growth to rise.
    The relatively large gains in growth when matching becomes perfectly assortative suggests
that policies that increase the degree of assortative matching can enhance growth. An
example of such a policy is early-stage R&D subsidies to startups. Recent evidence on
the e¤ectiveness of Small Business Innovation and Research (SBIR) grants by the federal
government suggests that an important function of these grants is to allow startups to
develop a "prototype" and demonstrate the feasibility of their technology or product. This
demonstration can reduce uncertainty about the viability of a startup, and make it more
attractive to private investment. For instance, Howell (2017) ...nds that a Phase I SBIR grant
nearly doubles the likelihood of VC investment in a startup. In other words, such grants can
act like a "match-maker" and allow startups that may otherwise be unnoticed by venture
capitalists to be selected and funded by them. Making such grants available to a broader
set of startups or raising the grant amount can therefore increase the degree of assortative
matching, leading to higher growth.



    Alternatively, suppose that matching is random-- that is, selection by venture capitalists
is eliminated. The situation is given by the last panel of Table 12. There are sv venture
capitalists in total. With random matching, :1            sv venture capitalists will be matched with
...rms in the top 10 percent, the rest with ...rms in the bottom 90 percent. Growth and welfare
now drop, but ever so slightly-- see Table 12. This occurs primarily from a fall in the number
of VC-funded ...rms operating in the high state from 0.73 to 0.68 percent. The movement
from the matching structure observed in the data to the random matching structure is much
smaller than moving to perfect assortative matching, as can be seen in Table 11.41 So, the
  41
     The magnitude of these movements can be assessed using a matrix distance metric. For instance, based
                                                                             qP
on the Frobenius norm, the distance between two matrices A and B is given by   (i;j ) (aij bij )2 ; where aij


                                                     44
                                Matching Thought Experiment
                                    Baseline  Perfect     Perfect Assort. Random
 Variable                                     Assortative with More VC
 Growth                             1.80      1.96        2.05            1.78
 C.V.                               0         2.73        4.41            -0.27
 VC ...rms, high
   fraction, v h                        0.73         0.91         78.43                        0.68
   patenting, xv         v
                 hh and xlh             12.99, 12.99 13.13, 13.15 8.35, 7.89                   13.06, 13.07
              v        v
   success, hh and lh                   33.11, 23.77 33.56, 24.18 17.94, 11.18                 33.12, 23.78
 VC share of all patenting              1.28         1.5          69.87                        1.20
 Non-VC ...rms, high
   fraction, n h                        99.28              99.09          21.57                99.32
   patenting, xn         n
                 hh and xlh             2.63, 2.63         2.67, 2.68     1.56, 1.38           2.55, 2.57
              n        n
   success, hh and lh                   19.53, 1.68        19.91, 1.73    8.59, 0.55           19.72, 1.71
 Non-VC share of all patenting          98.72              98.5           30.13                98.8

Table 12: The experiments report what happens when the initial matching between entre-
preneurs and ...nanciers is perfect assortative, perfect assortative with an increased supply of
venture capitalists, and random. All rates are reported as percentages.


impact on growth and welfare from random matching is more muted than the impact on
growth from perfect assortative matching.



9     The Taxation of Startups
The model can be used to assess the role of the di¤erential taxation of VC-funded startups
compared to others. In the United States VC-funded startups are taxed when they are
oated or sold at the capital gains rate, currently 17 percent. This happens because the key
o¢ cers of the companies are remunerated in the form of stock options and/or preferred shares
that only attain value when the ...rm goes public or is bought by another company. Other
forms of startups are taxed at either the corporate or personal income tax rates, which are
much higher. Until recently the corporate income tax rate was 35 percent. Lemma 2 states
that the taxation of all startups at a uniform rate would have no impact on an economy'
                                                                                      s
balanced growth path. Di¤erential taxation across VC-funded and non-VC funded startups
and bij are the (i; j ) elements of A and B , respectively. Using this measure, the movement from the baseline
to random matching represents a distance of 31:9; whereas the movement from the baseline to perfectly
assortative matching amounts to a much larger distance of 95:4:



                                                      45
                                Uniform Taxation Experiment
                                              Baseline  Uniform Taxation
                 Variable
                 Growth                              1.80           1.48
                 C.V.                                0              -5.87
                 VC ...rms, high
                   fraction, v h                     0.73         0.53
                   patenting, xv         v
                                 hh and xlh          12.99, 12.99 10.44, 10.14
                              v        v
                   success, hh and lh                33.11, 23.77 24.79, 16.52
                 VC share of all patenting           1.28         0.74
                 Non-VC ...rms, high
                   fraction, n h                     99.28          99.47
                   patenting, xv         v
                                 hh and xlh          2.63, 2.63     2.60, 2.59
                              n        n
                   success, hh and lh                19.53, 1.68    19.18, 1.64
                 Non-VC share of all patenting       98.72          99.26

Table 13: The experiment reports what happens when the tax rate on VC-funded startups
is raised from 17 percent to the 35 percent rate on non-VC-funded startups. All rates are
reported as percentages.


will though. As an experiment, consider what would have happened if the VC- and non-
VC-funded startups were taxed at a uniform rate of 35 percent. Note that the historical tax
rates on VC- and non-VC-funded startups are built into the calibrated synergies, or the z '
                                                                                          s.
So, the experiment amounts to degrading the synergy factor on VC-funded startups by a
factor of (1:0     0:35)=(1:0     0:17).42
   When VC-funded startups are taxed at a higher rate, economic growth drops from 1.80
to 1.48 percent per year, as Table 13 shows. Not surprisingly, the level of patenting activity
by VC-funded ...rms in the ex post high state drops. This is not made up for by an increase in
patenting activity by non-VC-funded ...rms. Additionally, VC-funded ...rms'success rates for
making it into the high state drops o¤ sharply. The success rates for non-VC-funded ...rms
does not rise to o¤set this. The share of VC-funded ...rms in patenting activity drops fairly
dramatically. Since VC-funded are the prime movers in the economy, all of this results in a
decline in the growth rate. Raising taxes on VC-funded startups results in a large welfare
loss of 5.87 percent in terms of consumption. In other words, the lower tax rates currently
applicable to VC-backed startups contribute signi...cantly to growth.

  42
       This can be gleaned by examining the proof for Lemma 2 in Appendix 12.


                                                   46
10     Conclusion
An endogenous growth model is developed to study the implications of venture capital back-
ing on aggregate productivity and innovation. In the model, entrepreneurs take ideas for
projects to either banks or venture capitalists for ...nancing. In the U.S. data, startups
backed by venture capitalists have more promising growth and innovation prospects than
other startups. The initial selection process observed in the data is imposed on the model.
Additionally, in the U.S. data, startups that are ...nanced by venture capitalists, as opposed
to banks, have a much higher likelihood of making it into the top decile of ...rms in terms
of employment ten years later. They also have much higher rates of growth and patent
quality, conditional on surviving. The model'
                                            s saturated structure allows the framework to
be calibrated so that it matches exactly the observed transitions from ex ante promise to
ex post success for both bank- and VC-...nanced ...rms. It also matches the small ratio of
VC-...nanced to bank-...nanced startups, the small average ...rm size in the U.S. economy, and
GDP growth per capita.
   Simulations of the model establish that the presence of venture capital is key for growth.
Shutting down venture capital in the economy reduces growth. In addition, the degree
of ex ante assortative matching between startups and ...nanciers matters. Improving the
degree of assortative matching from its existing level in the U.S. economy enhances growth,
while moving to random matching impedes it. Last, the di¤erential taxation of VC-...nanced
startups is important for growth. If the prevailing tax rates, which imply lower taxation of
VC-funded startups compared to others, were to be made uniform across all startups, growth
rate of the economy would have declined signi...cantly.



References
     Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. 1992. "A Model of Growth through Creative De-
     struction." Econometrica 60(2): 323-351.

     Antunes, António, Tiago Cavalcanti, and Anne Villamil. 2008. "The E¤ect of Finan-

                                             47
cial Repression and Enforcement on Entrepreneurship and Economic Development."
Journal of Monetary Economics 55(2): 278-297.

Ates, Sina. 2014. "Beyond Cash: Venture Capital, Firm Dynamics, and Growth."
Unpublished paper, Board of Governors.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van
Reenen. 2017a. "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms."National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23396.

Bayard, Kimberly, Emin Dinlersoz, Timothy Dunne, John Haltiwanger, Javier Mi-
randa, and John Stevens. 2018. "Early-Stage Business Formation: An Analysis of
Applications for Employer Identi...cation Numbers."National Bureau of Economic Re-
search Working Paper 24364.

Bento, Pedro, and Diego Restuccia. 2019. "The Role of Nonemployers in Business Dy-
namism and Aggregate Productivity."National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 25998.

Bernstein, Shai, Xavier Giroud, and Richard Townsend. 2014. "The Impact of Venture
Capital Monitoring." Journal of Finance 71(4): 1591-1622.

Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb. 2018. "Are
Ideas Getting Harder to Find?"National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
23783.

Brown, David, John Earle, Mee Jung Kim, and Kyung Min Lee. 2018. "High-Growth
Entrepreneurship."IZA Discussion Paper 11662.

Buera, Francisco J., Joseph Kaboski, and Yong Shin, 2011. "Finance and Development:
A Tale of Two Sectors." American Economic Review 101(5): 1964­    2002.

Castro, Rui, Gian Luca Clementi, and Glenn MacDonald. 2004. "Investor Protec-
tion, Optimal Incentives, and Economic Growth."The Quarterly Journal of Economics
119(3): 1131-1175.

Choi, Joonkyu. 2017. "Entrepreneurial Risk Taking, Young Firm Dynamics and Ag-
gregate Implications."Unpublished paper, University of Maryland.

Cole, Harold L., Jeremy Greenwood, and Juan M. Sanchez. 2016. "Why Doesn't Tech-
nology Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?" Econometrica 84(4): 1477-1521.

Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2016. "Where Has
All the Skewness Gone? The Decline in High-Growth (Young) Firms in the U.S."
European Economic Review 86(Jul): 4-23.

Erosa, Andres. 2001. "Financial Intermediation and Occupational Choice in Develop-
ment." Review of Economic Dynamics 4(2): 303-334.


                                      48
Gabaix, Xavier. 2011. "The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations." Economet-
rica 79(3): 733­772.

Gopinath, Gita, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina
Villegas-Sanchez. 2017. "Capital Allocation and Productivity in South Europe." Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 132(4): 1915-1967.

Gordon, Robert J. (2016). The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard
of Living since the Civil War. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Graham, Stuart, Cheryl Grim, Tariq Islam, Alan Marco, and Javier Miranda. 2015.
"Business Dynamics of Innovating Firms: Linking U.S. Patent Data with Adminis-
trative Data on Workers and Firms." Center for Economic Studies Working paper
CES-WP-15-19.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Pengfei Han, and Juan M. Sanchez. 2018. "Financing Ventures."
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24808.

Henrekson, Magnus and Tino Sanandaji. 2018. "Stock Option Taxation and Venture
Capital Activity: A Cross-Country Study." Venture Capital: An International Journal
of Entrepreneurial Finance 20(1): 51-71.

Howell, Sabrina. 2017. "Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants."American
Economic Review 107(4): 1136-64.

Jovanovic, Boyan and Balazs Szentes. 2013. "On the Market for Venture Capital."
Journal of Political Economy 121(3): 493-527.

Klette, Jakob and Samuel Kortum. 2004. "Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innova-
tion." Journal of Political Economy 112(5): 986-1018.

Kortum, Samuel and Josh Lerner. 2000. "Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital
to Innovation." Rand Journal of Economics 31(4): 674-692.

Lentz, Rasmus and Dale T. Mortensen. 2008. "An Empirical Model of Growth Through
Product Innovation." Econometrica 76(6): 1317-1373.

Levine, Ross. 2005. "Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence." Handbook of Eco-
nomic Growth 1: 865-934.

Midrigan, Virgiliu and Daniel Yi Xu. 2014. "Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from
Plant-level Data." American Economic Review 104(2): 422-58.

Moll, Benjamin. 2014. "Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-
...nancing undo Capital Misallocation?" American Economic Review 104(10): 3186-
3221.

Opp, Christian. 2019. "Venture Capital and the Macroeconomy." Review of Financial
Studies, forthcoming.

                                      49
       Pugsley, Benjamin, Petr Sedlacek, and Vincent Sterk. 2017. "The Nature of Firm
       Growth."Centre for Macroeconomics Discussion Paper 2017-37.

       Puri, Manju and Rebecca Zarutskie. 2012. "On the Life Cycle Dynamics of Venture-
       Capital and Non-Venture-Capital-Financed Firms." Journal of Finance 67(6): 2247-
       2293.

       Romer, Paul M. 1990. "Endogenous Technological Change." Journal of Political Econ-
       omy 98(5, pt. 2): S71-S102.

       Silveira, Rafael and Randall D. Wright. 2016. "Venture Capital: A Model of Search
       and Bargaining." Review of Economic Dynamics 19(Jan): 232­   246.

       Wong, Yuet-Yee. 2019. "Venture Capital Exit and Unobserved Risks." Unpublished
       paper, Binghamton University.



11      Appendix: Data
This Data Appendix describes the assembling of the main dataset and the analysis sample.
It also provides further detail about how the tables and ...gures are constructed.


11.1     Data merging procedure

To construct the analysis data, the Thomson-Reuter'
                                                  s VentureXpert data on ...rms receiving
VC funding is combined with the U.S. Census Bureau'
                                                  s Business Register (BR) using prob-
abilistic name and address matching. The resulting data is then linked with the U.S. Census
Bureau'
      s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
   The procedure to combine VentureXpert and BR involves several steps. The ...rst step
is to clean the two datasets to facilitate matching. For VC-backed ...rms between 1970 and
2015, VentureXpert provides the following information: ...rm identi...er, ...rm name, street
address, city, state, zipcode, and the year in which VC funding is received. The analysis uses
only ...rms located in the United States and identi...es the ...rst and last years of funding for
all such ...rms. The BR is the main sampling frame for U.S. Census Bureau'
                                                                         s surveys and it
is the main source data for the LBD. Establishment and ...rm identi...ers, years of operation,
and employment from the LBD are integrated with the information on ...rm name, street
address, city, state, and zip code from the BR for the period 1976 through 2013. The ...rm


                                               50
name, street address, city, and zip code variables in both the BR and VentureXpert are
standardized using the same protocol.
   The second step involves merging VentureXpert with the BR-LBD in a sequential manner
using nine passes. Each pass uses a less stringent screening than the previous one, to prevent
some valid potential matches from being eliminated. The quality of the matches obtained
at the end of the procedure are then assessed, as is discussed below. In each pass, ...rms are
linked based on certain ...rm name and address criteria, and removed from the set of linked
...rms before proceeding to the next pass. In the ...rst pass, the merge is based on ...rm name,
street address, city, and state. In the second pass, the merge is performed using ...rm name,
city, state, and zip code. In the third through ...fth passes, the merge is done on ...rm name
and two additional address criteria. In the sixth through eight passes, the merge utilizes
...rm name and one additional address criterion. Finally, in the ninth pass, only ...rm name
is used for matching.
   The implementation of the procedure described above results in multiple BR-LBD links
for each VC-funded ...rm. In the third step, the best BR-LBD match is identi...ed for each
VC-funded ...rm using a composite match quality score, which is constructed based on the
quality of the name, city, state, and zip code match. To determine the quality of a match,
the Jaro-Winkler string comparator is utilized. For each VC-funded ...rm, only the highest
quality BR-LBD links are kept based on the composite score. In the process, low-quality
links are also dropped-- these are the links based only on name with a low Jaro-Winkler
score, and only based on name and one address variable with a low Jaro-Winkler score.
   After implementing the above three steps, there still remain multiple BR-LBD links for
each VC-funded ...rm. The fourth step involves validating these links using information on
the years in which ...rms were funded. A link is considered valid if a ...rm is determined to
be active within a ...ve year window of the ...rst and last year of VC funding. In particular,
it is required that the funded ...rm appears in the LBD at least within the ...rst ...ve years of
receiving its ...rst VC funding, and that the funded ...rm not disappear (exit) from the LBD
more than ...ve years before receiving its last VC funding. Applying this window also helps
account for some potential lags in reporting or recording errors. In cases where multiple
links remain, ...rms whose ...rst year of operation is closest to the founded year recorded by


                                               51
VentureXpert are kept. Remaining cases with multiple links are dropped to reduce false
positives. Overall, the entire procedure results in a BR-LBD match rate of 70 percent for
the VC-funded ...rms in VentureXpert.
    It is important to note that each VC-funded ...rm is e¤ectively matched to an establish-
ment in the LBD, since the majority of ...rms in the United States are single-unit (single-
establishment) ...rms, particularly when they are in the age range when most ...rms receive
VC funding (i.e., when they are very young). The identi...er for an establishment is time
invariant in the LBD across all the ...rms an establishment is associated with throughout its
life. Hence, an establishment'
                             s expansion can be tracked, including the opening of additional
establishments under the same ...rm and M&A (the funded establishment being subsumed
into an existing ...rm).43


11.2      Analysis sample construction

The empirical analysis focuses on VC-funded ...rms that receive funding between 1980 and
2012. This is the period with the best overlapping coverage across all three data sets-- LBD,
patenting data, and VentureXpert. The last year of the analysis is set to 2012 to take into
account lags in the patenting data.
    The empirical analysis compares the performance of VC-funded ...rms with all non-VC-
funded ...rms in the economy. For this purpose, a sample of non-VC-funded ...rms is assembled
using a procedure similar to the construction of the VC-funded ...rms sample. In particular,
between 1980 and 2012 the analysis considers all non-VC-funded ...rms that are born as
single-units and follows the associated establishment identi...er across all the ...rms it is part
of throughout its life. Firms that are born as multi-units (a very small fraction of new-born
...rms) are excluded, as well as those single-unit ...rms that have an initial age di¤erent than
zero-- these ...rms are parts of existing businesses.
    For both the VC-funded and non-VC-funded ...rms in the sample, there is information on
...rm-level industry, age, location (state), multi-unit status, employment, and payroll. Years
   43
      In cases when the establishment identi...er disappears, but the ...rm identi...er associated with the estab-
lishment in the last year of the establishment' s existence continues, the latest ...rm the establishment belongs
to is followed.



                                                       52
associated with signi...cant events in the ...rm'
                                                s life are also identi...ed. These events are ...rm
failure, merger/acquisition, and IPO. Firm failure is identi...ed when all of the establishments
of a ...rm cease to report employment and stop appearing in the LBD. Mergers and acqui-
sitions are identi...ed when one or more of the establishments belonging to a particular ...rm
appear in subsequent years to be part of a di¤erent ...rm that: (i) existed in the two years
prior to the acquisition, (ii) continues to exist for at least two years after the acquisition,
and (iii) is a multi-unit ...rm, which means that it operates more than one establishment.
IPOs are identi...ed by the ...rst year in which a ...rm meets two criteria: it appears in the
Compustat-BR bridge constructed at the U.S. Census Bureau and records a positive stock
price in Compustat.
   For each VC-funded ...rm, the ...rst year in which it received funding is also identi...ed.
In addition, ...rm-level patenting information is brought in using the LBD-PatentsView link
...le provided by Nikolas Zolas (U.S. Census Bureau). The links identify which ...rms in the
sample engage in patenting activity and allow tracking of a number of innovation outcomes:
the number of new patents, the stock of patents, the number of citations received by new
patents, and the stock of citations based on patent application year. Two adjustments are
made to the citation data. Self-citations are dropped and all citations are scaled by the
average citations received by other patents applied for in the same year and same broad
NBER technology class.
   In the data when VC-backed ...rms are acquired by existing ...rms, the ...rm identi...er
they are associated with changes. This change often leads to jumps in employment and
patenting arising from the fact that the acquiring ...rm usually operates at a larger scale
than the acquired ...rm. These abrupt changes in ...rm outcome measures can confound the
analysis. Therefore, in cases where mergers or acquisitions are identi...ed, the employment
and patenting of the acquired ...rm are no longer tracked, and the last observed values are
used.




                                                53
11.3     Construction of ...gures and tables

11.3.1   Tables 1 and 7

In Tables 1 and 7, the outcomes of VC-funded and non-VC-funded ...rms are compared at
the time of VC funding, as well as 10 years after VC funding. First, using the sample of
VC-funded ...rms, average ...rm age at the ...rst funding event is calculated. This average age
(rounded to the nearest integer) is used as the synthetic date to impute a ...rst funding year
for all non-VC-funded ...rms. Second, the analysis is restricted to ...rms for which the ...rst
actual or synthetic funding occurs in 2002 or earlier to ensure that survivors (...rms that do
not fail or get involved in an M&A) are observed for a minimum of 10 years. For Table
1, employment at the time of ...rst VC funding is used to separate ...rms into those in the
top 10 percent versus the bottom 90 percent of ...rm employment at the time of ...rst VC
funding. These two groups are further divided into those ...rms that are funded by venture
capitalists versus not. For each group, their shares in the number of ...rms and employment
are calculated for the time of ...rst VC funding. Their shares in VC-funded versus non-VC-
funded ...rms are also computed, as well as their average employment relative to VC-funded
...rms in the top 10 percent.
   In Table 7, the focus is on the subsample of ...rms that survive 10 years either after ...rst
actual or synthetic VC funding. If a ...rm is involved in an M&A activity before the 10 year
mark, it is also included in the subsample, with the M&A year being the last observation year
for the ...rm. Firms are separated into two groups based on the distribution of employment
10 years after VC funding-- those that fall into the top 10 percent of the distribution versus
the bottom 90 percent. The two groups are then further divided into those that were funded
by venture capitalists versus those that were not. As in Table 1, for each group statistics
on their share of the number of ...rms and employment 10 years after ...rst VC funding are
calculated, as well as average employment and the patent stock relative to VC-funded ...rms
in the top 10 percent.
   Transition probabilities between groups in Table 1 and Table 7 are also computed. These
are the conditional probabilities with which a ...rm ends up in each of the four groups 10
years post ...rst funding (Table 7), contingent upon which of the four groups it started in at


                                              54
the time of ...rst funding (Table 1)-- provided that such a transition is feasible.


11.3.2       Figure 1

To generate Figure 1, ...rm age at ...rst VC funding is calculated as the di¤erence between
the ...rst year in which the ...rm is observed as an employer business in the LBD and the ...rst
year of VC funding. The ...gure is restricted to those ...rms that receive funding between the
ages of -5 and +5, where negative numbers indicate that funding was received prior to the
...rst year when the ...rm hired employees. Firms outside of this age range are not included
to prevent the disclosure of con...dential information-- they account for a small fraction of all
...rms that receive VC funding.


11.3.3       Figures 2 and 3

To generate Figure 2, the Davis-Haltiwanger-Schuh (DHS) average annual employment
growth rate in the ...rm'
                        s ...rst three years of life is calculated. Firm births are associated with
an annual growth rate of +2 in the ...rst year of their lives. Firm failures are associated with
a DHS growth rate of            2 in the year of failure. The ...rms in the analysis sample are then
grouped into quintiles based on the distribution of DHS average employment growth rate,
with the top quintile representing the highest average growth rates. For each quintile, the
number of ...rms that subsequently receive VC funding is then divided by the total number
of ...rms in that quintile to obtain the percentage probability plotted in the y-axis.
   To generate Figure 3, the sample is restricted only to patenting ...rms, and the total
quality-adjusted patenting of each ...rm is calculated over a period of three years starting
with the ...rst year of patenting.44 This calculation is done before VC funding. Most ...rms
only patent in the ...rst year of the three year period, so e¤ectively this procedure mainly
captures the ...rst patenting activity. Firms are then grouped into quintiles based on the
quality-adjusted patenting measure, with the highest quintile corresponding to the largest
amount of patenting. The y-axis is the ratio of the number of ...rms that subsequently receive
VC funding to the total number of ...rms in that quintile (expressed as a percentage). The
  44
       For example, if the ...rst patent of a startup is in 1995, the ...rst three years are 1995, 1996, and 1997.




                                                         55
VC funding probability is based on VC funding observation within the 5 years following the
...rst patent by a ...rm.


11.3.4       Figures 4, 5, and 6

In Figures 4, 5, and 6, the outcomes of funded ...rms are compared with those of the non-
VC-funded ...rms. The employment, age, industry, and location distributions of VC-funded
and non-VC-funded ...rms are quite di¤erent, which may lead to an overstatement of the
di¤erences between the two groups. To address these di¤erences that indicate selection, for
each VC-funded ...rm in the sample, matching non-VC-funded ...rms are found that are obser-
vationally similar to the VC-funded ...rm in the year ...rst VC funding is received. Speci...cally,
for each year in the time frame from 1980 to 2012 a ...rm that received ...rst VC funding in
a year is matched with a non-VC-funded ...rm in the same year that is of the same age, is
in the same narrowly de...ned employment bin, has the same multi-unit status, is located in
the same state, and operates in the same 4-digit NAICS industry.
   Ultimately, the matching procedure assigns multiple matches to each VC-funded ...rm,
each of which are given an equal weight in the analysis. Of the nearly 19; 000 VC-funded
...rms in the full sample, approximately 13; 000 are matched with non-VC-funded ...rms that
form the control group.45 The control group consists of a total of about 649; 000 ...rms.
For each VC-funded ...rm, this procedure sometimes generates multiple matches from the
non-VC-funded ...rm sample, owing to the large set of potential matches available. For the
cases with multiple matches, only those matches are kept where the percentage di¤erences
in initial employment (at age zero) between the VC-funded and non-VC-funded ...rms do not
exceed 50 percent. After this elimination of multiple matches, there are still cases where
multiple non-VC-funded ...rms match to a single VC-funded ...rm. In these cases, equal
weights are assigned to each matching ...rm. In certain cases, one non-VC-funded ...rm also
matches to multiple VC-funded ...rms. To ensure that a single trajectory is followed for the
non-VC-funded ...rm, its earliest match is kept.
   For the analysis of ...rm innovation, a separate set of matched VC-funded and non-VC-
funded samples are created following the same procedure described above, but with the
  45
       All ...rm counts in the Appendix are rounded to avoid disclosure of con...dential information.


                                                       56
additional restriction that treated and control ...rms have to be patenting ...rms-- a restriction
ful...lled by a relatively small number of ...rms.46 The subsample of VC-funded ...rms that have
patents consists of nearly 6; 500 ...rms. Of these about 2; 500 are successfully matched based
on the criteria described above to about 5; 000 non-VC-funded ...rms that also have patents.
    In Figure 4 the evolution of average employment for VC-funded and non-VC-funded ...rms
is plotted. To construct the ...gure, the sample is restricted to those VC-funded ...rms (and
their non-VC-funded matches) that received funding at ages 1, 2, or 3 and have non-zero
employment. These restrictions ensure that the focus is on a sample where ...rm employment
is observed in at least one year prior to the ...rst year of funding. In Figure 6 the sample
is also restricted to those VC-funded ...rms (and their non-VC-funded counterparts) that
receive their ...rst funding at age 1, 2, or 3, but no additional restrictions are placed based
on employment.
    Using the matched sample, in Figure 5 the focus is on those ...rms that survive for at least
10 years post VC funding. For each ...rm, the DHS employment growth rate is calculated
between the year in which funding is received and 10 years later. For both the VC-funded
and non-VC-funded groups, the kernel density estimate of the resulting growth rate is plot-
ted. The extreme tails of the distributions were trimmed to comply with the disclosure
requirements and protect con...dentiality.


11.3.5     Figures 7 and 8, and Table 2

In Figures 7 and 8, and in Table 2, the focus is on high- versus low-quality venture capitalists.
There are several steps involved in assigning VC-funded ...rms a VC funder quality measure.
The VentureXpert data predominately consists of one observation per VC-funded ...rm per
year. Each row of data has a list of funders and the average equity invested per funder. First,
a separate indicator is created for each funder, which is used to generate a full list of VC
funders in the data. Since the underlying VentureXpert data are obtained from regulatory
disclosures, slight variations are observed in the spelling of funder names across deals and
over time. In order to take these variations into account, alternate spellings of funder names
  46
     No matching is done based on patent quality similarity, because many treated ...rms do not have matched
controls that are also close in terms of patent quality similarity.



                                                    57
in the data are taken into account to group these slight variations in spelling under the same
identi...er. These identi...ers are then used to create a measure of total number of deals in
which the funder was involved in over the years. A funder is de...ned to be of high quality
(or high experience) if it is in the top 10 percent of the total number of deals distribution,
and of low quality (low experience) if it is in the bottom 90 percent.
   It is common for a VC-funded ...rm to receive funding from multiple venture capitalists
within the ...rst year of funding. If 50 percent or more of the ...rms'funders (in counts) are
high quality, it is considered to be a ...rm funded by high-quality venture capitalists. If,
instead, more than 50 percent of its funders are low quality, it is considered to be a ...rm
funded by low-quality venture capitalists. As a result, each VC-funded ...rm is unambiguously
classi...ed to be ...nanced by either a high-quality or a low-quality funder for the ...rst year it
received VC funding.
   In Figures 7 and 8 the sample is restricted to those VC-funded ...rms that receive their
...rst funding at age 1, 2, or 3. The evolution of employment (Figure 7) and patenting (Figure
8) are separately plotted for those ...rms identi...ed as being funded by high- versus low-quality
venture capitalists. In Table 2, the outcomes of ...rms funded by high- and low-quality funders
are compared more formally by using regression analysis. A VC-funded ...rm'
                                                                          s employment
in the year of failure, M&A, or at 10 years out after ...rst VC funding (whichever comes ...rst)
is used as the dependent variable. The independent variables are an indicator of whether
funding was provided by a high- or low-quality funder (omitted category is the low quality),
age at which ...rst funding is received, years since the ...rst funding event, initial ...rm size
(employment) at funding, the amount of equity received at time of ...rst funding, and 4-digit
NAICS industry-year ...xed e¤ects.




                                                58
12           Appendix: Theory
Proof. (The Impact of Synergy) The six ...rst-order conditions connected with the Nash
Bargaining problem (P1) are

                                                                                          xv
                                                                                           ih               xv
                                                                                                             il
  [ xv          0
     ij zij I ( )             pv
                               ij ]     f     v
                                              ih    pih +        v
                                                                 il    pv
                                                                        il      R(            )        R(       )        D(         v
                                                                                                                                    ih )        D(    v
                                                                                                                                                      il )    Vg
                                                                                           x                x
                     v
             +f      ih       xv   v      0
                               ih zih I ( ) +
                                                        v
                                                        il    xv   v      0
                                                               il zil I ( )
                                                                                          v
                                                                                          ih    pv
                                                                                                 ih
                                                                                                            v
                                                                                                            il   pv
                                                                                                                  il       Ei g            [ pv
                                                                                                                                              ij       D1 (   v
                                                                                                                                                              ij )]   = 0;



   v     v                                                              xv
                                                                         ih                    xv
                                                                                                il
   ij   zij I ( 0)        f    v
                               ih     pih +        v
                                                   il   pv
                                                         il      R(         )             R(       )    D(       v
                                                                                                                 ih )        D(        v
                                                                                                                                       il )      Vg
                                                                         x                     x
                                              v
                                                                                                                                                                  xv
                                                                                                                                                                   ij
                                        f     ih    xv   v      0
                                                     ih zih I ( )        +      v
                                                                                il    xv   v      0
                                                                                       il zil I ( )
                                                                                                                 v
                                                                                                                 ih    pv
                                                                                                                        ih
                                                                                                                                      v
                                                                                                                                      il   pv
                                                                                                                                            il       Ei g     R1 ( );
                                                                                                                                                                   x

and


        v            v                  v                      xv
                                                                ih                   xv
                                                                                      il                v                    v
        ij      [    ih   pih +         il    pil        R(        )         R(          )        D(    ih )          D(     il )          V]
                                                                x                    x
                                              v
                                      +[      ih    xv   v      0
                                                     ih zih I ( ) +
                                                                                v
                                                                                il    xv   v      0
                                                                                       il zil I ( )
                                                                                                                 v
                                                                                                                 ih    pv
                                                                                                                        ih
                                                                                                                                      v
                                                                                                                                      il   pv
                                                                                                                                            il       Ei ]      v
                                                                                                                                                               ij     = 0;


for j = 1; 2. Using the last ...rst-order condition to cancel out the terms in braces in the ...rst
two statements leads to the two e¢ ciency conditions (4) and (5). Displacing (4) and (5)
                 v
with respect to zij yields

                                    2                                      32                    3          2                   3
                                               v 0
                                              zij I              D11                  dxv
                                                                                        ij                            xv
                                                                                                                       ij I
                                                                                                                            0
                                    4                                      54                    5=         4                   5 dzij
                                                                                                                                    v
                                                                                                                                       ;
                                                        2        v 0                       v                            v 0
                                             R11 =x             zij I                 d    ij                           ij I


so that
                                                   dxv
                                                     ij               ( I 0 ) 2 xv   v
                                                                                 ij zij
                                                                                                       v 0
                                                                                                       ij I D11
                                                     v
                                                        =                                                              > 0;
                                                   dzij
and
                                             d v
                                               ij
                                                                         v
                                                               ( I 0 )2 zij          v
                                                                                     ij        (R11 =x2 ) xv
                                                                                                           ij I
                                                                                                                0

                                               v
                                                  =                                                                        > 0;
                                             dzij
with
                                                                    v 0 2
                                                                 ( zij I)                 D11 R11 =x2 < 0;

                                                                                      59
where the sign of             follows from the second-order condition for a maximum.47
Proof. (Neutrality of a Uniform Corporate Income Tax on Long-Run Growth) The proof
is simple. The pro...ts for an ex ante type-(f; i; j ) enterprise will now be (1                                        )xf   f
                                                                                                                          ij zij (1

           )[( r ) ( w ) ]1= . One could rewrite this as xf    f
                                                             eij
                                                          ij z   (1                                  )[( r ) ( w ) ]1= , where z f
                                                                                                                               eij
             f
(1         )zij . Hence, the introduction of a corporate income tax amounts to an equiproportional
renormalization of all of the synergies. From equation (17), it can seen that wages will fall
                                   =( + )
by a factor of (1              )            . This fact, in conjunction with (3), implies that the value of
a successful venture will drop by this factor too. Last, as can be seen from the ...rst-order
                      f
conditions for        ij   and xf
                                ij , or (4), (5), (8), and (9), the marginal bene...ts and costs of research
                                                                                           =( + )
and development fall in lock step by same factor (1                                   )             . Therefore, the solutions for
 f
 ij   and xf
           ij are unchanged.




     47
          The maximization problem linked to the above two e¢ ciency conditions is
                                                  v
                                        max
                                        v v
                                            f     ij   xv   v     0
                                                        ij zij I ( )    D(   v
                                                                             ij )     R ( xv
                                                                                           ij =x)g:
                                        ij ;xij


For the second-order condition for a maximum to hold, it must transpire that
                                                                     v 0
                                                         D11        zij I
                                                         v 0                        > 0;
                                                        zij I      R11 =x2

or that
                                                  D11 R11 =x2             v 0 2
                                                                       ( zij I ) > 0:



                                                                   60
