                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE IMPACT OF SOCIOECONOMIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENCES ON ONLINE
                               TRADE

                                     Daniel W. Elfenbein
                                      Raymond Fisman
                                      Brian McManus

                                      Working Paper 26197
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26197


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




We are grateful for eBay's support for this research, especially Sharat Raghavan, Dimitriy
Masterov, and Tom Blake. Eli Locicero provided excellent research assistance. We thank Rachel
Croson, Dave Donaldson, Liran Einav, Ali Hortascu, and Avri Ravid, as well as seminar
participants at the University of Southern California and the ASSA 2019 meetings, for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Daniel W. Elfenbein, Raymond Fisman, and Brian McManus. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Socioeconomic and Cultural Differences on Online Trade
Daniel W. Elfenbein, Raymond Fisman, and Brian McManus
NBER Working Paper No. 26197
August 2019
JEL No. D12,D91,F14,L15,R12

                                            ABSTRACT

We use U.S. eBay data to investigate how trade is influenced by differences in socioeconomic
characteristics, tastes, and trust. States' similarity in cultural characteristics (ethnicity, religious
affiliations, and political behavior) is predictive of online trade; cultural similarity similarly
predicts trade between finer (three-digit zip code) geographies. The culture-trade relationship is
mediated in part by consumers' tastes, and is stronger for transactions with sellers who lack
extensive reputations or certification, suggesting that consumers infer seller trustworthiness from
cultural similarity. There is no correlation between cultural similarity and buyer satisfaction,
consistent with perceived differences in trustworthiness not being validated by actual
transactions.

Daniel W. Elfenbein                                Brian McManus
Olin School of Business                            Department of Economics CB 3305
Washington University in St. Louis                 University of North Carolina
St Louis, MO 63130                                 Chapel Hill, NC 27599
elfenbein@wustl.edu                                mcmanusb@unc.edu

Raymond Fisman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road, 304A
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
rfisman@bu.edu
1.       Introduction

Trade requires a match between a seller's production or inventory and a buyer's demands, as well as buyer-

seller trust. The match in product characteristics may be higher and the information frictions lower for more

similar buyer-seller pairs, which would imply higher trade flows between market participants that share

socio-cultural attributes that may be drivers of taste and (perceived) trust.

         In this paper, we use data from eBay transactions in the U.S. in the years 2015 and 2016 to

document socioeconomic and cultural similarity as drivers of online trade, and we also present evidence

suggesting that both shared tastes and greater trust underlie the culture-trade relationship. Several key

features of our setting allow us to focus on a subset of potential drivers of trade flows, particularly for online

platforms that constitute a sizeable and ever-larger share of retail sales worldwide, growing 2.7 times faster

than retail in the U.S. overall during 2009-2018.1 First, because all of the transactions take place on the

same platform and are governed by the same regulations (both national laws and platform-specific rules),

we hold constant many of the institutional factors that might complicate the interpretation of earlier studies

linking similarity to trade based on country-pair analyses (e.g., see Anderson and Van Wincoop's (2004)

survey of the gravity model trade literature). Furthermore, as a platform that directly connects individual

buyers to sellers, eBay allows us to focus directly on consumer responses to socioeconomic and cultural

similarities and differences.2 Prior work investigating these relationships has, for the most part, examined

the combined trade in intermediate and final goods, even when implemented within a single country as in

Hillberry and Hummels (2008), and has generally focused on trade between countries (e.g., Guiso, Sapienza

and Zingales, 2009).



1
 Calculations based on data from the St. Louis Federal Reserve, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/ECOMSA (accessed
May 15, 2019).
2
  An eBay seller's location is a prominent feature of each eBay product listing. Although information about the seller's
buying and selling history on the eBay platform is available to buyers (and summarized in several reputation metrics),
information about the seller's gender, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status is generally unavailable. Sellers use
pseudonyms on the platform, making it difficult to infer these attributes from names. Furthermore, nearly all contact
with sellers occurs via electronic communication. We believe, then, that any inferences buyers make about
socioeconomic and cultural proximity or distance with sellers come from their beliefs about the expected
characteristics of sellers at the designated location.

                                                           2
           Specific features of the eBay setting also allow us to distinguish, at least partially, between overlap

in buyer-seller inventory and demand versus buyer-seller trust as underlying drivers of trade. In particular,

eBay's product category structure, together with the detailed transactional data we employ, enables us to

develop measures of congruence between the product preferences of consumers in a given geographic

location and the products supplied by sellers in other locations. We may then use this measure to examine

the extent to which the culture-trade relationship is mediated by similarity in "product taste" or, to be more

specific, overlap between the inventory in one location and the purchases in another. Furthermore, because

eBay has several well-established (and well-documented) mechanisms for identifying trustworthy sellers,

we can explore how socioeconomic and cultural distance influence trade involving sellers that vary in their

performance records, and hence the perceived riskiness of the transaction from the consumer's perspective.

These features allow us to partially disentangle the degree to which cultural or socioeconomic distance

reflect a buyer-seller divergence in product preferences rather than perceived advantages from dealing with

more trustworthy counterparties.

           We employ eBay trade data at two levels of geographic aggregation in our analysis: state-pair and

3-digit zip-code-pair, aggregating pairwise trade to the year-level in each case.3 As proxies for cultural

distance (i.e., differences in shared values and beliefs), we employ differences in state ethnic composition,

voting behavior, and religion; we also account for differences in a range of socioeconomic characteristics,

such as income, urban share, home values, and average age, as well as geographic distance. All

specifications also include buyer-location and seller-location (whether state or zip code) fixed effects, by

year, to account for differences in the scale of trade originating in and destined for particular regions.

           For our state-pair data, we find that greater cultural distance ­ for all three "culture" measures ­

between two states is associated with significantly lower trade. Our estimates imply, for example, that a

one standard deviation increase in ethnic similarity is associated with an 8 percent increase in state-pair




3
    A 3-digit zip-code is the first 3 of 5 digits in a conventional U.S. zip code.



                                                               3
trade.5 Or to be more concrete, if the ethnic similarity of Oklahoma and New York (the 75th percentile of

ethnic distance) were as similar as that of Massachusetts and Ohio (the 25th percentile distance), trade

between these states would be 11 percent greater. (Other socioeconomic characteristics are also predictive

of trade: our estimates suggest that if the gap in home values between Arkansas and Colorado were equal

to that of Maryland and Washington state, for example, trade between Arkansas and Colorado would be 3

percent greater.)

         While state-level attributes may be salient for prospective buyers, there is a great deal of within-

state variation that may also be discernable to trading partners: the "cultural" characteristics of Philadelphia,

PA, and Austin, TX, for example, differ markedly from their surrounding states. When we repeat our

analysis at the 3-digit zip-code-pair level, the patterns are very similar to the state-pair results.6 This is true

even when we focus on within-state trade only, which removes any cross-state variation from the analysis.

         As we noted at the outset, these strong associations between socioeconomic and cultural variables

and trade could be due to greater trust between buyers and sellers, a greater "inventory-preference overlap"

between them, or a combination of the two.

         To address the role of inventory-preference overlap between two geographies (pairs of states or 3-

digit zip codes), we construct two measures that aim to capture the congruence between the products that

eBay users in one area generally sell, and the products that users in another area generally buy. Focusing

on state-level overlap, to construct these measures we calculate the cross-category distribution of goods

sold and the cross-category distribution of goods purchased in each state. Our first measure is based on

differences between buyer states' and seller states' shares of activity in each of 33 individual product

categories. This distance measure decreases, for example, as the fraction of purchases in the electronics



5
 The quantitative results we discuss here are from a classic log-linearized gravity equation, which we estimate with
OLS. The results are qualitatively the same when we employ Pseudo Poisson Maximum Likelihood (PPML)
estimation, as suggested by Silva and Tenreyro (2006).
6
  As we discuss in more detail below, there are two potentially offsetting effects in moving to more disaggregated
data. First, it may lead to less measurement error since it allows us to account for different buyer-level assessments
of, say, Philadelphia versus Allentown. On the other hand, to the extent that state-level rather than zip-level variation
is salient to consumers, we may be adding noise.

                                                           4
category in the buyer's state approaches the share of sales of electronics from the seller's state. The second

measure is (one minus) the cross-product of the two category shares, which captures the likelihood that a

randomly selected buyer from the buyer state is looking to purchase a product listed by a randomly selected

seller from the seller state. We also calculate these inventory-preference overlap measures at the zip-pair

level. The measures are related to Finger and Kreinin's (1979) similarity index, which aims to capture

overlapping exports, whereas our indexes capture the congruence between consumers' purchases and

sellers' offerings.7

         We find that both of our inventory-preference overlap measures are predictive of state-pair trade.

Furthermore, the inclusion of one or both overlap measures has a large effect on the estimated coefficients

for our cultural and socioeconomic variables. For example, the coefficient on our measure of states' ethnic

similarity falls by 38 percent when we include the category differences-based overlap measure. A second

measure of cultural distance ­ vote share for the 2016 Presidential election winner ­ shrinks by more than

half. Some of the reluctance to trade between dissimilar partners, therefore, is due to simple asymmetries

in what sellers offer and what buyers demand. As an alternative way to account for compositional

differences in what states buy and sell, we also conduct our analysis by examining state-to-state trade within

individual product categories; the culture-trade relationship is attenuated only marginally in this analysis.

         We next explore whether the correlation between sociocultural proximity and trade is the result of

greater trust. We are motivated to do so by the large body of research on in-group favoritism dating back at

least to Tajfel et al. (1971), and more recently work which shows that individuals place greater trust in, and

are more apt to cooperate with, others with whom they share common traits (e.g., Foddy et al. 2009, Buchan




7
  Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2009) take a distinct approach to accounting for taste overlap that focuses instead on
the demand side, by incorporating correlations between consumption patterns in buyer and seller locations, rather than
correlating the offerings of sellers and the purchases of buyers.



                                                          5
et al. 2002, DeBruine 2002).8,9 Our test is based on the insight that, if social and cultural similarity leads to

greater trust, then quality-assurance mechanisms ­ which serve as an alternative source of trust ­ may

moderate the impact of cultural and socioeconomic similarity. We explore this possibility by examining

whether the effect of cultural and socioeconomic variables on trade is different for sellers with eBay's Top

Rated Seller (eTRS) designation, which serves as an alternative signal of trustworthiness. Intuitively, we

expect that trust between groups will matter less if there is a separate source of quality assurance (see

Elfenbein, Fisman, and McManus 2012; 2015). Consistent with cultural similarity serving as a source of

trust, we find that the correlations between trade and our cultural similarity variables (e.g., similarities in

ethnicity and political affiliation) are substantially diminished for eTRS listings, whether we look at state-

pair or zip-pair levels of aggregation. We find a similar pattern when we separate sellers by their level of

buyer-provided feedback,10 which reinforces the notion that cultural similarity is especially important for

trade when sellers do not yet have track records of previous success to reassure buyers of their reliability.

         Finally, we examine the relationship between cultural similarity and buyer satisfaction with

completed transactions. We measure satisfaction using two standard metrics: the fraction of all transactions

that lead to positive feedback, and the fraction of feedback that is negative. While prior studies have

documented discrimination in online sales (e.g., Ayres, Banaji, Jolls 2015, Doleac and Stein 2013), if the

sort of "animus" between groups described by Becker (1957) were to play a major role in shaping trade

patterns online, we might expect to see a negative association between favorable feedback and our measures



8
  Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006: 29) argue that "the opening through which culture entered the economic
discourse was the concept of trust" and conceptualize trust as a feature of culture. An alternative perspective is that
trust, or cooperative behavior, may be easier to sustain among socially or culturally similar actors.
9
  Research on trust games more generally is more ambiguous on the relationship between social distance and trust.
Buchan et al. (2006), for example, find that this relationship depends on cultural context, with strong in-group effects
in the U.S. but not in Asian countries, while Fershtman and Gneezy (2001) find that both Ashkenazi and Eastern Jews
in Israel exhibit lower trust of Eastern Jews. Glaeser et al. (2000) find no statistically significant relationship between
demographic similarity and trust.
10
  The feedback score is one of the principal reputation mechanisms that eBay has used since its early days, and has
featured in many studies; see Bajari and Hortacsu (2004) for survey. The literature has generally concluded that buyers
see greater risk in dealing with sellers with low feedback scores, because their trustworthiness is more uncertain.



                                                            6
of cultural difference; however, we find no such association. Rather, we find that, conditional on trade, the

relationship between our measures of buyer satisfaction and cultural similarity is not economically

significant. We recognize, however, that this does not fully rule out the possibility that buyer selection

adjusts trade volume in a precise way across state- or zip-code-pairs, so that consummated trades might

capture only the instances in which buyers find sufficiently appealing or trustworthy sellers. Still, these

results are not consistent with perceptions of seller trustworthiness (untrustworthiness) in culturally similar

(different) locations being validated by executed transactions.11

         Our work contributes first and foremost to the literature that studies the determinants of online

trade. The clearest antecedent is Hortacsu, Martinez-Jerez, and Douglas (2009), who study the effect of

buyer-seller geographic distance on trade for eBay transactions, and also for a similar Latin American

platform, Mercado Libre. Like us, they find a much smaller distance effect relative to gravity models

estimated using trade in both intermediate and final goods (whether for cross-state or cross-country trade).

They further provide an indication that tastes play some role for "local" preferences, by showing that the

distance effect is particularly prominent for sports memorabilia and tickets. Our agenda is distinct from

Hortacsu, Martinez-Jerez, and Douglas (2009) in that our aim is not to understand the geographic distance

effect but rather how trade is affected by a broader set of similarities and differences between populations.

A number of studies explore the roles of trust and/or quality certification, and generally emphasize either

seller attributes (such as charitable contributions, as in Elfenbein, Fisman, and McManus, 2012) or buyer

attributes (such as experience, as in Perez-Truglia, 2017) to understand the drivers of trust. By contrast, we

emphasize the importance of the buyer-seller match, which implies a difference in (perceived) opportunism

among culturally proximate trading partners. That is, our approach emphasizes the role of the buyer-seller

match, rather than the attributes of the seller or attributes or the buyer.




11
   This is also consistent with the findings of DeBruine (2002), who finds that, while individuals exhibit greater trust
in others with similar facial features to themselves, individuals are no less likely to betray facially similar partners.

                                                           7
        Also closely related to our paper, Bailey et al. (2018) examine social media friendships on platforms

such as Facebook, and they document that trade ­ online and otherwise ­ between counties correlates with

measures of social connectedness. Our work explores similar socio-cultural determinants of commercial

interactions, but allows us to explore overlapping product interests versus trust as distinct mechanisms.

        Previous researchers have also considered the effects of cultural and social distance on trade across

countries. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2009), in particular, study the link between survey-based

measures of bilateral trust among European nations and economic activity such as trade and investment.

They find that, particularly for "trust-sensitive" products, trust impacts trade flows. More broadly, an

extensive literature documents that cross-border exchange of goods and services is greater between

counterparties when they are closer together, whether in terms of physical, cultural, legal, or other

"distance" (see Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004). While these cross-country patterns are helpful in

guiding our understanding of the determinants of trade, as noted earlier, we are able to hold many more

factors constant in looking at trade on a particular platform within a single country. One attempt at looking

at the determinants of trade across regions within a single country comes from Hillberry and Hummels

(2008), who look at the flow of goods within the U.S. They focus on understanding a very strong geographic

distance effect, and their explanation centers on production co-location and trade in intermediate goods. In

that sense, we see our focus on consumer goods and preferences as complementary to their work. 12



2. Data

We use two broad types of data in our analysis. The first is sales data from eBay, at varying degrees of

aggregation. These include data on trade between geographies at the state-to-state and zip-to-zip level, as

well as state-to-state trade disaggregated by eBay's 33 top-level categories. Throughout, when we refer to


12
   Our work also connects, albeit more indirectly, to a relatively new literature on habit formation, taste, and the
geography of consumption, pioneered Bronnenberg, Dhar, and Dubé (2007) in a study showing that brand preferences
are heavily influenced by the distance of consumers from where the company was founded. Bronnenberg, Dubé, and
Gentzkow (2012) and Atkin (2013) extend this framework to show that consumers maintain loyalty to a brand (and in
the case of Atkin, food type) even when they migrate. Both of these latter papers naturally have taste-based
implications for the flow of goods within a country.

                                                         8
zip-code-level data, we refer to 3-digit zip-code areas (e.g., the area "275" includes zip codes 27514, 27516,

and others), of which there are 887 in the U.S. with civilian populations and complete demographic data.

We also use the distribution of U.S. buyer and seller transactions across product categories to construct our

measures of taste overlap by state- and zip-code-pair. The second is state- and zip-code-level demographic

data, drawn from a variety of sources we describe below, which capture cultural and socioeconomic

characteristics of individual areas.



2.1 eBay data

Our eBay data come from the firm's U.S. platform, which hosted over $36 billion worth of transactions

during 2017.13 eBay.com is the eleventh-most frequently visited website in the U.S., behind only Amazon

among e-commerce platforms.14 eBay offers its users the opportunity to sell items in several formats, and

it attracts sellers who vary widely in their engagement with the platform. Some sellers offer items for sale

rarely, while other sellers are professionals who create dedicated "eBay Stores." Seller quality and other

attributes are tracked in a variety of ways. All sellers have at least a small amount of information visible to

consumers, including a feedback score and the location (city and state) from which an item will ship. The

feedback score reports the sum of individual-transaction feedback (+1, 0, or -1) that an eBay user has

received as a seller on the platform. In addition, a small fraction of sellers (who represent a

disproportionately large proportion of sales volume) earn an eTRS badge, which indicates that they have

cleared specified thresholds for sales volume and customer satisfaction. These reputation mechanisms have

been studied extensively in the economics literature. Cabral and Hortascu (2010), Hui, Saeedi, Shen, and

Sundaresan (2016), and Elfenbein, Fisman, and McManus (2015), provide empirical evidence of the impact

of these mechanisms on sales probability and price, while Hui, Saeedi, Spagnolo, and Tadelis (2018)




13
     eBay US platform revenue from https://www.digitalcommerce360.com/article/ebays-sales/.
14
     Web traffic statistics are from the marketing firm Alexa (an Amazon.com subsidiary), accessed on May 10, 2019.

                                                          9
examine the mechanisms' impact on seller entry, and Nosko and Tadelis (2015) study how buyers learn

from experience about the overall quality to be expected on the platform.

        When an eBay consumer searches for a product, the platform provides the user with a collection of

listings sorted by several factors, including product characteristics, price, sellers' quality ratings, and

sellers' physical proximity to the consumer. The precise algorithm used to return search results is

proprietary and ever-evolving. The consumer may elect to re-sort the listings based on a single factor,

including proximity. (Other than geography, consumers cannot filter or sort listings based on the difference

measures we use in our analysis below.) eBay sellers can affect their positions in search results through

their choices of prices or shipping fees, but they are largely unable to affect the geographic distribution of

consumers who evaluate their products. eBay consumers, therefore, have ample opportunities to inspect

products from all over the United States, and interstate trade patterns are likely to reflect consumers'

preferences over trading partners rather than awareness of partners, which can be an important driver of

geographic trade patterns in other contexts.

        We collect data on eBay transactions in which both the buyer and seller identify themselves as

located in the U.S. In addition, we limit the population of sellers to those who do not operate eBay Stores.

We apply this filter on sellers for two reasons. First, sellers with eBay Stores may ship from warehouses

that are not in the same zip code or indeed the same state as the seller, which creates uncertainty about how

to classify the seller's location. Second, we conjecture that buyers are more likely to use location-based

characteristics to infer seller attributes when the seller provides only the sparse personal information offered

in eBay's standard format, whereas sellers with Stores often use the interface to provide additional

information about themselves. While the subset of sellers we study are likely less professional than those

with eBay Stores, many sellers in our sample have earned eTRS status or have relatively large feedback

counts. We discuss below the characteristics of the sellers in our sample.




                                                      10
2.1.1 Measures of inter-state trade and customer satisfaction

Our primary eBay data comprise a comprehensive record of transactions that occurred between January

2015 and December 2016, aggregated to the year level. In the description that follows we provide an

overview of the state-pair data; an identical process is used to generate the zip-to-zip data, just at a finer

level of disaggregation.

        For the U.S.-based buyers and sellers described in the preceding section, we observe the total

quantity of items sold and total dollar revenue from product sales, excluding shipping fees, between each

pair of U.S. states; we also observe buyer and seller transactions for Washington D.C., which we treat as a

separate (51st) state in our analysis. In addition to the aggregate annual transactions, we observe transactions

categorized according to the sellers' eTRS statuses (badged or not) and whether their feedback scores were

above or below 200 at the time of the transaction.15 We define High feedback to denote a seller that has

feedback of at least 200. This is a relatively low feedback threshold, as we aim to distinguish the sample

split based on feedback from the split based on eTRS.16 Roughly half of all sales revenue (48%) and

transactions (45%) associated with feedback above 200 are from sellers without eTRS certification. Thus,

these two different sample splits provide somewhat correlated, but not identical, tests.

        Finally, we analyze feedback provided by buyers, aggregated to the state-pair-year level. Our main

measure is Effective Percent Positive (EPPbst), the fraction of total transactions between buyers in state b

and sellers in state s during year t that leads to positive feedback. This measure is proposed by Nosko and

Tadelis (2015) to deal with the fact that, conditional on feedback being provided, it is almost always (99.3%)

positive. They show that there is information on seller reliability in the fraction of buyers that provide any

feedback (which averages approximately 65% in their sample). We use the fraction of transactions with




15
  For example, we may observe that, during 2016, Arizona sellers sold 2000 items for $20,000 (in total) to Missouri
buyers. Within those 2000 items, 800 with a value of $7000 were from eTRS sellers, and 1000 items with a value of
$14,000 were from sellers with feedback greater than 200.
16
  We have also performed the analysis after separating sellers by whether their feedback is greater than 1000. Our
results are very similar to those reported below for a feedback threshold of 200.

                                                        11
negative feedback (Negative feedbackbst), conditional on feedback being provided, as an alternative measure

of buyer (dis-)satisfaction.

        In preparing the data, we exclude observations on trade that occurs within states because these

cases have zero "distance" in many of the measures that we introduce below. We provide summary statistics

on state-to-state annual trade in Table 1. Trade between states (exclusive of shipping) has a mean value of

$4,381,590 per year in total for 109,447 items (medians of $1,342,110 and 35,342, respectively), summing

to nearly $22 billion in sales on over 550 million items during the two-year period we study. In our sample,

which conditions on less-professional sellers by excluding data from eBay Stores, state-level sales by non-

eTRS sellers averages 65% more than that of eTRS sellers; the quantity sold by non-eTRS sellers is 24%

greater. The total sales by low-feedback sellers is about half of that associated with sellers with feedback

above 200. The average EPPbst value across state dyad-year combinations is just over one half, and the

mean rate of negative feedback is 0.36%.17

        As expected, pairs of large states have the greatest transaction volume. In 2016, the top 162 state

dyads in total revenue involve buyers or sellers from California, Florida, New York, or Texas; the top 10 is

almost entirely comprised of these states trading with each other (with one appearance each by New Jersey

and Illinois). States with low trade volumes include Alaska, the Dakotas, Washington D.C., Rhode Island,

Vermont, and Wyoming.

        Our process for generating the zip-to-zip annual transaction dataset is virtually identical, and we

include summary statistics for this dataset in Appendix Table A1. As expected, average transaction volume

is much lower at the zip-to-zip level.




17
  The difference between our mean EPP value and the 65% rate reported by Nosko and Tadelis (2015) may be due
to differences in our respective samples' seller populations; they take a platform-wide average that includes
professional sellers that we largely omit.

                                                     12
2.1.2 Measures of geographic differences in buyer and seller activity across product categories

We supplement the trade flow data with additional information from eBay on the distribution of transactions

across 33 high-level product categories (e.g., Consumer Electronics, Collectables and Art, Home and

Garden, etc.). We once again focus on state-pairs in describing the construction of our data; however, the

approach extends straightforwardly to measuring zip-pair inventory-preference overlap.

        For each combination of buyer state (b), seller state (s), and product category (c), we obtain the

total quantity of items sold and the associated revenue during 2015-16. Let qbsc represent the quantity of

items sold in a (b, s, c) combination. For each b and s pair, we calculate:

                                              ,   ,       =               , ,             and
                                                                   \


                                                      ,       =           ,       ,   .


The notation \ indicates the set of all states excluding state s. We use these objects to calculate

                                                                        ,     ,
                                                          ,   ,    =
                                                                        ,

as the share of b's quantities that is in category c, excluding any trade between b and s. The vector                          ,


contains    ,   ,   values for each category. For an individual buyer state we obtain 50 versions of                      ,   (one

for each s  b, including Washington D.C.), but they are all quite similar to each other because removing a

single trading-partner seller-state (which we do to avoid a mechanical correlation between our taste overlap

measures and realized buyer-seller state transactions) generally has a small impact on the distribution of

buyer activity across categories within a state. We produce analogous measures for three additional

variables: buyer-state revenue (r) across categories, which generates                           ,   values, and for quantities and

revenues while focusing on the distribution of items sold from state s. Let the seller-focused share vectors

be  ,    and  ,       .

        We use these distributions to construct inventory-preference difference measures that aim to

capture the divergence between states in the products they buy and sell. For each pair ( b, s) and each


                                                                  13
transaction variable (j = q or r), we compute a "cross-product category difference" measure, P, as one minus

the cross-product of category shares:

                                              , = 1 -                     ,   ,    ,   ,   .


 , is similar to a Herfindahl index in which (b, s) pairs replace squared market shares; we subtract the

summed products from one so that it is increasing in distance. Intuitively, this measure captures the

likelihood that, within a buyer-seller state dyad, a buyer, chosen at random, would be searching in the

category that a seller, also chosen at random, had decided to offer a product. When the buyer and seller

states both have large fractions of their activity in different categories (i.e., one state tends to sell a lot in

categories that are little demanded by the other state),  , will be relatively large. In the regression analysis

below, we rescale the measure to have mean zero and standard deviation one, to make its estimated impact

easily comparable to other variables.

         We use a Euclidean distance calculation to develop an alternative measure of the differences

between items that are sold in a seller state and items that are purchased in a buyer state. The variable D

captures "Euclidean category distance," and we compute it as


                                             ,    =            ,      ,       -  ,     ,       .


As in the case of  , , we calculate      ,       at the quantity (j = q) and revenue (j = r) level, and in our analysis

we normalize the variable so that it has mean of zero and standard deviation of one. The measures  , ,  , ,

   ,   and    ,   capture different aspects of trade and handle between-state differences in distinct manners,

particularly in how they are affected by buyer and seller category dispersion. A buyer-seller pair with high,

but similar, dispersion across categories will have a low value for the Euclidean category distance but a

large value for the cross-product category difference. Thus, while both measures capture some intuitive

element of overlapping category interests, in some cases the two measures may be negatively correlated. In




                                                             14
practice, however, once we control for differences in average levels of  , and                  ,   across states, the

correlation between the two measures is strongly positive.



2.2 Demographic data

The underlying data for calculating group-pair similarity comes from several datasets which we query at

the state and county levels. We use the state-level demographic data directly in our analysis of between-

state trade, and we use the county-level data to construct zip-code level demographic measures using a

weighting procedure described below.

         We draw data on Median household income, Share with bachelor's degrees and above, Median

age, Share of males, Share in urban areas, Home ownership share, and Median home value from the 2017

American Community Survey, which is organized by the US Census. The ACS interviews a representative

sample of over two million Americans each year, providing a high-quality source of data with broad

geographic coverage. We measure similarity in political attitudes using voting patterns from the 2016 U.S.

presidential election, taken from the Federal Election Commission. We use the numbers of votes cast in

each state or county for the two major parties to calculate the winning candidate's fraction of these votes at

the state and zip-code level; we label this variable Winner vote share.18

         Table 2 reports summary statistics for the state-level aggregations of these variables, which we use

to create measures that capture differences in socioeconomic and cultural characteristics across states. In

Table 3 we report the cross-state differences of each variable, which is simply the absolute value of the

difference between the buyer and seller state values.




18
  We focus on 2016 vote shares to measure political preferences because it is based on real-stakes decisions during
the same period covered by our eBay transactions data. For robustness, we considered two alternative measures of
between-state differences in political preferences. The first is based on the winner vote share in 2012. The second is
constructed using survey responses from a 2015 Gallup Poll of 175,000 adult Americans on their political views. The
raw correlations among our three state-level measures of political preferences are each above 0.93; if we use 2012
election data or Gallup survey responses to measure political differences across states, our results are qualitatively
similar to those based on the most recent election data.



                                                         15
         We report three additional measures at the state dyad level in Table 3: Distance, and Ethnic

difference, and Religious difference. Distance is the "shortest curve" distance (in kilometers) between the

state population centers, which we obtain from the US Census.19 For Ethnic difference, we use the county-

level ACS data from 2017 on ethnicity, aggregated to the state level to construct a measure of ethnic

similarity between two states. The variable we construct is analogous to a between-group measure of ethnic

fractionalization (see, e.g., Alesina et al. 2003) which aims to capture the likelihood that a person chosen at

random from the seller state is in the same ethnicity category as a person chosen at random from the buyer

state. Let  be the share of individuals in the ethnic category E of state i, which is drawn from a set of

mutual exclusive and collectively exhaustive categories provided by the ACS.20 We then calculate the

ethnic dissimilarity between seller state s and buyer state b as Ethnic differencebs = -                . A higher

level of this measure indicates a greater likelihood that two people drawn at random from each state are of

different ethnicities. Religious difference is calculated similarly, using data on religious affiliations from

the 2010 U.S. Religion Census, which provides the number of adherents for 236 distinct faith groups by

state and county. We aggregate adherents of distinct faiths into five main categories, with the residual state

population categorized as non-adherents.21




19
   Alternative distance measures yield near-identical results, which is unsurprising given the very high correlation
across such measures. For example, the correlation between the log of the distance between capitals and the log of the
distance between population centers is 0.995.
20
   We use the shares of non-Hispanic individuals who are white, African-American, Asian, Pacific Islander, other
(single) race, and two or more races; in addition we use the share who are Hispanic or Latino.
21
   The aggregate categories are Evangelical Protestant, Black Protestant, Mainline Protestant, Catholic, and Other. As
an alternative state-level measure of religious similarity, we may use the results of a survey conducted by Pew Center's
US Religious Landscape Center Research, which was reported in 2016. See http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2016/02/29/how-religious-is-your-state [accessed 2/23/2018]. Pew reports data on the percentage of adults in a
state who say that religion is very important in their lives, the percentage who say they pray daily, the percentage who
say they attend worship services at least weekly, and the percentage who say they believe in God with absolute
certainty. This would be closest to using simply adherents versus non-adherents from the Religion Census. For our
state-level analyses, using the Pew-based measure yields quite similar results.



                                                          16
         The summary statistics in Table 3 are raw difference measures. However, to make the effect sizes

more easily comparable across distance measures in our empirical analysis in the next section, we normalize

all cultural and demographic distance variables to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one.

         To construct zip-code-level values of the demographic variables, we take a weighted average of all

counties that contribute to the 3-digit zip code. We know the share of each county's land area that is within

each zip code, and we assume that a county's population is distributed uniformly within its boundaries. For

each county, we obtain the fraction of its population that is in zip code z, and calculate the county's weight

with the fraction of z's population that comes from the county.22 We construct our zip code demographic

variables by using these weights with the county-level versions of the demographic variables described

above.23 In Appendix Tables A2 and A3 we present summary statistics for zip-code-level and zip-code-pair

attributes.



3.       Empirical Analysis and Results

Our main state-level specification takes the form:

                log(           ) =        +        +  + log( ) +                          +  +                  (1)

where C is a vector of cultural similarity variables, X a vector of socioeconomic similarity variables, T

contains our inventory-preference overlap variables (P and D), log() is logarithm of the distance

between the two states' population centers, and  and  are buyer-state × year and seller-state × year fixed

effects, respectively. Throughout, we focus our discussion on results using a revenue-based measure of

annual Tradebst between seller state s and buyer state b during year t. For robustness, we also present


22
  For example, zip code z may contain 100% of 80,000-person county A, 20% of 100,000-person county B and 60%
of 200,000 person county C. We conclude that z's total population is 220,000 (=80,000+0.2100,000+0.6200,000),
and the counties' weights in z are their population shares of z's total population, e.g. 0.36 for county A.
23
  This procedure will introduce some measurement error in the zip-code demographic variables, but we believe it is
minor. Potential sources of error include: the assumption that county population is uniformly distributed within its
geographic boundaries, our use of weighted averages to calculate county-level median ages and house values, and the
construction of a zip code geographic center using the average of Census-reported county population centers.



                                                        17
findings based on quantity-based measures, and also with Poison pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML)

specifications rather than OLS, as suggested by Silva and Tenreyro (2006), which use the levels of trade

and transactions as the dependent variables, rather than log transformations of them. 24

         As described in Section 2, the set of variables we use to capture cultural/attitudinal factors include

differences in ethnic and religious composition as well as the pairwise absolute difference in the fraction of

each state's vote share in the 2016 Presidential election. The set of socioeconomic variables we use are

(absolute) differences in median income, share with a bachelor's degree, median age, male share, median

home value, and shares of urban residents and owner-occupied housing. All covariates are normalized so

that the mean difference between states is 0 and the standard deviation is 1. We use two-way clustering by

seller state and buyer state to calculate the standard errors. For our zip-code-level analyses, the specification

is virtually identical to (1), with 3-digit zip codes defining b and s throughout.



3.1 Impact of cultural and socioeconomic differences on trade

We begin by presenting our baseline state-pair trade findings in Table 4, for both revenue- and quantity-

based measures of trade. Throughout, we present our state-to-state trade results in the main text and zip-to-

zip findings in a set of appendix tables.

         In the first three columns, we present results that use the log of total sales revenue as our measure

of trade. In columns 1 and 2 we include the "culture" variables and the socioeconomic variables separately,

and we include both groups of covariates in column 3. Focusing first on the set of measures that reflect

cultural differences, we find in column 1 that all three "distance" measures are predictive of trade, in the




24
  The PPML specification with buyer-location and seller-location fixed effects can be advantageous in handling zeros,
heteroscedasticity, and in solving the "adding up" problem in trade equations. Our dataset has very few zeros. In the
state-to-state trade data there are no instances in which there is 0 trade volume in a given year, and at the 3-digit-zip
level of analysis only 1.2% of observations are equal to zero. The latter two issues, however, are applicable to the
present work, so we include PPML specifications in each of our reported estimates of (1).



                                                           18
expected directions: the coefficients on the ethnic, political, and religious distance measures are all negative

and significant at least at the 5 percent level.

        Given that these variables are all normalized to have a standard deviation of one, their coefficients

are easily interpreted and compared. By far the biggest effect comes from ethnic difference: a one standard

deviation increase in ethnic difference is associated with an 11 percent decrease in state-pair trade. The

coefficients on religious and political differences imply sizeable but more modest effects.

        Turning to the socioeconomic variables, their role in predicting state-pair trade is mixed. While

similarity in urban share is predictive of trade in column 2, the inclusion of culture variables reduces the

size of its coefficient by more than half. Four of the socioeconomic variables remain significant predictors

of trade in column 3: differences in median age, male share, urban share, and home values. (While we group

these variables with other demographic measures, there are no clear guidelines on whether buyers view

particular measures as reflecting cultural versus other social differences.) None of these results appear to

be driven by outlier observations ­ we observe similar patterns if we omit Alaska and/or Hawaii (both are

obvious geographic outliers, and Alaska is also an outlier in male share).

        We note that, as expected, all regressions produce coefficients on log(Distance) that are negative,

economically important, and precisely estimated. The estimated coefficients that we find are larger, but

similar in order of magnitude, to the estimates produced by Hortacsu, Martinez-Jerez, and Douglas (2009)

for eBay trade. (By construction, however, our analysis differs from Hortascu et al. (2009) as we exclude

within-state (or within-3-digit zip code) transactions, which Hortascu et al. (2009) show are particularly

important for certain categories of transactions, like event tickets).

        In column 4 we present results from a specification that employs all culture and socioeconomic

difference variables, using the logarithm of annual sales quantity as the dependent variable. The patterns

are broadly similar though in some cases marginally weaker than the results that measure trade in terms of

total transaction value. Finally, in columns 5 and 6 we present PPML specifications for state-pair annual

transaction revenue and quantity, respectively, using the full set of covariates. Most of the PPML models'

point estimates are slightly smaller in magnitude than the corresponding coefficients in the OLS models

                                                      19
(including the geographic distance elasticity), but the results are broadly similar across estimation

approaches.

        In Appendix Table A4, we show analogous results for zip-to-zip annual transaction data, which

allows us to account for the very different perceptions that buyers may have of, say, Manhattan versus

upstate New York, or Austin versus rural Texas. The first three columns exactly parallel the specifications

in columns 1-3 of Table 4, and similarly show a consistent and robust relationship between culture proxies

and trade at the zip-code-pair level. In general, the magnitudes of the coefficients on Religious difference

and Voting Difference are larger, and all variables are (unsurprisingly) more precisely estimated than in the

state-to-state trade analyses. These specifications exploit both cross- and within-state variation in estimating

the culture-trade relationship. In column 4, we limit the sample to within-state zip code pairings to focus

on variation that is distinct from the between-state results. The patterns are quite similar to those based on

the full set of zip-code-pairs. Finally, we show results based on transaction quantities (column 5) and using

PPML estimation (columns 6 and 7); the patterns are again quite similar to (and more precisely estimated

than) those based on state-pair data.

        In a set of figures, we next illustrate the culture-trade relationship graphically, using binned scatter

plots (Hao et al., 2010) to display the relationship between the three main proxies for culture and trade.

Focusing first on state-pair trade, to capture the role of all three culture variables simultaneously, we use

the sum of (normalized) state-pair ethnic, religion, and voting differences. We group the data into 50 bins

with equal numbers of observations, though in practice the patterns are essentially the same if we use coarser

(e.g., 25 bins) or finer (e.g., 100 bins) groupings. Finally, we residualize the data, netting out the effects of

all socioeconomic and control variables included in our main specification (Table 4, column 3), including

buyer-state  year and seller-state  year fixed effects,       and  , respectively.




                                                       20
         We present the resulting binned scatter plot in Figure 1, which shows a clear negative correlation

between our summary measure of state-pair cultural distance and interstate trade.25 The relationship is

roughly linear, and it is in line with the estimates presented in Table 4. In Appendix Figures A1 ­ A3, we

present binned scatterplots for each individual cultural difference variable, generated while including all

other controls from Table 4, column 3 (e.g., in Figure A1, when we illustrate the role of ethnicity

differences, we control for differences in religion and voting). As expected, given the more prominent role

of ethnicity in our regression results, the plotted pattern is clearest and the best-fit slope is steepest in Figure

A1, which uses ethnicity to measure cultural differences. In Appendix Figures A4 ­ A6 we show analogous

figures to illustrate the zip-code-level relationships between our culture variables and trade. We once again

use 50 bins to plot the relationship. Given the vast number of observations underlying each data point (over

30,000), it is perhaps unsurprising that the graphs show a tight fit around the regression line; our main

takeaway from these figures is that the log-linear model is again a good fit for the data.



3.2 Accounting for inventory-preference overlap between buyer-seller groups

As noted from the outset, there are two primary reasons we might expect culturally or socioeconomically

similar locations to trade more: greater trust and more overlap between sellers' inventories and buyers'

demands. We now turn to exploring the extent to which these factors account for the correlation between

state-pair and zip-code-pair similarity and trade.

         Focusing first on state-pair results, in Table 5, we present results that build on those in Table 4,

including one or both of our inventory-preference overlap measures as controls. Intuitively, if the inclusion

of these direct overlap measures attenuates the effects of cultural or socioeconomic closeness, then we may

infer that the initial correlation was capturing, at least in part, a concordance between sellers' goods and

buyers' preferences. Focusing on total annual state-pair sales revenue as our measure of trade, we explore




25
  The scatter plot is quite similar if we include only the fixed effects    and  , as suggested by the stability of the
coefficients across columns 1 and 3 of Table 4.

                                                          21
how the inclusion of our direct measures of Euclidean category distance ( D) and/or cross-product category

differences () affect the estimates in Table 4. We begin in column 1 by showing the results from Table 4,

Column 3, for comparison. We add Euclidean category distance as a covariate in column 2. Our category

difference measure is itself highly predictive of trade. A one standard deviation increase in Euclidean

category distance is associated with a 27 percent reduction in state-pair trade. Moreover, the inclusion of

category differences has a very large effect on the remaining predictive power of our cultural variables: the

coefficient on Ethnic difference falls by more than 35 percent and the coefficient on Voting difference falls

by more than half. One exception is the coefficient on Religion difference, which increases marginally in

absolute value. The coefficient estimates for most of the socioeconomic variables are also attenuated.

Column 3 uses our cross-product category difference measure () to capture state-pair differences in

sellers' inventories versus buyers' preferences. The coefficients on our cultural difference variables are

again attenuated, although to a more modest degree in the case of Ethnic difference. In column 4 we include

both inventory-preference difference measures as controls. Interestingly, while the coefficient on each is

smaller than its counterpart in columns 2 and 3, both measures remain significant at the 1 percent level,

suggesting that these two measures effectively capture different types of variation in inventory-preference

overlap. Again, most coefficients on our cultural similarity variables are markedly lower than in column 1.

Finally, in column 5 we show a PPML specification with the full set of covariates. Comparing these results

to the PPML estimates in Table 4, column 5, confirms that the effect of introducing inventory-preference

overlap measures is similar between OLS and PPML approaches to estimation.

        In Appendix Tables A5 and A6, we repeat the analysis reported on Table 5, but using alternative

dependent variables (quantity rather than revenue) and a different approach to geographical boundaries (zip

codes rather than states). The results are broadly similar to those presented in Table 5, with two exceptions:

the attenuation of the Voting difference coefficients in the quantity regressions is much smaller, and the

attenuation of the Religious difference coefficients is about one-fifth in quantity-based regressions, whereas

the Religious difference coefficients increased modestly in the revenue-based specifications. In Table A5



                                                     22
and A6, all of our sociocultural coefficients remain statistically significant when inventory-preference

overlap controls are added.

         An alternative approach to accounting for differences in sellers' inventories and buyers'

preferences is to disaggregate our data by category. This allows us to control for category-level differences

in inventory-preference overlap with fixed effects at the level of buyer-state  category  year and seller-

state  category  year, rather than the constructed variables D and P. If D and P fail to capture how

inventory-preference overlap plays a primary role in driving the link between state-pair cultural differences

and trade, we would expect that within-category analyses could generate markedly different results.

Furthermore, if differences in trade patterns were entirely based upon differences in category-level

preferences across locations (e.g., Texans have a greater propensity to shop for clothing and Arizonans sell

a greater proportion of clothing), then the fixed effects should fully capture these differences, and the

estimated coefficients for sociocultural and socioeconomic similarity should be much reduced. We report

these results in Appendix Table A7. The patterns are quite similar to those in Tables 4 and 5, suggesting

that while category-level tastes partially explain the relationship between trade patterns and cultural

similarity, they do not fully explain it.26



3.3 Quality assurance and the impact of cultural differences on trade

We next explore whether buyers deem sellers from places that are more culturally or socioeconomically

different to be less trustworthy, and hence the buyers trade less with them. Since we lack a direct measure

of state-pair trust (the approach utilized by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2009) in studying European

trade flows), we use a different empirical approach: we investigate how trade patterns are different with

and without additional mechanisms that build trust. We first analyze whether trade volume varies with

whether the seller has earned a certification label that may substitute for trustworthiness, namely the eTRS


26
  The coefficients in Table A7 are not directly comparable to the corresponding estimates in the state-level aggregate
regressions in Tables 4 and 5, as they represent the (unweighted) average effect of similarity across 33 different-sized
categories.

                                                          23
designation. Intuitively, little trust is required on the buyer's part to purchase from a seller that has an

excellent, certified track record for quality and promptness. Similarly, we posit that questions of

trustworthiness are more salient for evaluating sellers with little feedback, who may be new to the platform

and have a limited observable track record. To test whether cultural similarity matters more when dealing

with these less-established sellers, we allow for different impacts depending on whether sellers have

feedback scores greater or (weakly) less than 200 at the time of the transaction.

         Table 6 contains results from two models based on our state-pair data. For the sake of comparison,

we reproduce Table 5 column 4 as column 1 in Table 6. In the next pair of columns (labeled 2a and 2b), we

report results from a single model that includes two observations per year and state-pair: one for aggregate

sales by non-eTRS sellers and the other for aggregate sales from eTRS sellers. We allow measures of

socioeconomic differences, inventory-preference overlap, and geographic distance to affect each type of

seller's transactions differently, and we implement this with a full set of interactions with an indicator

(eTRS) for whether trade involves an eTRS seller.27 Table 6, column 2a shows the coefficient estimates for

the direct effects of all state-pair variables, while column 2b shows the coefficient estimates for all

variables' interactions with eTRS. Thus, the coefficients in column 2a show the effects of the state-pair

differences when sellers lack eTRS certification, which forces buyers to depend on other information or

characteristics to infer seller reliability. The coefficients in column 2b show the incremental effect for

 = 1 transactions, so that the total effect for  = 1 transactions is the sum of the coefficients in

columns 2a and 2b. Columns 3a and 3b repeat this exercise, using High feedback rather than eTRS to divide

sellers by their performance records.

         While the estimates of the interaction terms in column 2b are mixed in sign, for our cultural

difference measures for two cases (ethnic and voting differences) they go in the direction of implying that



27
   We also interact each state-year fixed effect with the eTRS indicator to account for different overall trade volumes
flowing out of and into states by eTRS status. For example, if California consumers, on average, prefer eTRS items
regardless of the item's origin, then this tendency is captured by the additional fixed effect for California buyers by
eTRS status. Similarly, if Florida has a greater than average fraction of eTRS sellers shipping to all destinations, then
the additional eTRS-specific seller-state fixed effect will account for this pattern.

                                                           24
these differences matter less when buyers consider purchases from eTRS-badged sellers; the religion

difference interaction goes in the opposite direction, but does not approach statistical significance. As an

intuitive test of whether the three variables collectively differ for eTRS versus non-eTRS sellers, we provide

an F-test of the sum of their coefficients, which has a p-value of 0.051. (An F-test of the joint significance

of the three separate coefficients has a p-value of 0.049). The eTRS interactions with the socioeconomic

variables are of inconsistent sign and an F-test of their sum has a p-value of 0.224. Together, these estimates

suggest that cultural differences have a greater dampening effect on trade between buyers and sellers who

have not earned quality certification, relative to the effect of cultural differences on trade between buyers

and sellers with quality certification.

        The results in columns 3a and 3b corroborate those in 2a and 2b. In particular, the joint effect of

cultural differences is significantly smaller for High feedback sellers: an F-test of the summed coefficients

has a p-value < 0.001. Comparing the coefficients across columns 3a and 3b, our estimates suggest that the

effect of ethnic differences is more than halved for high feedback (relative to low feedback) sellers, while

the effect of voting differences disappears entirely. The estimates in 3a and 3b also show similar patterns

for socioeconomic differences as those in columns 2a and 2b, with the effect of these variables of

inconsistent sign in both columns. Given that our data do not contain (near-) experimental variation in eTRS

or feedback, we interpret these variables as capturing the effects of a range of markers or achievements that

distinguish well-established sellers.

        Collectively, we interpret the estimates in Table 6 as suggesting that cultural similarity supports

trust, so that cultural distance becomes a greater determinant of trade when quality certification or extensive

seller reputations are absent. This finding echoes that of Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2009), who find

that bilateral trust is a stronger predictor of trade for quality-differentiated products relative to commodities.

        As with our previous results, we repeat the specifications here using quantity-based trade data, zip-

code-pair data, and PPML estimation. All of these sets of analyses show that cultural variables' impact on




                                                       25
trade is consistently attenuated for eTRS-badged and high feedback sellers.28 Furthermore, in each of these

models the coefficient on the interaction term with Religious difference is positive, consistent with Religious

difference mattering less when alternative signals of trustworthiness are available. These results are in

Appendix Tables A8 ­ A10.



3.4 Impact of cultural and socioeconomic differences on buyer satisfaction

In our final set of results, we examine whether, conditional on a transaction having taken place, cultural

distance predicts buyer satisfaction. One possibility raised by the literature on economic discrimination, but

difficult to explore directly in patterns of trade conducted above, is that buyers simply have preferences to

do business with people like themselves, or conversely have an "animus" (Becker, 1957) toward interacting

with others unlike themselves that is distinct from expectations about quality or trustworthiness. While both

animus and perceptions of untrustworthiness may reduce the likelihood of transactions between dissimilar

parties, conditional on the transaction occurring, buyers should be less inclined to provide positive

feedback, and more inclined to provide negative feedback, to sellers towards whom they feel animus. We

posit that, at least in some instances, these transactions would occur due to favorable product matches or

idiosyncratically low prices, despite animus that a buyer may feel. Nonetheless, we recognize that those

with the greatest animus may not engage in trade at all with dissimilar partners. Thus, our examination of

customer feedback only rule in animus, rather than fully ruling it out

        In Table 7 we provide results based on a variant of specification (1), in which we use effective

percent positive (EPP) and fraction negative feedback (Negative feedback) as measures of buyer

satisfaction. Geographic distance between states is negatively and significantly related to EPP, and

positively and significantly related to Negative feedback; which may reflect shipping-related issues that

increase with distance, such as damage or delays. In column (1), which uses EPP as a satisfaction measure,




28
  We do not have data on zip-code level trade by sellers with feedback scores above versus below 200, so at the zip-
code level we divide sellers by eTRS status only.

                                                        26
none of the cultural or economic similarity measures are statistically significant. We obtain similar results

using Negative feedback as an outcome measure in column (2) ­ though Voting difference is in this case a

significant predictor of negative feedback. A one standard deviation increase in Voting difference is

associated with a .01 percentage point rise in negative feedback, a small impact given the average negative

feedback rate of 0.34 percent across the sample. We repeat the analysis with 3-digit zip codes and report

the results in Table A11. The geographic distance measures in these regressions continue to have a strong

association (both in economically and statistically) with dissatisfaction. By contrast, although the estimated

coefficients on cultural and economic similarity in these regressions are statistically significant in several

instances ­ sometimes in the opposite direction of what we would predict from animus-based models ­ they

remain economically very small. In summary, our results on feedback are hard to reconcile with animus-

based models.

        Considering our feedback results through the lens of perceptions of trustworthiness suggests several

possible interpretations. One potential explanation (incorporating both the trade and satisfaction results) is

that, while buyers' perceptions of trustworthiness are associated with cultural similarities or differences,

these perceptions reflect excessively strong generalizations (e.g., Bordalo et al. 2016) which are not

validated in practice. According to this interpretation, perceptions shape the propensity to transact, but do

not reflect actual performance conditional on the transaction being executed. A second explanation is that

selection drives the observed satisfaction results. Buyers choose to interact only with sellers that they deem

sufficiently trustworthy, and make accurate inferences of trustworthiness based upon cultural similarities

or differences. Observed transactions then lead to levels of customer satisfaction that are independent of

buyer-seller cultural similarity. This possibility raises the question of whether sellers do, in fact, behave in

a more trustworthy manner when interacting with buyers from states with culturally similar populations;

this question is beyond the scope of the current paper.




                                                      27
4. Conclusions

Our paper provides three contributions. First, we document that cultural distance ­ as measured by

differences in ethnicity, religiosity, and voting behavior ­ is negatively associated with trade patterns in an

online market in which buyers choose among sellers with observable locations but whose personal identities

are effectively concealed. These differences are robust to controlling for socioeconomic differences and

measures of inventory-preference overlap. This, in and of itself, is somewhat surprising as buyers and

sellers in this marketplace do not meet directly, see pictures of one another, or engage in voice

communication. Our second contribution is to show that socio-cultural similarity matters more for trade

when there is more uncertainty about the quality of the seller, suggesting that buyers associate socio-cultural

similarity with greater trustworthiness. In examining customer satisfaction with executed transactions, we

raise the question of whether these perceptions of trustworthiness are accurate or driven by mistaken beliefs

about the impact of buyer-seller differences. Collectively these findings suggest that cultural similarity

drives trade both because of greater inventory-preference overlap and higher trust. These findings

contribute to a small but growing body of work that examines the relationship between socio-cultural

similarity and trade, such as Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2009) and Bailey et al. (2018). Finally, we see

our inventory-preference overlap measures, which explain a significant share of interstate trade on eBay,

as a methodological contribution that builds on related similarity indices, which could be applied to cross-

or within-country trade models.

        The fact that we find the trade patterns exist on an e-commerce platform in which face-to-face

contact is rare and demographic information about counterparties is concealed is, perhaps, surprising. While

discrimination based on observable buyer or seller ethnicity has been documented on e-commerce platforms

such as Airbnb (Cui, Li, and Zhang 2016; Edelman, Luca, and Svirsky 2017), on online classified

advertisement platforms (Doleac and Stein 2013), and online used-car markets (Zussman 2013), features

of the eBay platform make it nearly impossible to discover the ethnicity or other demographic details of a

seller. Buyers in our setting must, therefore, make inferences about a seller based upon his or her location.

Our results, which suggest a higher level of trust between more similar eBay users, indicate that eBay users

                                                      28
­ whether consciously or not ­ are incorporating such information in their purchasing decisions. Our

observations about buyer satisfaction raise an important question about whether eBay buyers incorporate

this information in an accurate way.

        Finally, our results also point to some positive potential measures for stimulating transactions

between dissimilar partners: quality-assurance institutions and information about sellers' track records

appear to help buyers trust sellers from locations different from their own. Given the emphasis placed by

eBay and other two-sided platforms on developing robust customer feedback mechanisms, such markets

may hold out the promise of reducing the importance of sociocultural distance in economic transactions.




                                                   29
REFERENCES
Alesina, A., Devleeschauwer, A., Easterly, W., Kurlat, S., and Wacziarg, R., 2003. Fractionalization.
   Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2): 155-194.
Anderson, J.E. and Van Wincoop, E., 2004. Trade costs. Journal of Economic Literature, 42(3): 691-751.
Atkin, D., 2013. Trade, tastes, and nutrition in India. American Economic Review, 103(5): 1629-63.
Bailey, M., Cao, R.R., Kuchler, T., Stroebel, J. and Wong, A., 2018. Social Connectedness: Measurement,
    Determinants, and Effects. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3): 259-80.
Bajari, P. and Hortacsu, A., 2004. Economic Insights from Internet Auctions. Journal of Economic
    Literature, 42(2): 457-486.
Becker, G. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bordalo, P., Coffman, K., Gennaioli, N. and Shleifer, A., 2016. Stereotypes. The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 131(4): 1753-1794.
Bronnenberg, B.J., Dhar, S.K. and Dubé, J.P., 2007. Consumer packaged goods in the United States:
   National brands, local branding. Journal of Marketing Research, 44(1): 4-13.
Bronnenberg, B.J., Dubé, J.P.H. and Gentzkow, M., 2012. The evolution of brand preferences: Evidence
   from consumer migration. American Economic Review, 102(6): 2472-2508.
Buchan, N.R., Croson, R.T. and Dawes, R.M., 2002. Swift neighbors and persistent strangers: A cross-
   cultural investigation of trust and reciprocity in social exchange. American Journal of Sociology,
   108(1), pp.168-206.
Buchan, N.R., Johnson, E.J., and Croson, R.T., 2006. Let's get personal: An international examination of
   the influence of communication, culture and social distance on other regarding preferences. Journal of
   Economic Behavior & Organization, 60(3): 373-398.
Cabral, L. and Hortacsu, A., 2010. The dynamics of seller reputation: Evidence from eBay. The Journal of
   Industrial Economics, 58(1): 54-78.
Cui, R., Li, J. and Zhang, D.J., 2016. Discrimination with incomplete information in the sharing economy:
    Field evidence from Airbnb. Washington University in St. Louis working paper.
DeBruine, L. M. 2002. Facial resemblance enhances trust. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B:
   Biological Sciences, 269(1498): 1307-1312.
Doleac, J.L. and Stein, L.C., 2013. The visible hand: Race and online market outcomes. The Economic
   Journal, 123(572): F469-F492.
Edelman, B., Luca, M. and Svirsky, D., 2017. Racial discrimination in the sharing economy: Evidence from
   a field experiment. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(2): 1-22.
Elfenbein, D.W., Fisman, R. and McManus, B., 2012. Charity as a substitute for reputation: Evidence from
    an online marketplace. Review of Economic Studies, 79(4): 1441-1468.
Elfenbein, D.W., Fisman, R. and McManus, B., 2015. Market structure, reputation, and the value of quality
    certification. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7(4): 83-108.
Fershtman, C., and Gneezy, U., 2001. Discrimination in a segmented society: An experimental approach.
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1): 351-377.
Finger, J. M., & Kreinin, M. E. (1979). A Measure of Export Similarity and Its Possible Uses. The Economic
    Journal, 89(356), 905-912.


                                                   30
Foddy, M., Platow, M.J., and Yamagishi, T., 2009. Group-based trust in strangers: The role of stereotypes
   and expectations. Psychological Science, 20(4): 419-422.
Glaeser, E.L., Laibson, D.I., Scheinkman, J.A., and Soutter, C.L., 2000. Measuring trust. The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 115(3): 811-846.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2006. Does culture affect economic outcomes? Journal
   of Economic Perspectives, 20(2): 23-48.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L., 2009. Cultural biases in economic exchange? The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 124(3): 1095-1131.
Hao, M.C., Dayal, U., Sharma, R K., Keim, D.A., and Janetzko, H., 2010. Visual analytics of large
   multidimensional data using variable binned scatter plots. In Visualization and Data Analysis 2010
   (Vol. 7530, p. 753006). International Society for Optics and Photonics.
Hillberry, R. and Hummels, D., 2008. Trade responses to geographic frictions: A decomposition using
    micro-data. European Economic Review, 52(3): 527-550.
Hortaçsu, A., Martínez-Jerez, F. and Douglas, J., 2009. The geography of trade in online transactions:
   Evidence from eBay and Mercadolibre. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 1(1): 53-74.
Hui, X., Saeedi, M., Shen, Z. and Sundaresan, N., 2016. Reputation and regulations: evidence from eBay.
    Management Science, 62(12): 3604-3616.
Hui, X., Saeedi, M., Spagnolo, G. and Tadelis, S., 2018. Certification, Reputation and Entry: An Empirical
    Analysis. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper w24916.
Nosko, Chris, and Steven Tadelis, 2015. The limits of reputation in platform markets: An empirical analysis
   and field experiment. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper w20830.
Perez-Truglia, Ricardo, 2018. Markets, trust and cultural biases evidence from eBay. Journal of Behavioral
    and Experimental Economics 72: 17-27.
Silva, J.M.C.Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro, 2006. The log of gravity. Review of Economics and Statistics
    88(4): 641-658.
Tajfel, H., Billig, M.G., Bundy, R.P., and Flament, C., 1971. Social categorization and intergroup
    behaviour. European journal of social psychology, 1(2): 149-178.
Zussman, A., 2013. Ethnic discrimination: Lessons from the Israeli online market for used cars. The
   Economic Journal, 123(572): F433-468.




                                                    31
                                      Figure 1: Relationship between cultural distance and interstate trade


                  11.66       11.64
   Log(State-Pair Monthly Revenue)
  11.58     11.6     11.62
                  11.56




                                       -3             -2             -1              0                1                 2
                                            Sum of State-Pair Cultural Difference (Ethnicity, Religiosity, Political)


Note: The figure shows a binned scatter plot to illustrate the relationship between state-pair cultural
differences and interstate trade. The horizontal axis is the sum of the three measures of cultural
distance: ethnicity, religiosity, and voting. We use 50 bins, and residualize the data to account for all
control variables included in Table 4, column 3.




                                                                           32
                         Table 1: State-to-state annual sales and feedback

                                    Mean         Median         SD           Min      Max

Revenue                            4,381,590    1,342,110    10,474,446      10,011    178M
Quantity                             109,447       35,342       247,015         245      4M

Revenue, non-eTRS sellers          2,727,223      833,795     6,504,506       6,839    109M
Revenue, eTRS sellers              1,654,367      475,990     4,139,427         937     87M
Revenue, low feedback sellers      1,403,531      440,778     3,308,409       4,432     51M
Revenue, high feedback sellers     2,978,059      872,455     7,244,180       5,579    130M

Effective pct. positive feedback       50.87         51.01         4.72       21.77    70.36
Negative feedback (percent)             0.36          0.34         0.15           0      2.1
Observations                            5100




                                                33
                                            Table 2: State characteristics

                                           Mean          Median           SD           Min        Max
    Winner vote share 2016                  0.52           0.52           0.13         0.04        0.76
    Median income (1000)                   58.24          56.57           9.85        42.01      78.92
    Bachelors share                         0.31           0.30           0.06         0.20       0.57
    Median age                              38.37         38.30           2.37        31.00       44.60
    Male share                               0.49          0.49           0.01         0.47        0.52
    Median home value (1000)               211.86        178.70          97.81       109.30      563.90
    Urban share                             0.73           0.73           0.16        0.33        1.00
    Owner-occupied share                    0.67          0.69            0.06        0.44        0.75
    Observations                             51

Note: Includes all 50 states and the District of Columbia.




                                          Table 3: State pair characteristics

                                               Mean           Median         SD           Min         Max
Ethnic difference                                 0.50            0.50       0.14        0.12         0.87
Religious difference                              0.33            0.33       0.06        0.10         0.52
Voting Difference, 2016                           0.14            0.12       0.11        0.00         0.71
Difference in ...
    Median income (10,000)                      1.12            0.95         0.83         0.00        3.69
    Bachelors share                             0.07            0.05         0.06         0.00        0.37
    Median age                                  2.58            2.00         2.15         0.00       13.60
    Male share                                  0.01            0.01         0.01         0.00        0.05
    Median home value (100,000)                 0.98            0.68         0.98         0.00        4.55
    Urban share                                 0.18            0.15         0.13         0.00        0.67
    Owner-occupied share                        0.06            0.04         0.06         0.00        0.31
Dist. between capitals (km)                   1964.91         1600.78      1468.42       31.73      8226.99
Observations                                   2550

Note: See text for variable definitions




                                                             34
                         Table 4: The impact of cultural and socioeconomic differences on interstate trade

                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
    Estimation method                                OLS            OLS             OLS             OLS            PPML            PPML
    Dependent variable                           log(revenue)   log(revenue)    log(revenue)    log(quantity)     Revenue         Quantity

    Ethnic difference                             -0.110***                      -0.0798***      -0.0635***      -0.0647***      -0.0721***
                                                   (0.0206)                        (0.0167)        (0.0123)        (0.0116)        (0.0111)
    Religious difference                          -0.0286**                       -0.0327**      -0.0410***        -0.00986      -0.0277***
                                                   (0.0129)                        (0.0136)        (0.0101)        (0.0155)        (0.0103)
    Voting difference                            -0.0403***                      -0.0262***       -0.0120**      -0.0215***      -0.00901**
                                                  (0.00801)                       (0.00631)       (0.00491)       (0.00658)       (0.00362)
    Median income (000)                                            0.0122*          0.00980         0.00140         0.00737         0.00560
                                                                  (0.00715)       (0.00713)       (0.00540)       (0.00751)       (0.00714)
    Bachelors share                                               -0.0210**         -0.0133        -0.00886        0.000356        -0.00327
                                                                  (0.00991)       (0.00992)       (0.00642)       (0.00945)       (0.00652)
    Median age                                                     0.0104*        0.0119**          0.00741      0.00860***       0.00506**
                                                                  (0.00576)       (0.00532)       (0.00521)       (0.00239)       (0.00216)
    Male share                                                   -0.0257***      -0.0237***       -0.0108**         -0.0107        -0.00425
                                                                  (0.00859)       (0.00797)       (0.00450)       (0.00937)       (0.00835)
    Median home value (000)                                       -0.0340**         -0.0197        -0.00789        -0.0147*        -0.00778
                                                                   (0.0160)        (0.0156)       (0.00826)       (0.00857)       (0.00543)
    Urban share                                                  -0.0261***        -0.0117*       -0.00866*         -0.0171         -0.0140
                                                                  (0.00715)       (0.00653)       (0.00462)        (0.0116)        (0.0105)
    Owner-occupied share                                         -0.0270***       -0.0152**      -0.0141***       -0.0178**       -0.0113**
                                                                  (0.00614)       (0.00613)       (0.00437)       (0.00714)       (0.00476)
    Log distance between capitals                 -0.146***       -0.145***       -0.134***       -0.115***      -0.0973***      -0.0849***
                                                  (0.00955)        (0.0103)       (0.00919)       (0.00754)        (0.0102)       (0.00633)

    Observations                                  5,100             5,100           5,100           5,100           5,100           5,100
    R-squared (within)                            .5702             .5605           .5873           .6308            n/a             n/a
    Robust standard errors in parentheses
    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (two-sided test)

Note: In addition to the listed variables, all models include buyer-state  year and seller-state  year fixed effects. The variables median income, bachelors
share, median age, male share, median home value, urban share and owner-occupied share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences. Standard
errors are two-way clustered by buyer state and seller state.

                                                                       35
                        Table 5: The impact of taste differences on interstate trade

                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)
 Estimation method                        OLS              OLS              OLS              OLS             PPML
 Dependent variable                   log(revenue)     log(revenue)     log(revenue)     log(revenue)       Revenue

 Ethnic difference                     -0.0798***       -0.0497***       -0.0554***      -0.0492***       -0.0371***
                                         (0.0167)         (0.0111)         (0.0126)        (0.0115)        (0.00726)
 Religious difference                   -0.0327**       -0.0400***       -0.0446***      -0.0436***         -0.0214*
                                         (0.0136)         (0.0119)         (0.0115)        (0.0111)         (0.0124)
 Voting difference                     -0.0262***        -0.0103**       -0.00981**       -0.00800*         -0.00754
                                        (0.00631)        (0.00464)        (0.00468)       (0.00446)        (0.00628)
 Median income (000)                      0.00980          0.0105*          0.00924       0.00984*          -0.00292
                                        (0.00713)        (0.00560)        (0.00602)       (0.00576)        (0.00663)
 Bachelors share                          -0.0133         -0.0156*        -0.0161**       -0.0162**          0.00431
                                        (0.00992)        (0.00902)        (0.00706)       (0.00771)        (0.00680)
 Median age                             0.0119**           0.00503          0.00525         0.00430          0.00293
                                        (0.00532)        (0.00364)        (0.00359)       (0.00341)        (0.00236)
 Male share                            -0.0237***        -0.0183**        -0.0197**       -0.0184**         -0.00681
                                        (0.00797)        (0.00735)        (0.00765)       (0.00752)        (0.00591)
 Median home value (000)                  -0.0197          -0.0174         -0.0186*        -0.0178*         -0.00627
                                         (0.0156)         (0.0114)         (0.0105)        (0.0105)        (0.00738)
 Urban share                             -0.0117*         -0.00767         -0.00741        -0.00701          -0.0103
                                        (0.00653)        (0.00539)        (0.00549)       (0.00535)        (0.00629)
 Owner-occupied share                   -0.0152**        -0.0114**       -0.0155***       -0.0133**       -0.00810**
                                        (0.00613)        (0.00543)        (0.00544)       (0.00538)        (0.00372)
 Euclidean category distance                             -0.269***                        -0.146***        -0.197***
    (revenue)                                             (0.0147)                         (0.0261)         (0.0139)
 Cross-product category                                                  -0.0783***      -0.0458***       -0.0410***
    difference (revenue)                                                  (0.00958)       (0.00959)        (0.00914)
 Log distance between capitals          -0.134***        -0.127***        -0.126***       -0.126***       -0.0937***
                                        (0.00919)        (0.00836)        (0.00857)       (0.00849)        (0.00661)

 Observations                          5,100               5,100            5,100           5,100            5,100
 R-squared (within)                    .5873               .6621            .6638           .6724             n/a
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (two-sided test)

Note: In addition to the listed variables, all models include buyer-state  year and seller-state  year fixed effects. The
variables median income, bachelors share, median age, male share, median home value, urban share and owner-
occupied share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences. Standard errors are two-way clustered by buyer
state and seller state.




                                                           36
       Table 6: The moderating role of seller quality in the impact of cultural distance on trade

                                       (1)              (2a)               (2b)              (3a)                (3b)

                                                    base effect,     add'l effect for     base effect,    add'l effect for
                                  base effect
                                                     eTRS = 0          eTRS = 1          High fdbk = 0    High fdbk = 1

 [1] Ethnic difference            -0.0492***        -0.0640***          0.0254*           -0.0754***        0.0436***
                                    (0.0115)          (0.0140)          (0.0143)            (0.0178)         (0.0153)
 [2] Religious difference         -0.0436***        -0.0390***         -0.00949           -0.0331***         -0.0190
                                    (0.0111)         (0.00992)         (0.00833)            (0.0102)         (0.0130)
 [3] Voting difference             -0.00800*        -0.0128***          0.0114*           -0.0203***        0.0200**
                                   (0.00446)         (0.00413)         (0.00669)           (0.00487)        (0.00793)

 Test of sum of [1]-[3] = 0        F = 42.64         F = 47.70          F = 4.00           F = 33.81        F = 5.67
                                  (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.000)        (p = 0.051)        (p = 0.000)      (p = 0.021)

 [4] Median income (000)           0.00984*           0.00814            0.00301             0.00660             0.00534
                                   (0.00576)         (0.00528)         (0.00598)           (0.00399)           (0.00584)
 [5] Bachelors share               -0.0162**         -0.0166**          -0.00203            -0.0131*            -0.00730
                                   (0.00771)         (0.00710)         (0.00619)           (0.00670)           (0.00643)
 [6] Median age                      0.00430         0.00860**         -0.0111**           0.00972**            -0.00670
                                   (0.00341)         (0.00385)         (0.00517)           (0.00405)           (0.00567)
 [7] Male share                    -0.0184**        -0.0213***           0.00679          -0.0301***           0.0176***
                                   (0.00752)         (0.00775)         (0.00848)           (0.00704)           (0.00574)
 [8] Med. home value (000)          -0.0178*         -0.0198**           0.00633          -0.0302***              0.0201
                                    (0.0105)         (0.00838)          (0.0122)           (0.00546)            (0.0136)
 [9] Urban share                    -0.00701         -0.0106**           0.00796          -0.0175***           0.0125**
                                   (0.00535)         (0.00508)         (0.00540)           (0.00413)           (0.00506)
 [10] Owner-occup. share           -0.0133**        -0.0181***          0.0151**           -0.0179**             0.00659
                                   (0.00538)         (0.00660)         (0.00652)           (0.00722)           (0.00661)

 Test of sum of [4]-[10] = 0       F = 26.68         F = 28.61          F = 1.52           F = 38.12        F = 6.86
                                  (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.2239)        (p = 0.000)      (p = 0.012)

 Euclidean categ dist              -0.146***         -0.131***          -0.0624           -0.0744**         -0.124***
          (revenue)                 (0.0261)          (0.0353)          (0.0554)           (0.0348)          (0.0338)
 Cross-product categ diff         -0.0458***        -0.0203***         -0.0354**           0.00159         -0.0593***
          (revenue)                (0.00959)         (0.00562)          (0.0141)          (0.00581)          (0.0155)
 Log distance between
 capitals                          -0.126***         -0.135***         0.0212***          -0.149***         0.0326***
                                   (0.00849)         (0.00928)         (0.00714)          (0.00899)         (0.00630)

 Observations                      5,100                       10,200                                 10,200
 R-squared (within)                .6724                        .5681                                 .6364
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (two-sided test)

Note: In addition to the listed variables, the model in columns 2a and 2b includes buyer-state  eTRS  year and seller-
state  eTRS  year fixed effects; the model in 3a and 3b replaces eTRS with High feedback. The variables median
income, bachelors share, median age, male share, median home value, urban share and owner-occupied share all refer
to the absolute value of state-level differences. Standard errors are two-way clustered by buyer state and seller state.




                                                           37
                     Table 7: The impact of cultural distance on customer satisfaction

                                                                     (1)                  (2)
                    VARIABLES                                        EPP            Share neg. fdbk

                    Ethnic difference                                0.0657            -0.00642
                                                                    (0.152)            (0.0109)
                    Religious difference                              0.110             0.00375
                                                                   (0.0676)           (0.00572)
                    Voting Difference                               -0.0197           0.0105***
                                                                   (0.0873)           (0.00364)
                    Median income (000)                             -0.0195            0.00253
                                                                   (0.0619)           (0.00441)
                    Bachelors share                                  0.0617            -0.00208
                                                                   (0.0740)           (0.00333)
                    Median age                                      0.00771            0.00170
                                                                   (0.0765)           (0.00448)
                    Male share                                       0.0556             0.00209
                                                                   (0.0490)           (0.00490)
                    Median home value (000)                        -0.00119           -0.0132**
                                                                   (0.0854)           (0.00550)
                    Urban share                                       0.106            -0.00219
                                                                   (0.0645)           (0.00252)
                    Owner-occupied share                            -0.0713            -0.00511
                                                                   (0.0476)           (0.00532)
                    Log distance between capitals                 -0.532***           0.0150***
                                                                   (0.0848)           (0.00331)

                    Observations                                     5,100              5,100
                    R-squared (within)                              0.0295              0.0176
                    Robust standard errors in parentheses
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Note: In addition to the listed variables, all models include buyer-state  year and seller-state  year fixed effects. The
variables median income, bachelors share, median age, male share, median home value, urban share and owner-
occupied share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences. Standard errors are two-way clustered by buyer
state and seller state.




                                                            38
APPENDIX




   39
                             Figure A1: Relationship between ethnic differences and interstate trade




                 14.16       14.14
  Log(State-Pair Annual Revenue)
   14.08    14.1     14.12
                 14.06




                                     -1               -.5                       0                      .5
                                                    State-Pair Difference in Ethnicity


Note: The figure shows a binned scatter plot to illustrate the relationship between state-pair
differences in ethnicity and interstate trade. We use 50 bins, and residualize the data to account for
all other variables included in Table 4, column 3.




                                                                40
                      Figure A2: Relationship between differences in religiosity interstate trade




                14.15
  Log(State-Pair Annual Revenue)
      14.05     14     14.1




                                   -1     -.5                 0                    .5               1
                                         State-Pair Difference in Religious Affiliation


Note: The figure shows a binned scatter plot to illustrate the relationship between state-pair
differences in religiosity and interstate trade. We use 50 bins, and residualize the data to account for
all other variables included in Table 4, column 3.




                                                           41
                    Figure A3: Relationship between differences in voting and interstate trade




                 14.16       14.14
   Log(State-Pair Annual Revenue)
  14.08    14.1     14.12
                 14.06




                                     -1.5   -1        -.5            0             .5        1
                                                 State-Pair Difference in Voting




Note: The figure shows a binned scatter plot to illustrate the relationship between state-pair differences
in voting in the 2016 presidential election and interstate trade. We use 50 bins, and residualize the data
to account for all other variables included in Table 4, column 3.




                                                           42
                             Figure A4: Relationship between ethnic differences and zip-to-zip trade




                 8.15
  Log(Zipcode-Pair Annual Revenue)
  7.95      8    7.9 8.05     8.1




                                     -1         -.5                  0                  .5             1
                                                      Zipcode-Pair Ethnicity Difference


Note: The figure shows a binned scatter plot to illustrate the relationship between zip-code-pair
differences in ethnicity and trade. We use 50 bins, and residualize the data to account for all other
variables included in Table A4, column 3.




                                                                 43
                 Figure A5: Relationship between religiosity differences and zip-to-zip trade




                 8.1
  Log(Zipcode-Pair Annual Revenue)
    7.95         8
                 7.9        8.05




                                     -1.5   -1            -.5               0              .5     1
                                              Zipcode-Pair Religious Affiliation Difference


Note: The figure shows a binned scatter plot to illustrate the relationship between zip-code-pair
differences in religiosity and trade. We use 50 bins, and residualize the data to account for all other
variables included in Table A4, column 3.




                                                               44
                             Figure A6: Relationship between voting differences and zip-to-zip trade




                 8.1
  Log(Zipcode-Pair Annual Revenue)
    7.95         8
                 7.9        8.05




                                     -2          -1                 0                  1               2
                                                      Zipcode-Pair Voting Difference


Note: The figure shows a binned scatter plot to illustrate the relationship between zip-code-pair
differences in voting in the 2016 presidential election and trade. We use 50 bins, and residualize the
data to account for all other variables included in Table A4, column 3.




                                                                45
                     Table A1: Zip code to zip code annual sales and feedback

                                          Mean         Median       SD          Min         Max


Revenue                                 15,179          3,524   56,868            0   11,865,290
Quantity                                   379            101    1,176            0      207,816

Revenue, non-eTRS sellers                9,499          2,296   33,207            0    7,351,905
Revenue, eTRS sellers                    5,680          1,042   27,910            0    8,572,258

Effective percent positive feedback       52.49         52.27    13.44            0         100
Negative feedback share                    0.37             0     1.76            0         100
Observations                          1,571,764




                                                  46
                                  Table A2: Zip code characteristics

                                     Mean        Median        SD         Min          Max
    Winner vote % 2016                0.55         0.56       0.17         0.04         0.92
    Median income (1000)            56.05        53.21       14.28        24.75       116.20
    Bachelors share                  0.28         0.27        0.10         0.07         0.74
    Median age                       39.08        38.90       3.67        25.99        52.40
    Male share                        0.49         0.49       0.01         0.47         0.56
    Median home value (1000)        201.62       154.41      134.95       48.79       927.34
    Urban share                      0.69         0.71        0.24         0.00         1.00
    Owner-occupied share             0.68         0.69        0.08         0.20        0.82
    Observations                     887




                               Table A3: Zip code pair characteristics

                                       Mean         Median          SD          Min          Max
Ethnic difference                      0.52           0.52        0.18        0.04           0.95
Religious difference                   0.33           0.33        0.07        0.02           0.70
Voting difference, 2016                0.19           0.17        0.14        0.00           0.88
Difference in ...
    Median income (10,000)              1.51         1.14         1.34        0.00         9.14
    Bachelors share                     0.10         0.08         0.08        0.00         0.67
    Median age                          4.11         3.45         3.17        0.00        26.41
    Male share                          0.01         0.01         0.01        0.00         0.09
    Median home value (100,000)         1.25         0.71         1.44        0.00         8.79
    Urban share                         0.28         0.24         0.21        0.00         1.00
    Owner-occupied share                0.09         0.07         0.08        0.00         0.62
Dist. between capitals (km)           1633.73      1408.81      1078.88       0.00       8368.32
Observations                          785,882




                                                 47
                               Table A4: The impact of cultural and socioeconomic differences on trade between zip codes

                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)
           Sample                                  All            All            All        Same state         All           All             All
           Estimation method                      OLS            OLS            OLS            OLS            OLS           PPML            PPML
           Dependent variable                 log(revenue)   log(revenue)   log(revenue)   log(revenue)   log(quantity)    Revenue         Quantity

           Ethnic difference                    -0.114***                    -0.112***      -0.107***     -0.0611***      -0.0862***      -0.0974***
                                                (0.00877)                    (0.00814)       (0.0242)      (0.00639)        (0.0129)        (0.0114)
           Religious difference                -0.0595***                   -0.0545***      -0.0379**     -0.0387***      -0.0368***      -0.0433***
                                                (0.00483)                    (0.00476)       (0.0172)      (0.00370)       (0.00874)       (0.00490)
           Voting difference                   -0.0634***                   -0.0420***     -0.0404***     -0.0276***      -0.0281***      -0.0166***
                                                (0.00438)                    (0.00353)      (0.00732)      (0.00276)       (0.00596)       (0.00478)
           Median income (000)                                0.00781*       0.000922        -0.00750       0.00302         0.00463         0.000154
                                                              (0.00438)      (0.00402)      (0.00779)      (0.00289)       (0.00571)       (0.00447)
           Bachelors share                                   -0.0347***     -0.0248***      0.0267***     -0.0197***      -0.0238***      -0.0134***
                                                              (0.00505)      (0.00450)      (0.00790)      (0.00324)       (0.00663)       (0.00439)
           Median age                                          -0.00335      0.000745       -0.0163**       0.00196        0.000357        -0.000569
                                                              (0.00260)      (0.00222)      (0.00660)      (0.00167)       (0.00303)       (0.00279)
           Male share                                        -0.0179***     -0.0126***       -0.00575     -0.0173***      -0.0193***      -0.0128***
                                                              (0.00398)      (0.00372)      (0.00799)      (0.00274)       (0.00415)       (0.00309)
           Median home value (000)                           -0.0572***     -0.0281***     -0.0797***     -0.0166***         -0.0104        -0.00462
                                                              (0.00651)      (0.00651)       (0.0124)      (0.00472)       (0.00777)       (0.00746)
           Urban share                                       -0.0299***     -0.00893**     -0.0456***     -0.0368***      -0.0555***      -0.0394***
                                                              (0.00444)      (0.00413)      (0.00677)      (0.00355)       (0.00633)       (0.00454)
           Owner-occupied share                              -0.0269***       -0.00163      0.0274***       -0.00161       0.000110         -0.00179
                                                              (0.00448)      (0.00403)      (0.00806)      (0.00294)       (0.00447)       (0.00406)
           Log distance between centers         -0.167***     -0.179***      -0.161***     -0.0798***      -0.133***      -0.0625***      -0.0656***
                                                (0.00547)     (0.00569)      (0.00547)      (0.00999)      (0.00403)       (0.00686)       (0.00563)

           Observations                        1,571,764      1,571,764      1,571,764       43,556        1,571,764       1,571,764       1,571,764
           R-squared (within)                    0.0699         0.0644        0.0717         0.0900         0.1527            n/a             n/a
           Robust standard errors in
           parentheses
           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (two-sided test)

Note: In addition to the listed variables, all models include buyer-zip code  year and seller- zip code  year fixed effects. The variables median income,
bachelors share, median age, male share, median home value, urban share and owner-occupied share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences.
Standard errors are two-way clustered by buyer zip code and seller zip code.



                                                                                48
                   Table A5: Quantity-focused models of taste and trade between states

                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)
 Estimation method                        OLS              OLS              OLS              OLS             PPML
 Dependent variable                   log(quantity)    log(quantity)    log(quantity)    log(quantity)      Quantity

 Ethnic difference                     -0.0635***       -0.0247***       -0.0388***      -0.0246***       -0.0207***
                                         (0.0123)        (0.00642)        (0.00924)       (0.00646)        (0.00738)
 Religious difference                  -0.0410***       -0.0317***       -0.0353***      -0.0317***       -0.0260***
                                         (0.0101)        (0.00831)        (0.00862)       (0.00840)        (0.00739)
 Voting difference                      -0.0120**        -0.0104**        -0.0103**       -0.0104**       -0.0144***
                                        (0.00491)        (0.00424)        (0.00456)       (0.00433)        (0.00283)
 Median income (000)                      0.00140        0.000335         0.000215        0.000359          -0.00101
                                        (0.00540)        (0.00458)        (0.00485)       (0.00453)        (0.00389)
 Bachelors share                         -0.00886         -0.0103*         -0.0103*        -0.0102*          0.00111
                                        (0.00642)        (0.00538)        (0.00538)       (0.00539)        (0.00463)
 Median age                               0.00741          0.00575          0.00585         0.00578          0.00217
                                        (0.00521)        (0.00432)        (0.00432)       (0.00435)        (0.00272)
 Male share                             -0.0108**       -0.00942**        -0.0101**      -0.00940**        -0.00818*
                                        (0.00450)        (0.00441)        (0.00454)       (0.00440)        (0.00485)
 Median home value (000)                 -0.00789         -0.00761         -0.00698        -0.00765       -0.00720**
                                        (0.00826)        (0.00645)        (0.00681)       (0.00635)        (0.00365)
 Urban share                            -0.00866*       -0.00868**       -0.00852**      -0.00869**        -0.00663*
                                        (0.00462)        (0.00360)        (0.00395)       (0.00358)        (0.00393)
 Owner-occupied share                  -0.0141***       -0.0141***       -0.0153***      -0.0140***      -0.00625***
                                        (0.00437)        (0.00364)        (0.00362)       (0.00357)        (0.00242)
 Euclidean category distance                             -0.139***                        -0.144***        -0.121***
    (revenue)                                             (0.0211)                         (0.0323)         (0.0374)
 Cross-product category                                                  -0.103***          0.00573        -6.85e-05
    difference (revenue)                                                  (0.0382)         (0.0399)         (0.0540)
 Log distance between capitals          -0.115***        -0.115***       -0.115***        -0.115***       -0.0868***
                                        (0.00754)        (0.00723)       (0.00735)        (0.00723)        (0.00452)

 Observations                          5,100               5,100            5,100           5,100            5,100
 R-squared (within)                    .6308               .6880            .6709           .6881             n/a
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (two-sided test)

Note: In addition to the listed variables, all models include buyer-state  year and seller-state  year fixed effects. The
variables median income, bachelors share, median age, male share, median home value, urban share and owner-
occupied share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences. Standard errors are two-way clustered by buyer
state and seller state.




                                                           49
                   Table A6: The impact of taste differences on trade between zip codes

                                           (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)
 Estimation method                        OLS             OLS             OLS              OLS            PPML
 Dependent variable                   log(revenue)    log(revenue)    log(revenue)     log(revenue)      Revenue

 Ethnic difference                     -0.112***       -0.0826***      -0.0831***      -0.0812***       -0.0582***
                                       (0.00814)        (0.00726)       (0.00689)       (0.00695)        (0.00920)
 Religious difference                 -0.0545***       -0.0556***      -0.0561***      -0.0560***       -0.0400***
                                       (0.00476)        (0.00451)       (0.00448)       (0.00447)        (0.00825)
 Voting difference                    -0.0420***       -0.0324***      -0.0323***      -0.0318***       -0.0123***
                                       (0.00353)        (0.00323)       (0.00319)       (0.00320)        (0.00458)
 Median income (000)                   0.000922          -0.00209        -0.00168        -0.00192         -0.00113
                                       (0.00402)        (0.00377)       (0.00375)       (0.00375)        (0.00458)
 Bachelors share                      -0.0248***       -0.0191***      -0.0210***      -0.0204***       -0.0175***
                                       (0.00450)        (0.00419)       (0.00414)       (0.00417)        (0.00481)
 Median age                            0.000745         -0.000751       -0.000606       -0.000718       -0.00532**
                                       (0.00222)        (0.00203)       (0.00197)       (0.00197)        (0.00267)
 Male share                           -0.0126***        -0.00605*       -0.00640*       -0.00596*      -0.00875***
                                       (0.00372)        (0.00342)       (0.00336)       (0.00337)        (0.00328)
 Median home value (000)              -0.0281***       -0.0215***      -0.0208***      -0.0205***         -0.00415
                                       (0.00651)        (0.00592)       (0.00588)       (0.00586)        (0.00520)
 Urban share                          -0.00893**        0.000223        -0.000170       0.000435        -0.0401***
                                       (0.00413)        (0.00390)       (0.00386)       (0.00388)        (0.00604)
 Owner-occupied share                   -0.00163          0.00403         0.00210         0.00275          0.00458
                                       (0.00403)        (0.00358)       (0.00341)       (0.00346)        (0.00324)
 Euclidean category distance                            -0.372***                      -0.0840***        -0.198***
    (revenue)                                            (0.0166)                        (0.0291)         (0.0253)
 Cross-product category                                                -0.127***        -0.106***       -0.0733***
    difference (revenue)                                               (0.00670)         (0.0114)         (0.0101)
 Log distance between capitals         -0.161***       -0.158***       -0.159***        -0.159***       -0.0629***
                                       (0.00547)       (0.00513)       (0.00513)        (0.00511)        (0.00598)

 Observations                          1,571,764       1,571,764        1,571,764       1,571,764       1,571,764
 R-squared (within)                     0.0717          0.0825           0.0853          0.0854            n/a
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (two-sided test)

Note: In addition to the listed variables, all models include buyer-zip code  year and seller- zip code  year fixed
effects. The variables median income, bachelors share, median age, male share, median home value, urban share and
owner-occupied share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences. Standard errors are two-way clustered
by buyer state and seller state.




                                                         50
                             Table A7: Interstate trade within product categories

                                                  (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)
         Estimation method                       OLS              OLS            PPML            PPML
         Dependent variable                  log(revenue)     log(quantity)     Revenue         Quantity

         Ethnic difference                    -0.0860***      -0.0443***      -0.0637***       -0.0724***
                                                (0.0177)        (0.0117)        (0.0110)         (0.0111)
         Religious difference                 -0.0548***      -0.0385***       -0.00848        -0.0280***
                                                (0.0121)       (0.00737)        (0.0155)         (0.0104)
         Voting difference                     -0.0143**       -0.0113**      -0.0225***       -0.00889**
                                               (0.00653)       (0.00446)       (0.00726)        (0.00377)
         Median income (000)                   0.00750*         0.00148         0.00766           0.00614
                                               (0.00425)       (0.00308)       (0.00776)        (0.00721)
         Bachelors share                         -0.0136       -0.000223       0.000738          -0.00348
                                                (0.0103)       (0.00397)       (0.00980)        (0.00666)
         Median age                              0.00546         0.00165      0.00815***        0.00526**
                                               (0.00629)       (0.00416)       (0.00232)        (0.00224)
         Male share                             -0.00794       -0.0167**       -0.00964          -0.00427
                                               (0.00685)       (0.00703)       (0.00908)        (0.00835)
         Median home value (000)               -0.0263**       -0.0152**       -0.0139*          -0.00843
                                                (0.0103)       (0.00621)       (0.00800)        (0.00551)
         Urban share                             0.00981      -0.0121***        -0.0168           -0.0141
                                               (0.00586)       (0.00389)        (0.0115)         (0.0105)
         Owner-occupied share                   -0.00889        -0.00427      -0.0190***        -0.0111**
                                               (0.00627)       (0.00340)       (0.00712)        (0.00488)
         Log distance between capitals         -0.158***       -0.125***      -0.0987***       -0.0847***
                                               (0.00879)       (0.00678)        (0.0101)        (0.00643)

         Observations                          168,300          168,300         168,300         168,300
         R-squared (within)                    0.0500           0.1157            n/a             n/a
         Robust standard errors in parentheses
         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (two-sided test)

Note: In addition to the listed variables, all models include buyer-state  product category  year and seller-state 
product category  year fixed effects. The variables median income, bachelors share, median age, male share, median
home value, urban share and owner-occupied share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences. Standard
errors are two-way clustered by buyer state and seller state.




                                                         51
                               Table A8: Quantity-focused trust and trade models

                                         (1)             (2a)               (2b)             (3a)              (3b)

                                                     base effect,    add'l effect for    base effect,    add'l effect for
                                     base effect
                                                      eTRS = 0         eTRS = 1         High fdbk = 0    High fdbk = 1

[1] Ethnic difference                -0.0246***      -0.0453***             0.0301       -0.0711***        0.0628***
                                      (0.00646)        (0.0116)            (0.0189)        (0.0125)         (0.0132)
[2] Religious difference             -0.0317***      -0.0350***            0.00498       -0.0362***         0.00673
                                      (0.00840)       (0.00818)           (0.00527)       (0.00808)        (0.00777)
[3] Voting difference                 -0.0104**      -0.0125***            0.00570       -0.0151***         0.00636
                                      (0.00433)       (0.00411)           (0.00575)       (0.00296)        (0.00479)

Test of sum of [1]-[3] = 0            F = 58.69       F = 46.00         F = 4.02          F = 66.12         F = 30.70
                                     (p = 0.000)     (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.050)       (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.000)

[4] Median income (000)               0.000359          0.00145           0.000215        0.000755         -3.83e-05
                                      (0.00453)       (0.00404)           (0.00557)       (0.00322)        (0.00471)
[5] Bachelors share                   -0.0102*        -0.0104**            -0.00222       -0.0114**          0.00114
                                      (0.00539)       (0.00508)           (0.00478)       (0.00492)        (0.00409)
[6] Median age                         0.00578          0.00700            -0.00335      0.00825***         -0.00316
                                      (0.00435)       (0.00516)           (0.00456)       (0.00187)        (0.00543)
[7] Male share                       -0.00940**        -0.00751            -0.00556      -0.0206***        0.0155***
                                      (0.00440)       (0.00534)           (0.00534)       (0.00399)        (0.00468)
[8] Median home value (000)           -0.00765        -0.0119**             0.00737      -0.0203***        0.0172**
                                      (0.00635)       (0.00525)           (0.00902)       (0.00421)        (0.00713)
[9] Urban share                      -0.00869**      -0.0108***             0.00501      -0.0133***          0.00496
                                      (0.00358)       (0.00370)           (0.00423)       (0.00259)        (0.00348)
[10] Owner-occup. share              -0.0140***      -0.0154***             0.00505      -0.0151***          0.00111
                                      (0.00357)       (0.00440)           (0.00546)       (0.00522)        (0.00438)

Test of sum of [4]-[10] = 0           F = 24.20       F = 25.58         F = 0.27          F = 41.97         F = 8.56
                                     (p = 0.000)     (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.604)       (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.005)

Euclidean categ dist                 -0.144***       -0.119***           -0.0438         -0.0531**         -0.119***
   (quantity)                         (0.0323)        (0.0258)          (0.0486)          (0.0207)          (0.0350)
Cross-product categ diff              0.00573          0.0315           -0.0419            0.0157           -0.00903
   (quantity)                         (0.0399)        (0.0399)          (0.0367)          (0.0185)          (0.0342)
Log distance between                 -0.115***       -0.125***         0.0231***         -0.134***         0.0244***
   capitals                          (0.00723)       (0.00797)         (0.00459)         (0.00593)         (0.00576)

Observations                        5,100                        10,200                              10,200
R-squared (within)                  .6881                        .5922                               .7090
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (two-sided test)

Note: In addition to the listed variables, the model in columns 2a and 2b includes buyer-state  eTRS  year and
seller-state  eTRS  year fixed effects; the model in 3a and 3b replaces eTRS with High feedback. The variables
median income, bachelors share, median age, male share, median home value, urban share and owner-occupied
share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences. Standard errors are two-way clustered by buyer state
and seller state.



                                                           52
                   Table A9: Revenue-focused trust and trade models, PPML estimation

                                          (1)                 (2a)            (2b)              (3a)                 (3b)

                                                          base effect,   add'l effect for    base effect,    add'l effect for
                                      base effect
                                                           eTRS = 0        eTRS = 1         High fdbk = 0    High fdbk = 1

[1] Ethnic difference                 -0.0371***          -0.0449***        0.0227*          -0.0572***        0.0320***
                                       (0.00726)           (0.00848)        (0.0116)          (0.00789)         (0.0101)
[2] Religious difference               -0.0214*            -0.0262**        0.00945          -0.0384***         0.0223*
                                        (0.0124)            (0.0113)        (0.0111)          (0.00910)         (0.0116)
[3] Voting difference                  -0.00754            -0.0147**       0.0178**          -0.0215***        0.0211***
                                       (0.00628)           (0.00617)       (0.00718)          (0.00462)        (0.00617)

Test of sum of [1]-[3] = 0            2 = 15.38           2 = 27.03        2 = 6.96          2 = 84.08         2 = 15.09
                                      (p = 0.001)         (p = 0.000)     (p = 0.008)        (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.000)

[4] Median income (000)                -0.00292             -0.00254       0.000599           -0.00169          -0.00170
                                       (0.00663)           (0.00616)       (0.00656)          (0.00367)        (0.00743)
[5] Bachelors share                     0.00431            0.000109          0.00949          0.000259           0.00441
                                       (0.00680)           (0.00522)       (0.00802)          (0.00412)        (0.00829)
[6] Median age                          0.00293            0.00572**        -0.00751         0.00644***         -0.00553
                                       (0.00236)           (0.00263)       (0.00587)          (0.00213)        (0.00348)
[7] Male share                         -0.00681             -0.00653       -0.000514         -0.0150***          0.0123*
                                       (0.00591)           (0.00609)        (0.0102)          (0.00579)        (0.00714)
[8] Median home value (000)            -0.00627             -0.00392        -0.00648         -0.0135***          0.00992
                                       (0.00738)           (0.00638)       (0.00705)          (0.00448)        (0.00669)
[9] Urban share                         -0.0103            -0.0126**         0.00712         -0.0184***           0.0109
                                       (0.00629)           (0.00598)       (0.00836)          (0.00505)        (0.00729)
[10] Owner-occup. share               -0.00810**          -0.0124***        0.0104*          -0.0196***        0.0161***
                                       (0.00372)           (0.00455)       (0.00623)          (0.00505)        (0.00551)

Test of sum of [4]-[10] = 0            2 = 6.26            2 = 8.18        2 = 0.55          2 = 24.34          2 = 9.15
                                      (p = 0.012)         (p = 0.004)     (p = 0.459)        (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.003)

Euclidean categ dist                   -0.197***           -0.165***       -0.121***         -0.0812***        -0.189***
          (revenue)                     (0.0139)            (0.0193)        (0.0404)           (0.0253)         (0.0231)
Cross-product categ diff              -0.0410***          -0.0334***        -0.00287           -0.00689         -0.0370*
          (revenue)                    (0.00914)            (0.0101)       (0.00828)           (0.0114)         (0.0200)
Log distance between capitals         -0.0937***          -0.0994***       0.0153**           -0.112***        0.0265***
                                       (0.00661)           (0.00645)       (0.00606)          (0.00702)        (0.00652)

Observations                                      5,100                      10,200                         10,200
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (two-sided test)

Note: In addition to the listed variables, the model in columns 2a and 2b includes buyer-state  eTRS  year and
seller-state  eTRS  year fixed effects; the model in 3a and 3b replaces eTRS with High feedback. The variables
median income, bachelors share, median age, male share, median home value, urban share and owner-occupied
share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences. Standard errors are two-way clustered by buyer state
and seller state.



                                                               53
              Table A10: Revenue-focused trust and trade models, OLS and all zip codes

                                                            (1)           (2a)               (2b)

                                                                      base effect,    add'l effect for
                                                        base effect
                                                                       eTRS = 0         eTRS = 1

                [1] Ethnic difference                  -0.0812***     -0.0919***        0.0236***
                                                        (0.00695)      (0.00757)        (0.00785)
                [2] Religious difference               -0.0560***     -0.0633***         0.00374
                                                        (0.00447)      (0.00483)        (0.00434)
                [3] Voting difference                  -0.0318***     -0.0332***         0.00686
                                                        (0.00320)      (0.00348)        (0.00465)

                Test of sum of [1]-[3] = 0             F = 382.59     F = 411.48         F = 10.35
                                                       (p = 0.000)    (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.001)

                [4] Median income (000)                  -0.00192      0.000967          0.00150
                                                        (0.00375)      (0.00398)        (0.00429)
                [5] Bachelors share                    -0.0204***     -0.0214***         0.00362
                                                        (0.00417)      (0.00454)        (0.00468)
                [6] Median age                          -0.000718      -0.000677         0.00216
                                                        (0.00197)      (0.00219)        (0.00263)
                [7] Male share                          -0.00596*     -0.00811**         0.00338
                                                        (0.00337)      (0.00360)        (0.00353)
                [8] Median home value (000)            -0.0205***     -0.0243***        0.0124**
                                                        (0.00586)      (0.00619)        (0.00537)
                [9] Urban share                         0.000435        0.00404         0.000207
                                                        (0.00388)      (0.00434)        (0.00472)
                [10] Owner-occup. share                   0.00275       0.00179          0.00323
                                                        (0.00346)      (0.00377)        (0.00376)

                Test of sum of [4]-[10] = 0             F = 19.47      F = 16.66         F = 7.01
                                                       (p = 0.000)    (p = 0.000)       (p = 0.008)

                Euclidean categ dist                   -0.0840***      -0.138***          -0.0124
                          (revenue)                      (0.0291)       (0.0366)          (0.0371)
                Cross-product categ diff                -0.106***     -0.0570***        -0.0514***
                          (revenue)                      (0.0114)       (0.0140)          (0.0152)
                Log distance between capitals           -0.159***      -0.176***         0.0308***
                                                        (0.00511)      (0.00549)         (0.00281)

                Observations                        1,571,764                    3,143,528
                R-squared (within)                   0.0854                       0.0534
                 Robust standard errors in parentheses
                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (two-sided test)

Note: In addition to the listed variables, the model in columns 2a and 2b includes buyer-state  eTRS  year and
seller-state  eTRS  year fixed effects. The variables median income, bachelors share, median age, male share,
median home value, urban share and owner-occupied share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences.
Standard errors are two-way clustered by buyer state and seller state.




                                                            54
     Table A11: The impact of cultural distance on customer satisfaction, OLS and all zip codes

                                                                    (1)                    (2)
                                                                                       Share neg.
                 VARIABLES                                         EPP                  feedback

                 Ethnic difference                               0.335***              -0.0231***
                                                                 (0.0673)               (0.00709)
                 Religious difference                            -0.00526               0.0130***
                                                                 (0.0363)               (0.00414)
                 Voting Difference                                0.00983               0.000125
                                                                 (0.0285)               (0.00300)
                 Median income (000)                             -0.0533*                -0.00367
                                                                 (0.0315)               (0.00326)
                 Bachelors share                                 0.0674**               0.000590
                                                                 (0.0303)               (0.00304)
                 Median age                                       0.0221                  0.00181
                                                                 (0.0235)               (0.00207)
                 Male share                                       0.0411*                 0.00111
                                                                 (0.0247)               (0.00327)
                 Median home value (000)                           0.0539                 0.00137
                                                                 (0.0407)               (0.00399)
                 Urban share                                    0.0803***                -0.00420
                                                                 (0.0270)               (0.00274)
                 Owner-occupied share                            -0.00431                -0.00298
                                                                 (0.0305)               (0.00340)
                 Log distance between capitals                  -0.471***              0.0200***
                                                                 (0.0219)               (0.00217)

                 Observations                                   1,552,549               1,552,549
                 R-squared (within)                              0.0008                  0.0001
                 Robust standard errors in parentheses
                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Note: In addition to the listed variables, all models include buyer-state  year and seller-state  year fixed effects. The
variables median income, bachelors share, median age, male share, median home value, urban share and owner-
occupied share all refer to the absolute value of state-level differences. Standard errors are two-way clustered by buyer
state and seller state.




                                                           55
