                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                   PRESCHOOL QUALITY AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT

                                          Alison Andrew
                                         Orazio Attanasio
                                          Raquel Bernal
                                        Lina Cardona Sosa
                                         Sonya Krutikova
                                        Marta Rubio-Codina

                                        Working Paper 26191
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26191

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2019



We would like to acknowledge excellent research assistance provided by Diana Martinez and the
contributions of Carlos Medina, Marcos Vera-Hernandez and Ximena Pena to the design of this
study. Ximena passed away in January 2017 and is dearly missed. This research was funded
by the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie) and Fundacíon Exito. Prof Attanasio
acknowledges funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 695300-HKADeC-
ERC-2015-AdG). Ms Andrew, and Dr Krutikova acknowledge funding from the ESRC Centre
for Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy at the Institute for Fiscal Studies, Prof Bernal
acknowledges funding from the British Academy Visiting Fellowship VF10124. The funders of
the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing
up results. Ethics Committees at Universidad de los Andes and University College London
approved the study's protocol in 2013. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26191.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alison Andrew, Orazio Attanasio, Raquel Bernal, Lina Cardona Sosa, Sonya
Krutikova, and Marta Rubio-Codina. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Preschool Quality and Child Development
Alison Andrew, Orazio Attanasio, Raquel Bernal, Lina Cardona Sosa, Sonya Krutikova, and
Marta Rubio-Codina
NBER Working Paper No. 26191
August 2019
JEL No. H43,I10,I20,J13

                                           ABSTRACT

Global access to preschool has increased dramatically yet preschool quality is often poor. We use
a randomized controlled trial to evaluate two approaches to improving the quality of Colombian
preschools. We find that the first, which was rolled out nationwide and provides additional
resources for materials and new staff, did not benefit children's development and, unintentionally,
led teachers to reduce their involvement in classroom activities. The second approach additionally
trains teachers to improve their pedagogical methods. We find this addition offset the negative
effects on teacher behavior, improved the quality of teaching and raised children's cognition,
language and school readiness.

Alison Andrew                                     Lina Cardona Sosa
Institute for Fiscal Studies                      Institute for Fiscal Studies
7 Ridgmount Street                                7 Ridgmount Street
London WC1E 7AE                                   London WC1E 7AE
United Kingdom                                    United Kingdom
alison_a@ifs.org.uk                               lina_s@ifs.org.uk

Orazio Attanasio                                  Sonya Krutikova
Department of Economics                           Institute for Fiscal Studies
University College London                         7 Ridgmount Street
Gower Street                                      London WC1E 7AE
London WC1E 6BT                                   United Kingdom
UNITED KINGDOM                                    sonya_k@ifs.org.uk
and NBER
o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk                             Marta Rubio-Codina
                                                  Inter-American Development Bank
Raquel Bernal                                     Social Protection and Health Division
Universidad de los Andes                          Washington, DC 20577
and CEDE                                          martarubio@iadb.org
rbernal@uniandes.edu.co




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at:
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1246
1     Introduction

There is growing momentum behind investing in early years education in both lower- and higher-income countries.

In the UK, for example, government spending on early years care and education has tripled over the past 17 years

and, in 2018, the US Congress approved a doubling of funding for subsidized childcare for low-income families

(Belfield, Farquharson, and Sibieta 2018; The Economist 2019). Universal access to quality early childhood care by

2030 is one of the Sustainable Development Goals and globally enrollment in pre-primary education has increased

from 29% in 1990 to 49% in 2015.1 In Colombia, the setting of this paper, enrollment rates have increased from

13% in 1990 to 84% in 2015 and, in its 2011 national early childhood strategy, the government committed 0.3% of

GDP to delivering high quality early years education - a three-fold increase from the 0.1% of GDP spent in 2005.2

    This global policy shift is a big achievement in light of the strong evidence that the early years are a critical

period for the process of human capital formation (Black et al. 2017; Britto et al. 2017), and a time during which

there is great potential to influence children's development through intervention, such as high-quality preschool

(Cunha et al. 2006; Heckman 2006; Engle et al. 2007; Heckman et al. 2010; Heckman et al. 2013; Yoshikawa et al.

2013; Heckman and Mosso 2014; Almond et al. 2018). Recent evidence suggests that it is not enough to increase

spending on the early years, though; if the money is spent increasing access to poor quality services, it may deliver

few benefits or even have adverse effects (Rosero and Oosterbeek 2011; Engle et al. 2011; Britto et al. 2011; Araujo

and Schady 2015; Ichino et al. 2019). The great challenge, therefore, is to ensure that services are of sufficiently

high quality.

    Much remains unknown about which dimensions of quality are most important and how to improve these

dimensions at scale. Easily observable characteristics, which make up what is often categorized as structural 3

quality have traditionally been used as proxies for quality, although they appear to be poor stand-alone predictors

of child development and pupil achievement (Hanushek 2003; Hanushek and Rivkin 2006; Murnane and Ganimian

2014). There is some evidence, instead, suggesting that pedagogical practices and the quality of teacher-child
    1 Figures from World Bank EdStats' "Gross enrolment ratio, pre-primary, both sexes (%)" series. Available from: https://data.

worldbank.org/data-catalog/ed-stats. This definition gives the total enrollment in pre-primary education, regardless of age, as a
percentage of pre-primary age population. It classifies pre-primary education as "Education designed to support early development in
preparation for participation in school and society. Programmes designed for children from age 3 to the start of primary education."
(ISCED level 02). It should be noted that the preschools we study, while serving children up until age five or six, also serve children
under the age of three however there is a lack of internationally and historically comparable data on enrollment rates for programs
aimed at younger children.
    2 The government's 2011 spending commitment was made as part of its De Cero a Siempre (From Zero to Forever) early childhood

strategy. 2005 expenditure from "Government expenditure on pre-primary education as % of GDP (%)" series.
    3 Structural dimensions of quality relate to infrastructure, health, sanitation, safety, and characteristics of teachers and the group of

children. Process dimensions, on the other hand, reflect to children's experience, learning and development at preschool e.g. characteristics
(frequency, type, quality) of interaction between children and their caregivers.




                                                                     2
interaction (which we will refer to as process quality) have much higher explanatory power (Araujo, Carneiro,

Cruz-Aguayo, and Schady 2016). However, few studies have examined the causal impact of these factors and,

                                    ¨
among these, the results are mixed (Ozler et al. 2018; Yoshikawa et al. 2015). In the context of such ambiguity,

governments and other stakeholders struggle to identify ways to ensure that early years spending supports high-

quality service provision; work in the UK suggests that indicators currently used by the government to allocate

funding to preschools are not correlated with child outcomes (Blanden, Hansen, and Mcnally 2017)4 , and in the US

evidence on the link between the structural quality factors which make up the National Quality Standard Checklist5

and child development is very mixed (Hanushek 2003; NICHD Early Child Care Research Network 2002).

    In this study, we compare and contrast the effect of targeting different dimensions of preschool quality on

children's development. We analyze how both intended and unintended changes in the quantity and quality of

teachers' teaching, as well as changes in parental investments, generate these effects. In particular, we designed a

three-armed randomized controlled trial (RCT) around the rollout of a nationwide government program in Colombia

to improve the quality of public preschools for disadvantaged children. In one arm, public preschools received

additional resources (play materials and resources to hire more care-providers) to improve structural quality. In

the other, they additionally received a boost to process quality through the provision of teacher training on how

to improve the quality of day-to-day interactions with children. To our knowledge, this is the first study to

test rigorously and compare directly two substantively different approaches to improving preschool quality. This

comparison allows us to weigh up the relative effectiveness of different approaches for improving children's outcomes.

Further, our many sophisticated measures combined with latent-factor measurement models lets us to capture the

multi-dimensionality of preschool quality and child development, and thus allows us to provide evidence on the

mechanisms through which different types of improvements affect childrens outcomes. Finally, this study is built

around a real-life national program being implemented in a developing country context. Therefore, in addition

to moving forward our understanding of the link between preschool quality and child development, it informs

on realistic early childhood policy options for improving outcomes of disadvantaged populations rather than the

potential of early childhood programs that studies of well-resourced, typically small-scale and high-income country

based interventions speak to.
    4 The same study shows that where children go to preschool does matter suggesting that it is not the case that preschool does not

affect child development; just that the factors treated as indicators of quality by the government are unlikely to be the most relevant
ones (Blanden, Hansen, and Mcnally 2017).
    5 The checklist was developed by the National Institute for Early Education Research (Barnett, Hustedt, Friedman, Boyd, and

Ainsworth 2003; Barnett, Hustedt, Friedman, Boyd, and Ainsworth 2004) and includes teacher qualifications and in-service training,
class size, child-teacher ratio, whether there are screening and referral services as well as whether meals are provided.



                                                                  3
   As part of the trial, 120 public preschools - called "Hogares Infantiles" (HIs) - were randomized into one of three

treatment arms: (1) the government's "Hogar Infantil Mejorado " (HIM) quality improvement program, which

was being rolled-out nationally and consisted of increasing the availability of play materials and number of care-

providers, especially teaching assistants;6 (2) HIM plus an additional program focused on pedagogical training for

teachers (HIM+FE); and (3) pure "control" where the implementation of HIM was delayed.

   Our results provide stark new evidence that different approaches to increasing investment in the quality of

early education can have very different impacts. We show that, in this context, directing money to stand-alone

improvements in structural quality (arm 1) is not only ineffective, but potentially harmful since it appears to

cause teachers to substitute their effort and involvement in classroom activities for that of the less-qualified and

less-experienced new teaching assistants. In contrast, adding well-designed pedagogical training to such spending

(arm 2) more than offsets the negative effects on teacher behavior, raises the quality of the learning environment

directly observed in classrooms and improves children's cognition, language and school readiness by around 0.15 of

a standard deviation (SD), with the biggest gains of around 0.3SD observed for the most disadvantaged children.

   We make several contributions to the literature. First, this is one of only a handful of studies to assess the

effect of preschool quality improvement programs in a low- or middle-income country at scale and through existing

government infrastructure. Such an understanding is crucial for reconciling evidence showing that well-resourced

preschool programs (typically small in scale or in high-income countries) can have large and long-lasting positive

impacts (Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov 2006; Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev, and Yavitz 2010;

Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev 2013; Felfe and Lalive 2018; Havnes and Mogstad 2011) with evidence that large-

scale government-run programs in developing countries often do not (Rosero and Oosterbeek 2011; Rao et al. 2012;

Rao et al. 2014; Nores and Barnett 2010). Both the programs we study are scalable. The first, HIM, was rolled out

to HIs nationwide. We are thus assessing not only a scalable model but the effects of the program when actually

implemented at a national scale. The second, FE, was designed so that it could feasibly be expanded to all HIs.

The critical teacher training component of FE was run through the Colombian National University and most of the

training was carried out through videoconferencing technology to reduce costs and ensure that teachers could fit

the training around their busy schedules.

   Second, the study informs on which dimensions of quality should be targeted through quality-improvement

programs. Recent research suggests that enhancements aimed at structural components of quality alone, such
   6 "Hogar   Infantil Mejorado " means Improved HI.



                                                          4
as, physical infrastructure, teacher-child ratios and the endowment of toys and materials have little or no impact

on child development (Bernal, Attanasio, Pe~
                                           na, and Vera-Hern´
                                                            andez 2019), in line with findings on primary and

secondary education (Glewwe, Hanushek, Humpage, and Ravina 2011; Hanushek and Rivkin 2012). On the other

hand, evaluations of programs that, given a minimum level of structural quality, directly focus on improving process

quality through, for example, training to improve teacher­child interaction or the adoption of structured pedagogical

curricula, have often been found to have positive impacts on child development (Nores, Bernal, and Barnett 2019;

Bernal, Mart´
            inez, and Quintero 2015; Attanasio, Baker-Henningham, Bernal, Meghir, Pineda, and Rubio-Codina

2018; Araujo and Schady 2015). However, it is difficult to compare the impact of improving structural quality with

the impact of also targeting process quality by contrasting impacts found in different studies set in very different

contexts. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first randomized study to directly make this comparison.

   Third, we go beyond a simple comparison of the causal impacts of the two different approaches and provide evi-

dence on the mechanisms that generate these impacts - both the intended and unintended behavioral responses. An

understanding of these mechanisms is critical, especially for predicting how our findings might generalize to other

contexts. We show that providing additional support staff may have the unintended negative impact of reducing

the time that teachers spend doing educational activities with preschoolers. In contrast, we show that providing

teachers with training about early childhood development and support in developing high-quality classroom activi-

ties can reverse this negative impact and additionally increases the quality of directly observed classroom activities.

These findings may be relevant beyond preschool. For example, while the Tennessee Project STAR program found

that while increasing the intensity of teacher-student interactions through reducing class sizes improved children's

performance, the addition of teaching aides did not (Hanushek 1999; Gerber, Finn, Achilles, and Boyd-Zaharias

2001). Our findings suggest that a plausible explanation is that teachers may respond to additional human re-

sources in the classroom by reducing their own involvement but that training about the importance of high-quality

teacher-pupil interactions might mitigate this.

   A key feature of the study, which facilitates all three of these contributions, is more refined measurement than

is common in this literature. We use many and sophisticated measures of child development, of preschool quality

and of the quality of the home environment. We then use latent-factor measurement models, which explicitly

recognize the existence of measurement error, to extract efficient estimates of multiple dimensions of each of these

underlying constructs. To measure child development, for example, we use 15 different measures which cover




                                                          5
cognition, language, school readiness, executive function, pre-literacy and socio-emotional skills. We score the

measures using methods that use efficiently the information contained in children's responses to every item and

then use a factor model to assess the dimensionality of our measures and predict these underlying dimensions.

This type of approach is widely applied in the structural literature on child development (Attanasio, Cattan,

Fitzsimons, Meghir, and Rubio-Codina 2015; Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach 2010; Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix

2017; Agostinelli and Wiswall 2016) but much less frequently used in program evaluation despite its substantial

advantage of reducing measurement error which, given the standard practice of anchoring effect sizes to the standard

deviation of the untreated sample, not only reduces precision but also causes attenuation bias in the anchored

treatment effect. Our approach to measurement allows us to assess the impact of the two quality improvement

programs on multiple dimensions of child development and to do so with precision. Moreover, capturing multiple

dimensions of each of three important margins on which preschool teachers and parents might respond to the

programs ­ teachers' involvement in classroom activities, the quality of that involvement and parents' investments

in creating a stimulating environment at home ­ allows us to assess the mechanisms through which the programs

impact child development.

   The findings in this study are especially pertinent given that the part of the program which we find to be

ineffective, and potentially harmful (HIM), is now implemented nationwide. All HI preschools now receive the extra

resources for hiring additional staff and play materials, but without the pedagogical training program which we

find to be critical for translating this extra expenditure into positive impacts on child development. Our results,

therefore, offer evidence on a feasible and scalable way to significantly enhance the efficacy of the current government

quality improvement program. A rough assessment of costs suggests that the pedagogical training program could be

scaled at a one-off cost of US$5827 per HI and an ongoing cost, for training new teachers and running less-intensive

refresher training, of US$2206 per center per year, or an increase of 1.0% above current expenditures.7

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section outlines the interventions we study, our study

design and our empirical strategy. Section 3 outcomes of interest and how we measure them. In Section 4, we

present our results on both child outcomes and mechanisms. Section 5 concludes and discusses policy implications.
   7 All computations in USD henceforth, use the exchange rate in February 2013 (1,800 COP/USD) when the interventions we study

were implemented.




                                                              6
2       Interventions, Study Design and Empirical Strategy

2.1     Setting and Interventions

The preschools we consider in this study are Hogares Infantiles (HIs) which provide partially-subsidized preschool

for low socio-economic status children aged 5 years and younger.8 HIs are targetted at children whose parent(s)

are working and therefore who are at risk of inadequate childcare. The program is well-established; it is the oldest

public center-based childcare program in Colombia and has enrolled an average of 125 thousand children per year

during the last decade. There are now 1,008 HIs across the country which are run by the government with input

from parent associations. The preschools are typically located in fairly well-equipped community centers and employ

between 3 and 10 teachers who have some training in early education; each teacher cares for about 30 children. In

2011 the government of Colombia announced that the HIM upgrade of HIs would be a central component of its

US$1.28 million "De Cero a Siempre" (or From Zero to Forever) program (Bernal and Camacho 2012; Bernal and

Ram´
   irez 2019).


2.1.1     HIM


The Government of Colombia's Hogares Infantiles Mejorado (HIM, or improved HI) program provides HIs with

resources for (1) hiring classroom assistants, nutrition or health professionals, and professionals in child socio-

emotional development; and (2) buying toys, books and other pedagogical materials. The funds for the program

were provided on a per child basis: each center received $20 per child per month for the hiring component and a

one-off payment of $52 per child for the materials. The government provided some guidance on the level of hiring

centers should aim to achieve with this money: one full-time socio-emotional expert for every 200 children, one

full-time nutritionist for every 200 children and one full-time classroom assistant for every 50 children. Overall,

these improvements entailed a considerable financial commitment on the part of the government: a 30% increase

in per child expenditure relative to the business-as-usual unenhanced model (from $1,000 to $1,300 per year).

    To understand whether HIs indeed spent the additional resources on hiring we utilize data on number of children

in a given HI to compute the total budget allocated to each HI to spend on hiring new staff. We then use

personnel data, including data on salaries, collected at baseline and endline to calculate what proportion of the

budget allocated for hiring the additional personnel was spent by HIs in this way. This exercise suggests that on
    8 Occasionally,
                 HIs take children as young as 6 months when it is "proven that they do not have a responsible adult to care for
them". However, the vast majority of children enrolled in HIs are 18 months or older.



                                                               7
average hiring compliance was high with more than 70% of the money allocated for hiring socio-emotional experts,

nutritionists and classroom assistants spent in this way across the two treatment arms.

   Although HIs spent most of the money allocated as prescribed, the government guidelines on the professional-

child ratios that HIs should aim to reach through this hiring appear to have been overly optimistic given actual

market wages. The great majority of HIs (90%) had employed a nutritionist, a socio-emotional expert and at

least one classroom assistant by endline. However, less than 10% were able to achieve the recommended full-time

equivalent personnel-child ratios.


2.1.2      FE


The teacher training and reading programs were designed by a well-established Colombian NGO, Fundaci´  ´
                                                                                                    on Exito

(FE), in partnership with the Colombian National University, as an additional enhancement to the government

improvements.9 The FE upgrade began in June 2013 and was completed in May 2014.

   The teacher training program was planned, coordinated and implemented by expert professionals from the

departments of psychology and education at the Colombian National University. The aim of the program was to

train teachers on how to design and implement activities that promote children's development. The curriculum

covered technical guidelines for early childhood services; child development from 18 to 36 months of age; nutrition;

brain development; cognitive development; early literacy; the use of art, music, photography and body language

for child development; mathematical concepts during early childhood; and pedagogical strategies during early

childhood.

   The training was delivered through three components: (1) instruction through 16 monthly 3-hour long sessions

delivered via videoconferencing; (2) video tutoring sessions of three hours per week in which participants worked with

their tutors on-line on developing and refining classroom activities; and (3) on-site coaching where instructors carried

out one classroom observation of participating teachers to provide specific feedback on their content and pedagogical

methodology. The program was offered for free but participating teachers incurred costs of transportation to monthly

sessions, required internet access and needed materials for preparation of new activities.

   The teacher training component of the FE enhancement was implemented between June 2013 and June 2014.
   9 The  FE program also included additional nutritional improvements which aimed to increase calorie provision by 15% over the 60%
of daily requirements already provided by HIs. We have documented elsewhere that under-nutrition did not appear to be a particular
problem in this population at baseline and, perhaps not surprisingly therefore, we find no evidence of HIM+FE having any impact
on any measure of nutritional status (Andrew, Attanasio, Bernal, Cordona, Krutikova, Heredia, Medina, Pe~     na, Rubio-Codina, and
Vera-Hernandez 2018).




                                                                 8
Center directors nominated 2-3 teachers per treated HI to participate, with some additional teachers from the

same centers selected to replace teachers who were not able to attend all of the sessions or who dropped out.

Administrative records indicate that 114 teachers in the 40 HIs assigned to HIM+FE started the training. Out of

these, 99 teachers (or 87%) were certified as having completed it. Although the training was designed for teachers,

in some cases other staff, including classroom assistants, directors or other senior staff, additionally participated as

well.

   The reading program aimed to provide parents and teachers with strategies to motivate their children to read,

and emphasized reading as a way for parents to bond with their children. It had three components: reading

and music promotion, encouraging effective bonding in families through reading, and building an appropriate

environment for reading in the preschools. More specifically, the program involved providing books and book bags

to centers, providing training workshops to parents and teachers focused on reading with children as well as running

some reading workshops directly with children. The design and delivery of the program were commissioned to a

Colombian NGO devoted to promoting good reading habits among youth.



2.2     Study Design and Sample

We designed a three-armed cluster randomized controlled trial around the national rollout of the Colombian govern-

ment's preschool quality enhancement program to assess both the impact of HIM and HIM enhanced with a teacher

training and reading program (HIM+FE). Randomization was at the level of the HI with 40 HIs randomized into

each of the three arms: (i) HIM, where preschools received the government quality improvement program in line

with all other, non-study, HIs, (ii) HIM+FE, where preschools received the FE enhancements in addition to the

HIM program and (iii) a pure control group where the implementation of HIM was delayed. This design allows us to

test several hypotheses which we set out in a pre-analysis plan held at the AEA trial registry (AEARCTR-0001246).

First, we are able to study whether the government improvement program had an impact on children attending the

upgraded centers relative to those in the "business-as-usual" HIs. Second, we are able to evaluate the full impact

of the HIM+FE program relative to "business-as-usual" HIs. And finally, we are able to test whether adding the

FE component enhances the effectiveness of the government upgrade.

   To select the 120 study HIs, we first obtained GPS co-ordinates for the 248 HIs in eight study cities. In order

to increase the likelihood of having a balanced sample, we organized HIs into groups of three geographically close




                                                           9
HIs, from which we selected 40 triplets for inclusion in the study based on the HIs having at least 15 children in

our target age range (18 to 36 months at baseline). Then, within each triplet, we randomly assigned one HI to the

control group, one HI to the HIM treatment group and one HI to the HIM+FE treatment group. Randomization

and sample selection were carried out over November-December 2012.

    This procedure yielded a final sample of 120 HIs, with 40 in each of the three groups. On average, the HIs in

the sample had 48 children between the ages of 18 and 36 months from whom we drew a baseline sample of 15 to

17 children per HI.1011 Baseline data were collected between March and May 2013.12 The total baseline sample

consisted of 1,987 children (663 in HIM centers, 663 in HIM+FE centers and 661 in control group HIs). At endline,

18 months later during October and November 2014, we tried to reach all children in the study sample, regardless

of whether they were still attending an HI or not, and regardless of the length of their exposure to the programs.

The RCT flow chart (Figure B.1) shows how the final study sample was selected.



2.3     Balance and Attrition

As shown in the flow chart in Figure B.1, the attrition rate was relatively low ­ of the 1,987 children in the baseline

sample, we have complete child development assessments for all but 155 (7.80%) ­ and was not related to treatment

assignment (Table A.1). The sample at endline is largely balanced across key child and household characteristics

measured at baseline (Table 1). Exceptions include a significantly higher proportion of male children in the two

treatment groups than the control group; and that the children in the HIM+FE group are older than those in the

HIM group and the control group. We address the two baseline imbalances by controlling for children's age and

gender in our empirical strategy.

    The majority of children (72.2%) continued attending the same HI throughout the study period; by endline,

9.2% were enrolled in a different HI (mostly one not in the study sample); 13.1% were enrolled in a different public

or private child care service; and 5.5% were not enrolled in any type of child care service. The probability that

children remained in the same HI was not impacted by treatment status.
  10 HIs  were selected so that there was at least 15 children aged 18-36 months at baseline in each. Where there was 15, 16 or 17
children in the target age range, we included them all. When there were more, we randomly selected 17.
   11 Power calculations assumed program effects of 0.20 of a SD for all pair-wise comparisons on cognitive development. We assumed

an intra-cluster correlation coefficient of 0.035 which was similar to what we observed in the baseline data for cognitive development
(measured by the Ages & Stages Questionnaire and conditional on observables). Given our assumptions, we calculated that we would
require 15 children per cluster (HI) to achieve 80% power at a 5% significance level. To allow for attrition between baseline and follow-up
data collection (of about 10%), we assessed 17 children per cluster whenever possible.
   12 Baseline data collection happened after the start of the HIM rollout, which began in February 2013, due to delays in data collection.

However, we argue in footnote 27 that this is not driving our results.




                                                                    10
Table 1: Baseline sociodemographic characteristics and child outcomes by randomization status for analysis sample

                                                                              HIM vs.       HIM+FE vs.      HIM+FE vs.
                                       Control     HIM only     HIM+FE                                                        N
                                                                              Control         Control          HIM


    Male                                0.469        0.538        0.521     [p = 0.004]     [p = 0.062]      [p = 0.582]    1819
                                       (0.499)      (0.499)      (0.500)    {p = 0.010}     {p = 0.075}      {p = 0.590}

    Age (months)                        29.71        30.06        28.96     [p = 0.238]     [p = 0.067]      [p = 0.005]    1819
                                       (4.607)      (4.387)      (4.892)    {p = 0.334}     {p = 0.054}      {p = 0.012}

    HH income (million COP)            1345.4       1292.2       1373.3     [p = 0.406]     [p = 0.744]      [p = 0.208]    1819
                                      (751.626)    (727.624)    (816.559)   {p = 0.441}     {p = 0.690}      {p = 0.242}

    Mother's education (years)          12.69        12.35        12.67     [p = 0.081]     [p = 0.934]      [p = 0.083]    1802
                                       (2.722)      (2.608)      (2.628)    {p = 0.068}     {p = 0.918}      {p = 0.087}

    Father's education (years)          12.08        12.02        12.16     [p = 0.780]     [p = 0.741]      [p = 0.483]    1699
                                       (3.034)      (2.986)      (2.962)    {p = 0.802}     {p = 0.722}      {p = 0.506}

    Household size                      3.384        3.434        3.239     [p = 0.625]     [p = 0.159]      [p = 0.061]    1819
                                       (1.639)      (1.613)      (1.522)    {p = 0.634}     {p = 0.174}      {p = 0.044}

    ASQ Child Development              -0.0280      0.0830       -0.0547    [p = 0.307]     [p = 0.849]      [p = 0.138]    1817
    Factor Score                       (1.021)      (1.023)      (0.951)    {p = 0.290}     {p = 0.809}      {p = 0.154}

    Language Development               0.0317       0.0284       -0.0363    [p = 0.990]     [p = 0.430]      [p = 0.472]    1819
    (MacArthur Bates CDI)              (1.009)      (1.011)      (0.964)    {p = 0.968}     {p = 0.460}      {p = 0.461}

    Socio-Emotional                    0.0201       0.0788       -0.0974    [p = 0.443]     [p = 0.190]      [p = 0.028]    1819
    Factor Score (ASQ:SE)              (1.040)      (0.912)      (1.036)    {p = 0.467}     {p = 0.196}      {p = 0.028}
   Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 using bootstrap p-values. Baseline characteristics by treatment status for children
  included in the analysis sample (all children with non-missing child development assessment data at endline). Single-hypothesis
  two-sided p-values calculated 2 ways: (i) [bootstrap] and (ii) {randomization - t}. Bootstrapped statistics use block-bootstraps,
  resampling triplets with replacement, and comprise 5000 iterations. Randomization inference (5000 iterations) accounts for
  clustering at HI level and stratification by triplets. ASQ Child Development Factor Score is the first factor from an exploratory
  factor analysis of the five subscales of the ASQ: Communication, Gross Motor, Problem Solving, Personal-Social and Fine
  Motor. Socio-Emotional Factor Score is the first factor from an exploratory factor analysis of the seven subscales of the ASQ:SE:
  Self Regulation, Compliance, Communication, Adaptive Functioning, Autonomy, Affect and Interaction with People. Child
  development measures age-standardised and scaled to have zero mean and unit variance across the analysis sample.




                                                                 11
2.4     Empirical Strategy

We evaluate impacts using an intention-to-treat approach. Thus, our analysis sample includes all study children

regardless of whether they attended the center throughout the intervention period. Given the experimental design

                                                                          HIM                   HIM +F E
we estimate the impact of a child's baseline HI being allocated to HIM (Tlm   = 1) or HIM+FE (Tlm        = 1)

on final outcomes through OLS:


                                                    HIM       HIM +F E
                                     Yclm = 0 + 1 Tlm   + 2 Tlm        + Xclm  +                 clm                                (2.1)



Where Yclm is the outcome of interest for child c, in child care center l, in triplet m. Xclm is a pre-specified set of

control variables added to improve efficiency.          clm   is the random error term, which we allow to be clustered at the

level of the sampling triplet.

    Pre-specified baseline controls comprise the child's gender, a set of city dummies, a set of tester or interviewer

dummies, and, if applicable, the baseline levels of the outcome of interest.1314 We administered different assessments

of child development at baseline and endline ­ endline measures are outlined in Section 3.1 ­ to ensure that

we used age-appropriate instruments. Baseline child-development controls therefore include five subscales of an

extended version of the ASQ-3 to measure Communication, Gross Motor, Problem Solving, Personal-Social and

Fine Motor (Squires, Bricker, and Twombly 2009); MacArthur Bates Communicative Development Inventories

(Jackson-Maldonado et al. 2013; Jackson-Maldonado et al. 2003) to measure language development;15 and ASQ:SE

(Squires, Bricker, and Twombly 2002) to measure socio-emotional development.

    We report 1 , the average impact of HIM relative to control, 2 , the average impact of HIM+FE relative to

control, and 2 - 1 , the average impact of HIM+FE over and above HIM. We construct standard errors using

a block bootstrap, re-sampling the 40 randomization triplets with replacement (5000 iterations). We construct

two-sided single-hypothesis p -values in two ways: (1) through the same block bootstrap; (2) through randomization

inference (randomization-t ). Randomization inference has the advantage of providing exact tests where the size is

unaffected by sample size, the distribution of errors and the joint distribution of the dependent variables (Young

2018).16
  13 Pre-analysis  plan available at the AEA RCT Registry (ID AEARCTR-0001246).
  14  The inclusion of tester or interviewer dummies depends on whether the outcome was measured by the tester (psychologist) or the
household interviewer.
   15 We extended the ASQ for each age-specific questionnaire by adding the last three non-overlapping items in each subscale from

the age-specific questionnaire below and the first three non-overlapping items in each subscale from the age-specific questionnaire above.
This was to ensure the instrument had sufficient discrimination over the entire support of baseline child development.
   16 Although, randomization inference only provides exact tests when the null hypothesis in question is sharp, in our case this




                                                                   12
    Whenever we test the same hypothesis (i.e. the difference between any two treatment arms) on multiple

conceptually-similar pre-specified outcomes we also present p -values that are adjusted for multiple testing across

these outcomes. To do this we use the stepwise procedure described in List, Shaikh, and Xu (2016) which, building

on Romano and Wolf (2005) and Romano and Wolf (2010), provides balanced asymptotic control of the family-wise

error rate. In running the procedure we use the block bootstrap described above, studentizing by the bootstrap

standard error, to simulate the distribution of studentized test statistics under the assumption that all null hypothe-

ses are true. Importantly, this method accounts for interdependence between hypothesis tests, which increases the

tests' power compared to classical methods.




3     Outcomes and Measurement

To understand the impact of two approaches to improving preschool quality on child development and the mech-

anisms that generated any impacts, we seek to estimate the effects of the two approaches on three conceptual

constructs: child development, preschool quality and the quality of the home environment. Each of these constructs

is potentially multidimensional. As we discuss below, our data is very rich; we collected a variety of measures

related, although not perfectly, to each of these constructs. Therefore, we need a framework that relates these con-

ceptual constructs to the instruments that measure them and which, in turn, allows us to use information contained

in our multiple error-ridden measurements to obtain predictions of the underlying, potentially multi-dimensional,

constructs. In this section, we describe our methodology which uses an explicit model of measurement and mea-

surement error. The explicit consideration of a measurement system allows us to use all the available information

efficiently thereby reducing measurement error. Measurement error in outcome variables is of particular concern

when the size of treatment effects is anchored by the variance of the outcome variables, as is common the the child

development literature. Moreover, using the multiple measures to predict, fewer, underlying dimensions reduces the

loss of power resulting from correcting inference for testing multiple conceptually similar outcomes.

    Let q be a vector representing construct q , where q can be child development, preschool quality or the quality

of the home environment; q cannot be directly observed. Then let mj,q be a measure j that is informative, but not

perfectly, about q and let       j,q
                                       be the measurement error associated with how q maps into mj,q . Our approach
corresponds to the treatment having zero effect on each child rather than on average, Young (2018) shows that in the case where the
sharp null is false randomization-t still performs well in practice and hence we use randomization-t over straightforward randomization
inference.




                                                                  13
specifies a function that represents the measurement system:



                                                         mj,q = g j (q ,   jq
                                                                                )                                                 (3.1)



The way we specify the function g j () depends on the nature of the measurement we have. Given this structure, we

can use estimates of the parameters of function in equation (3.1) and a set of measures mjq to obtain estimates of

the factors q .

    When we have sufficient measures, we assess the dimensionality of the conceptual constructs we consider and

estimate underlying latent factors for each dimension. In this section, we discuss our choice of measures, how we

score them, how we assess the dimensionality of the underlying constructs and how we then predict esach dimension.



3.1     Child Development

Child development is a multidimensional construct (Cunha et al. 2010; Attanasio et al. 2015; Attanasio et al.

2017) and preschool has been shown to impact various dimensions (Datta Gupta and Simonsen 2010; Berlinski

et al. 2009; Chetty et al. 2011; Heckman et al. 2013; Araujo et al. 2016; Kline and Walters 2016). Our child

development assessments sought to capture cognition, receptive language, expressive language, school readiness,

executive function and socio-emotional development using fifteen different instruments (Table A.2).17 Preserving

the construct validity ­ the extent to which an instrument measures what it aims to measure ­ and the reliability or

consistency of an instrument when translating and adapting it across languages and cultures is challenging (Pe~
                                                                                                              na

2007). Therefore, we selected assessments that had previously been validated for use in Latin American populations;

most had previously been used in Colombia (Andrew et al. 2018; Bernal and Fern´
                                                                              andez 2013).

    Trained psychologists, who were blinded to treatment status, carried out eight direct assessments of children's

cognition, receptive language, expressive language, school readiness and executive function at endline in the HIs.

Five of these instruments, covering concept formation, fluid reasoning, memory for words, rhymes and expressive

language, came from the Woodcock-Mu~
                                   noz-III (WM) tests of cognition and achievement (Schrank et al. 2005)

which are Spanish versions of the well-known Woodcock-Johnson tests (Woodcock 1977). To measure receptive

language we used the Spanish version of the gold-standard Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) - Test Visual

de Im´
     agenes Peabody (TVIP) (Dunn et al. 1986) - and we measured school readiness using the Daberon-II (Danzer
  17 In this section we outline our outcome measures of child development ­ i.e. those collected at endline. For information about child

development measures collected and baseline and used as controls see Section 2.4.



                                                                  14
et al. 1991). Inhibitory control, a dimension of executive functioning, was measured using the non-verbal Pencil

Tapping Task (Diamond and Taylor 1996). Following test guidelines, two instruments, the Pencil Tapping Task

and the Sound Awareness assessment from the WM Achievement battery, were only performed with children above

48 months of age.

    Directly assessing socio-emotional development in young children is challenging. We relied on maternal re-

ports, collected as part of the household survey, using the Socio-Emotional Questionnaire in the Ages and Stages

Questionnaires (ASQ-SE) (Squires, Bricker, and Twombly 2002). We used all seven subscales of the ASQ-SE,

each measuring a different aspect of socio-emotional development: Self-Regulation, Compliance, Communication,

Adaptive Functioning, Autonomy, Affect and Interaction with People.18

    For child development outcomes, we specify the measurement system in equation (3.1) in two steps. We first

use an Item Response Theory (IRT) model, which we describe below, to convert a number of binary item responses

into a continuous measure, effectively creating a way to score the relevant test. We then use these continuous

measures to identify the relevant dimension of the process, estimate a measurement system and obtain estimates of

the relevant latent factors.

    For thirteen out of fifteen assessments we have item-level data available, i.e. how each child, or mother for the

socio-emotional assessments, answered each item in the assessment. For these cases we use a two-parameter IRT

model to score the assessments.19 IRT models whether or not a child answers each item in a given assessment

correctly as depending on one underlying latent variable ­ representing the child's ability in that assessment ­ and

an additive idiosyncratic error which is assumed to be type-I extreme value across items and individuals. The latent

ability variable is assumed to be normally distributed with zero mean and unit variance in the population. Items

may vary in both their difficulty ­ how likely is a child of average skill to answer correctly ­ and their discriminatory

power ­ how sensitive the probability of answering correctly is to the underlying latent ability. IRT scoring proceeds

in two stages. In the first, we estimate the difficulty and discrimination of each item from the item responses and

assumptions on the distribution of unobservables. In the second we construct assessment scores for each child as

the mean of the posterior distribution of the latent ability variable conditional on the child's item responses. See

Appendix D.1 for details of the identification and estimation of IRT models.

    There are several advantages to using a structural IRT measurement model to score assessments. First, if the
  18  Possible responses to items in the ASQ:SE are `most of the time', `sometimes' and `rarely or never'. Given most respondents chose
the option indicating their child had higher levels of socio-emotional development, we code these responses as 1 and the other two as 0.
   19 Two child development assessments, the Woodcock-Mu~     noz fluid reasoning and the Pencil Tapping Task, simply measure the number
of correct responses a child gave. For these two measures we take the count variable as our pre-standardized score.


                                                                  15
assumptions of the IRT model are correct then this method uses the information contained within item responses

efficiently and allows us to construct estimates of children's skills with the lowest expected error. This is especially

relevant when items vary substantially in their difficulty and discrimination power, as may be likely in our situation

given the instruments we used were not originally developed for, nor validated in, our population. Second, IRT is well

placed to deal with the `stopping rules' that are features of many of our assessments. These require, for example, that

a test is stopped after item x if a child has obtained less than a certain score until that point. With such assessments

it is not appropriate to simply use `naive' raw scores calculated by adding up the number of correct answers since

different children attempt different number of questions. Moreover, whether a child attempts a question is often

not a smooth function of their performance in the previous questions so there are sharp discontinuities in the

distribution of the naive scores at the specified cutoffs. IRT corrects for these problems since in this framework,

conditional on her latent ability, whether or not a child attempts a given item is only a function of idiosyncratic

errors associated with previous items. The resulting predicted scores are, therefore, no longer discontinuous around

the cut-offs.20

    Our IRT scoring model gives several useful indicators of how well different instruments performed. Well-

performing instruments, i.e. those where we can extract a lot of information about the underlying latent skill

from the item responses, are those with items with high discriminatory power in the ability range that most chil-

dren are situated in and where items differ in their difficulty levels. Item Characteristic Curves (ICCs) in Figure

B.2, which plot the probability of a child answering each item correctly as a function of their underlying latent

ability, show that our measures of receptive language, expressive language, memory for words and school readi-

ness performed well: the ICCs have steep positive slopes (i.e. high discriminatory power) in the range where

most children are situated (-3 to 3) and items differ in their difficulties. Our measures of concept formation and

sound awareness on the other hand performed poorly, primarily because these assessments were too hard for many

children so that many did not progress past the initial few items, leaving very little information. Assessments of

socio-emotional skills (subscales of the ASQ:SE) appear substantially less discriminatory with items having flatter

ICCs (Figure B.3). The Affect subscale performed especially poorly. We can also estimate the mean reliability

for each measure, namely the proportion of the variance of the predicted score that captures true variance in the
   20 Often, an official scoring algorithms is provided; it converts patterns of responses into standardized scores using parameters

estimated using a one-parameter IRT model on a norming sample. The validity of these, however, depends crucially on how similar
the performance of items in the norming sample is to the study sample. This is an issue for work with specific sub-groups or contexts
not covered by the norming sample. For example, the norming sample for the Woodcock-Mu~     noz test consists of 1,413 Spanish speaking
children from the USA, 6 Latin American countries and Spain (Schrank et al. 2005) who are likely to differ substantially from our
sample of children in Colombia.



                                                                  16
underlying construct. Again, the estimated mean reliabilities suggest that concept formation and sound awareness

performed substantially worse than other directly assessed measures and that assessments of socio-emotional skills

were less informative than measures of cognition, language and school readiness (Tables A.3 and A.5).

    We standardize the IRT scores for age non-parametrically. We use locally weighted regressions to estimate the

mean and variance in the control group at each age and then use these to create z -scores, for each instrument

(see Appendix D.2 for details). We label these age-standardized scores mj
                                                                        c , for child c's score for measure j . The


scaling of these scores, which have zero mean and unit variance in the control group at each age, implies that

the magnitude of treatment effects can be interpreted relative to the age-specific standard deviation of the control

group. We exclude from the analysis observations with standardized values lower than 3 standard deviations below

the mean (<-3SD), since we consider this to be an indication of either the assessment being carried out incorrectly

or of potential disability.

    Given the challenges of adapting child development assessments across contexts (Pe~
                                                                                      na 2007) we check our

measures pass basic tests of internal validity. Six of our eight direct measures of child skills (measuring cognition,

language, school readiness and executive function) are strongly correlated with age, baseline child development and

household wealth in the expected direction (Table A.3) and are strongly positively correlated with one another

(Table A.4). The two measures that presented problems in the IRT procedure (concept formation and sound

awareness) are the ones that are not strongly correlated with these variables. Maternal report measures of socio-

emotional development show lower correlations with age, baseline socio-emotional development, household wealth

and maternal education (Table A.5) and with one another (Table A.6) than the direct-assessment measures. This

could be a feature of socio-emotional skills or a sign that the maternal-report measures are of poorer quality.

    Based on a well-established literature on the different domains of early child development we pre-specified three,

not mutually exclusive, groups of measures: (i) cognitive development, language development and school readiness

(which we refer to as CLS), (ii) pre-literacy skills and (iii) socio-emotional skills.21 Within each group, we assess

the dimensionality of the contained measures - the extent to which each represents a separate construct or whether

they can be summarized by fewer constructs. For each of these three groups of measures, of size J, we estimate a

linear exploratory factor analysis model:

                                                           mc =  c  + c
  21 Pre-specifiedin pre-analysis plan held at AEA trial registry (AEARCTR-0001246). CLS includes Receptive Language, Concept
formation, Fluid reasoning , Expressive language, Memory for words, School readiness and Inhibitory control. Pre-literacy skills include
Receptive language, Expressive Language, Memory for words, and Rhymes. Socio-emotional skills includes the seven subscales of the
ASQ-SE.


                                                                  17
where mc = [m1    2     J                                                           1      k
             c , mc ...mc ] is the vector of J age-standardized scores, where  c = [c , ...c ] is a vector of underlying


latent factors of dimension k < J ,  is the k × J matrix of factor loadings and c is a vector of errors which

are assumed to be uncorrelated with  c and independent from one another. The un-rotated factor loadings are

pinned down by assuming the underlying latent factors are uncorrelated and normalizing the scale of the variance to

V ( c ) = I. We estimate factor loadings using the iterated principal-factor method and follow the standard method

of retaining all factors with an eigenvalue greater than one (Kaiser 1960). In this analysis we drop three measures

that have factor loadings of less than 0.4, as specified in the pre-analysis plan: concept formation, sound awareness

and affect. These measures all performed poorly in IRT analysis and exhibited poor internal validity. We use the

estimated factor loadings to predict values of these underlying latent factors for each child using the regression

method (Thomson 1939).

   All three groupings result in a single factor being retained (Tables A.7 and A.8) leaving us with three dimensions

of child development on which to assess the program's impacts: Cognitive, Language and School Readiness (CLS),

Pre-literacy and Socio-Emotional skills.



3.2    Preschool Quality

In addition to extensive measurement of child development, a distinguishing feature of this study is in-depth

assessment of the quantity and quality of teachers' classroom activities.

   We collected detailed teacher-reported data on the type and frequency of activities teachers had performed in the

classroom over the week prior to the interview using the Teacher Survey of Early Education Quality (Hallam, Rous,

Riley-Ayers, and Epstein 2011). In particular, we asked whether the teacher had performed each of 36 different

activities and, if so, on how many days. We split the activities into "Learning and Development Activities", such

as reading stories, teaching skills, storytelling and singing, and "Personal Care Activities" related to basic care of

children such as changing nappies, brushing teeth and washing hands, naps and feeding routines. We calculate

measures for the two activity types as the sum, across all relevant activities, of the number of days on which the

teachers performed the activity.

   The pedagogical training targeted the quality, in addition to the quantity, of classroom activities. We measured

quality by direct observation using the Early Childhood Environmental Rating Scale - Revised (ECERS-R) (Harms,

Clifford, and Cryer 1998). The ECERS-R measures the quality of the learning environment across six dimensions




                                                          18
­ Space and Furnishings, Personal Care Routines, Language and Literacy, Learning Activities, Interaction and

Program Structure. The instrument has been used extensively across a wide range of cultural and economic contexts

and has been shown to be predictive of child gains across cognitive (Peisner-Feinberg et al. 2001; Burchinal et al.

2000) and social-emotional skills (Sylva et al. 2006).

    The ECERS-R was carried out by psychologists, who were trained for three weeks, and each observation lasted

at least half a school day. Due to logistical and budgetary constraints, we only conducted ECERS-R in 172 of the

847 classrooms in our sample.22

    The ECERS-R is comprised of 43 individual items, each measuring a different aspect of quality, for example

`encouraging children to communicate'. Each item is formed of around 10 sub-items grouped under the headings

`inadequate', `minimal', `good' and `excellent' to which the observer must answer `true' or `false'. We followed

the official administration procedure, which unfortunately turned out to be poorly suited to our context due to

stopping rules which resulted in a high number of non-random missing values for items in the `minimal', `good' and

`excellent' categories (See Appendix D.3 for details). We therefore only use items from the `inadequate' category

in our analysis. While this overcomes the challenge posed by missing data, it implies that the sub-items that make

up our quality measures are informative on the absence of poor practices rather than the presence of good ones.

    We group together all sub-items in the Personal Care Routines, Language and Literacy, Learning Activities,

Interaction and Program Structure subscales to construct a measure of process quality while using items in the

Space and Furnishings subscale to construct a separate scale.23 We drop items with very low variance (< 0.10) and

predict the underlying latent process quality and space and furnishings for every classroom using a two-parameter

IRT model, as described above.

    ICCs for both measures show that while the majority of the items perform well and are informative about

underlying classroom quality, they tend to be more informative at lower levels of underlying quality meaning the

measures have more discriminatory power in identifying changes in quality in poor quality classrooms than high
   22 The subsample was chosen as follows. At baseline, we randomly chose 216 classrooms attended by study children in 54 HI's selected

randomly, stratifying by city, in which to measure classroom quality using either the ECERS-R (suitable for classrooms with children
over two years of age, 60% of classrooms) or ITERS-R (corresponding assessment for classes of children aged 0-2, 40% of classrooms).
At follow-up, we had sufficient budget to collect observations on 211 classrooms in 54 centers. We chose half these classrooms to be the
same classrooms we had observed at baseline (randomly chosen) and the other half to be classrooms attended by children in the sample
at follow-up (since study children had moved on from their baseline classrooms). This resulted in observations in 172 classrooms with
children older than two years where we carried out the ECERS-R and 39 classrooms with children aged 0-2 where we carried out the
ITERS-R. Given the small size of the ITERS-R sample at endline and given that there are no common items with the ECERS-R that
would allow us to create a common measure, we drop these classrooms from our classroom analysis sample.
   23 To increase the sample size for estimating IRT parameters we pool ECERS-R measures from baseline and end-line giving a total

sample of 296 observations. We drop items that were found to be preventing model convergence. These were items where the estimated
discriminatory parameter after 5 iterations was negative implying that the item was functioning poorly.




                                                                  19
quality classrooms (Figure B.4).



3.3     Quality of the Home Environment

We assessed the quality of the home environment in order to investigate whether the programs, either directly or

indirectly, impacted parental behavior. We used an adapted version of UNICEF's Family Care Indicators (FCIs)

which were themselves adapted from the Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment (Hamadani, Tofail,

Hilaly, Huda, Engle, and Grantham-McGregor 2010). We focus on the two dimensions measured by the FCI that

have previously been shown to be predictive of child development ­ the variety of play materials and play activities

(Hamadani, Tofail, Hilaly, Huda, Engle, and Grantham-McGregor 2010). Compared to the original FCI, which

asks parents yes/no questions about the play activities the child engaged in over the past three days and the play

materials the child played with, we extended both subscales due to concerns that binary items are insufficient to

pick up adequate variation in the quality of the home environment outside of contexts of extreme poverty (Culhane,

Cunha, Elo, and Pham 2016). In particular, for the play materials subscale we collected information on the number

of each type of toy that a child played with.24 For the play activities subscale, we distinguish between play activities

carried out with the mother and with the father and separately recorded those carried out over the last five weekdays

and over the last weekend.25 For each we recorded the number of times or the amount of time taken on the activity

(rather than just whether it had been done).

    With the three domains of, first, play materials, second, play activities with the mother and, third, play activ-

ities with the father we estimate an exploratory factor analysis model, as described by equation 3, to assess the

dimensionality of our multiple continuous measures. We find that, for each domain, all measures load onto a single

underlying latent factor (Tables A.9, A.10 and A.11) which we then predict for each child.




4     Results

In this section, we report our results. We start with the estimates of the impacts of HIM and HIM+FE programs

on child development followed by analysis of impact heterogeneity; we then move onto an analysis of possible
   24 As in the original FCI we asked about play materials across the following categories: Things which make/play music; Things for

drawing/writing; Picture books for children (not school-books); Things meant for stacking, constructing, building (blocks); Things for
moving around (balls, bats, etc.); Toys for learning shapes and colours; Things for pretending (dolls, tea-set, etc.).
   25 As in the original FCI we asked about play activities across the following categories: Read books or look at picture-books with

child; Tell stories to child; Sing songs with child; Take child outside home place; Play with the child with toys; Spend time with child
in naming things, counting, drawing.




                                                                  20
mechanisms that could explain the estimated impacts.



4.1     Effects on Child Development

The results show a stark difference between the impacts of the HIM and HIM+FE programs (Table 2). HIM, the

government quality improvement program, did not have the positive impact on child development that it aimed to

achieve. There is even some indication that HIM may have had adverse effects relative to the `business-as-usual'

control preschools. The estimated HIM treatment effect is negative for all three dimensions of child development

(see Table 2 and Table 3) with quite a large negative treatment effect for pre-literacy skills (-10% of a standard

deviation) which is approaching statistical significance (p = 0.141).2627

    In contrast, the enhanced program (HIM+FE) significantly improved children's cognition, language and school

readiness by 15% of a standard deviation relative to the `business-as-usual' control preschools. The final row of

Table 2 shows that the addition of the FE component to the HIM upgrade, the current status-quo, increased the

effectiveness of the government quality enhancement program by raising children's cognitive, language and school

readiness score by 18% of a standard deviation and pre-literacy score by nearly 15% of a standard deviation. These

effects remain highly statistically significant once p-values are corrected for testing hypotheses on the two outcomes

simultaneously. Examining effects of HIM+FE on the individual measures of child development, presented in Table

A.12, suggests that this effect is driven by improvements in performance on tests on fluid reasoning and expressive

language. The stark difference in the effectiveness of the government quality improvement program and the quality

improvement program combined with the FE program suggests that the FE component is crucial.

    The effects of the HIM+FE program, relative to the `business as usual' control, come through most strongly

for the older children in the sample and are not significantly different from zero once children under the age of 48

months at follow-up are included in the sample although the difference between HIM+FE and HIM continues to

be significant (Table 2, final column).28 This could either be because the intervention was genuinely more effective
   26 While all tables report p-values calculated through randomization inference (randomization-t) in addition to through a block

bootstrap, we notice that these are typically very similar. Thus we report statistical significance on the basis of p-values calculated
through the block bootstrap.
   27 While baseline measures were taken after HIM had formally begun, we see no very short term impacts (see baseline balance table).

If any very short term impacts, in the same direction as impacts at endline, were present then the inclusion of baseline controls would
attenuate estimated impacts. Our results are robust to excluding child development controls from baseline. Results on the impact of
FE over and above HIM would be unaffected since FE began after baseline.
   28 As described, the Pencil Tapping Test (PTT) is not suitable for children under the age of 48 months. Therefore, the complete

cognitive, language and school readiness measure can only be constructed for children older than 48 months at follow-up (1,071 out of
1,819). Estimates in the first and last columns of Table 2 show that while HIM+FE had an impact on the older sub-sample for whom
the complete measures can be constructed, there are no impacts once the younger children are included on the measure which excludes
the PTT. Column 3 further shows that this difference is not being driven by the exclusion of the PTT assessment since the significance
and size of HIM+FE impact on the older sub-sample does not change once PTT is excluded.




                                                                  21
  Table 2: Impact of HIM and FE on Cognition, Language and School Readiness and Pre-Literacy

                                              Pre-Specified Analysis                         Exploratory Analysis
                                    Cognitive,                                                  CLS               CLS
                                                                 Pre-literacy
                                 Language and                                               (exc. PTT,       (exc. PTT,
                                                                    Skills
                             School Readiness (CLS)                                       limited sample)    full sample)
                                        (1)                            (2)                      (3)              (4)


       HIM only                        -0.030                       -0.100                    -0.041            -0.066
                                      (0.079)                      (0.068)                   (0.079)           (0.066)
                             [p = 0.693, pF W = 0.693]    [p = 0.141, pF W = 0.200]        [p = 0.606]       [p = 0.317]
                                    {p = 0.682}                  {p = 0.124}               {p = 0.585}       {p = 0.297}

       HIM+FE                         0.151**                       0.045                    0.148**            0.066
                                      (0.074)                      (0.064)                   (0.075)           (0.064)
                             [p = 0.039, pF W = 0.066]    [p = 0.481, pF W = 0.481]        [p = 0.048]       [p = 0.310]
                                    {p = 0.045}                  {p = 0.465}               {p = 0.055}       {p = 0.277}



 HIM + FE vs. HIM                    0.182***                     0.145***                  0.189***           0.132**
                                      (0.066)                      (0.052)                   (0.067)           (0.055)
                             [p = 0.005, pF W = 0.010]    [p = 0.006, pF W = 0.006]        [p = 0.005]       [p = 0.016]
                                    {p = 0.017}                  {p = 0.016}               {p = 0.014}       {p = 0.035}


            N                          1071                         1819                       1071             1819
 Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 using bootstrap p-values. Standard errors (bootstrapped) in parentheses.
Single-hypothesis two-sided p-values calculated 2 ways: (i) [bootstrap] and (ii) {randomization - t}. Adjusted two-sided
p-values (pF W ) are equivalent to bootstrap p-values but adjusted for testing each null hypothesis (null impact of HIM,
HIM+FE and the comparison) on multiple outcomes through the stepwise procedure described in List, Shaikh, and Xu
(2016). In particular, we correct for multiple testing across our two pre-specified child development outcomes, in columns
(1) and (2). Columns (3) and (4) present additional exploratory analysis and thus we do not correct for multiple testing
here. Bootstrapped statistics use block-bootstraps, resampling triplets with replacement, and comprise 5000 iterations.
Randomization inference (5000 iterations) accounts for clustering at HI level and stratification by triplets. All estimates
control for gender, city effects, tester effects and baseline scores for MacArthur Bates CDI and each sub-scale of the
ASQ-III. All factors scaled to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one in the control group. All factors
constructed as described in section 4. Age effects removed from standardized scores prior to factor construction. Each
factor is constructed using the following standardized scores: (i) Cog, Lang and Sch (all measures): WM12, WM14,
WM17, TVIP, DAB and PTT, (ii) Cog, Lang and Sch (exc. PTT): WM12, WM17, TVIP, WM14 and DAB, and (iii)
Pre-literacy skills: WM14, WM17 and TVIP. See Table A.2 for details of measures and factors.




                                                            22
                              Table 3: Impact of HIM and FE on socio-emotional development

                                                                               Socio-
                                                                               Emotional
                                                                               Skills
                                                                                    (1)


                                                         HIM only                  -0.014
                                                                                  (0.087)
                                                                               [p = 0.874]
                                                                               {p = 0.851}

                                                         HIM+FE                   0.034
                                                                                 (0.089)
                                                                               [p = 0.710]
                                                                               {p = 0.690}



                                                   HIM + FE vs. HIM               0.047
                                                                                 (0.082)
                                                                               [p = 0.562]
                                                                               {p = 0.542}


                                                              N                    1826
         Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 using bootstrap p-values. Standard errors (bootstrapped) in parentheses.
   Single-hypothesis two-sided p-values calculated 2 ways: (i) [bootstrap] and (ii) {randomization - t}. Bootstrapped statistics use
   block-bootstraps, resampling triplets with replacement, and comprise 5000 iterations. Randomization inference (5000 iterations)
accounts for clustering at HI level and stratification by triplets. All estimates control for gender, city effects, tester effects and baseline
  scores for ASQ:SE. Factor scaled to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one in the control group. Factor constructed as
   described in section 4. Age effects removed from standardized scores prior to factor construction. Factor is constructed using the
  following standardized scores: Self Regulation, Compliance, Communication, Adaptive Functioning, Autonomy, Affect, Interaction
                                                                with People.


for older children or because our tests had higher discriminatory power for this sub-sample.

    As with cognitive development, Table 3 shows that the additional resources provided through the government

quality improvement program had no impact on child socio-emotional development. In contrast to findings on

cognitive outcomes, however, the addition of the FE component did little to change this (final row, Table 3).



4.2     Heterogeneity by Household Wealth

Several studies from high income countries show that children from disadvantaged households benefit more from

access to child care than children from better off backgrounds (Cornelissen, Dustmann, Raute, and Sch¨
                                                                                                     onberg 2018;

Felfe and Lalive 2018; Havnes and Mogstad 2015). We thus assess heterogeneity by household wealth. In interpreting

these results, however, it should be noted that our sample consists of children of low SES working parents, who,

because they are working, are not as poor as those typically eligible for public programs in Colombia.29 For example,

the households in our sample had an average monthly income of roughly 1.3 million COP (US$285), equivalent to

approximately two minimum wages in 2013, and average parental education was relatively high at 12 years.
   29 The government targets these children because with two working parents and a relatively low income household, they are at

especially high risk of receiving inadequate childcare.



                                                                      23
                                     Table 4: Heterogeneity by Child and Household Characteristics

                                                CLS                   Pre-literacy Skills                CLS                   Pre-literacy Skills
                                                 (1)                           (2)                        (3)                          (4)


            HIM only                            0.040                       -0.068                       -0.002                       -0.082
                                               (0.108)                     (0.083)                      (0.123)                      (0.098)
                                      [p = 0.706, pF W = 0.706]   [p = 0.416, pF W = 0.712]    [p = 0.986, pF W = 0.986]    [p = 0.403, pF W = 0.725]
                                             {p = 0.690}                 {p = 0.409}                  {p = 0.988}                  {p = 0.381}

 HIM only X Higher BL Dev                                                                                -0.070                       -0.036
                                                                                                        (0.140)                      (0.111)
                                                                                               [p = 0.613, pF W = 0.895]    [p = 0.744, pF W = 0.925]
                                                                                                      {p = 0.600}                  {p = 0.740}

    HIM only X Wealthier                        -0.128                      -0.052
                                               (0.126)                     (0.101)
                                      [p = 0.309, pF W = 0.621]   [p = 0.606, pF W = 0.832]
                                             {p = 0.230}                 {p = 0.587}

            HIM+FE                            0.302***                      0.158*                      0.237**                       0.096
                                               (0.094)                     (0.088)                      (0.098)                      (0.084)
                                      [p = 0.001, pF W = 0.004]   [p = 0.069, pF W = 0.069]    [p = 0.016, pF W = 0.048]    [p = 0.257, pF W = 0.393]
                                             {p = 0.004}                 {p = 0.072}                  {p = 0.038}                  {p = 0.264}

 HIM+FE X Higher BL Dev                                                                                  -0.172                       -0.103
                                                                                                        (0.130)                      (0.108)
                                                                                               [p = 0.178, pF W = 0.358]    [p = 0.336, pF W = 0.336]
                                                                                                      {p = 0.222}                  {p = 0.348}

     HIM+FE X Wealthier                       -0.286***                   -0.219**
                                               (0.111)                     (0.100)
                                      [p = 0.009, pF W = 0.022]   [p = 0.031, pF W = 0.052]
                                             {p = 0.022}                 {p = 0.044}


   HIM+FE vs. HIM only                       0.262***                     0.226***                    0.238**                      0.178**
                                              (0.088)                      (0.064)                    (0.113)                      (0.082)
                                       p=0.003 pF W = 0.007         p=0.001 pF W = 0.002        p=0.033 pF W = 0.070         p=0.029 pF W = 0.073
                                           {p = 0.009}                  {p = 0.005}                 {p = 0.035}                  {p = 0.062}

   HIM+FE vs. HIM only                                                                                 -0.102                       -0.068
      X Higher BL Dev                                                                                 (0.152)                      (0.116)
                                                                                                p=0.500 pF W = 0.649         p=0.552 pF W = 0.552
                                                                                                    {p = 0.500}                  {p = 0.571}

    HIM+FE vs. HIM only                       -0.158                      -0.167*
        X Wealthier                          (0.124)                      (0.087)
                                       p=0.204 pF W = 0.204         p=0.053 pF W = 0.087
                                           {p = 0.192}                  {p = 0.064}
                 N                              1071                           1819                      1071                         1819
 Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 using bootstrap p-values. Standard errors (bootstrapped) in parentheses. Single-hypothesis two-sided
p-values calculated 2 ways: (i) [bootstrap] and (ii) {randomization - t}. Adjusted two-sided p-values (pF W ) are equivalent to bootstrap p-values but
adjusted for testing each null hypothesis (null impact of HIM, HIM+FE and the comparison) on multiple outcomes through the stepwise procedure
described in List, Shaikh, and Xu (2016). In particular, we correct for multiple testing across our two pre-specified child development outcomes and,
for each of the two heterogeneity analyses separately, across the two subgroups. Bootstrapped statistics use block-bootstraps, resampling triplets
with replacement, and comprise 5000 iterations. Randomization inference (5000 iterations) accounts for clustering at HI level and stratification by
triplets. All estimates control for gender, city effects, tester effects and baseline scores for MacArthur Bates CDI and each sub-scale of the ASQ-III.
All factors scaled to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one in the control group. All factors constructed as described in section 4. Age
effects removed from standardized scores prior to factor construction. Each factor is constructed using the following standardized scores: (i) Cog,
Lang and Sch (all measures): WM12, WM14, WM17, TVIP, DAB and PTT, (ii) Cog, Lang and Sch (exc. PTT): WM12, WM17, TVIP, WM14 and
DAB, and (iii) Pre-literacy skills: WM14, WM17 and TVIP. See Table A.2 for details of measures and factors. Higher BL development implies child
had above median value of ASQ-III factor score at baseline. Wealthier implies child's household had above median value of household asset index at
baseline.




                                                                          24
    Heterogeneity analysis by household wealth suggests that in this setting too the average treatment effect of

HIM+FE is driven by effects on the poorer children. Breaking the sample down into two groups ­ children from

households with below and above median wealth ­ shows that HIM+FE, relative to the control, raised Cognitive,

Language and School Readiness skills by 30% of a standard deviation and pre-literacy skills by 16% of a standard

deviation among the poorer children; it had no significant impacts on the better-off children (Table 4).

    Generally, the finding that children from poorer households benefit more from center-based care than children

from better off households might be explained by (i) the fact that the counterfactual way in which they would spend

their time (at home) is less productive than that for better off children; and (ii) if, holding counterfactual activities

constant, children with lower developmental levels have more to gain from being in a stimulating environment. Since

we are studying changes in quality rather than intensity of exposure to preschool, the latter explanation appears

more likely here. And, indeed, results in Table 4 show that HIM+FE impacts were only significant for children

with lower baseline levels of development.30 It continues to be the case that the government quality improvement

program, HIM, has no impacts even on the more disadvantaged children.



4.3     Potential Mechanisms

To understand the mechanisms that generate both the null, bordering on negative, impacts of HIM relative to the

control and the positive impacts of HIM+FE, we examine how both interventions affect the quantity and quality

of classroom activities and the quality of children's home environment.

    Reduced-form correlations suggest that the way teachers spend their time matters. In Table 5, we report the cor-

relation between teachers' self-reported classroom activities, averaged at the center level, and child development.31

There is a significant positive association between the number of learning and development activities teachers in

the preschool carry out and our main measure of child development at endline. However, no correlation can be seen

between the number of personal care based activities and child development. We note that the estimates, perhaps

not surprisingly, are not very precise: when we limit the analysis to the control sample (which is one third of the

size), the estimated coefficients do not change substantially, but become statistically insignificant.

    We find that in response to HIM, the government improvement program, teachers significantly reduced the
  30  As measured by five subscales of an extended version of the ASQ-3 - Communication, Gross Motor, Problem Solving, Personal-Social
and Fine Motor (Squires, Bricker, and Twombly 2009); MacArthur Bates Communicative Development Inventories (Jackson-Maldonado
et al. 2013; Jackson-Maldonado et al. 2003); to measure language development; and ASQ:SE (Squires, Bricker, and Twombly 2002) to
measure socio-emotional development.
   31 We average teachers' activities at the preschool level as most children have been taught by more than one teacher during their time

at the HI.



                                                                   25
           Table 5: Correlations between Child Development and Teacher Reported Classroom Activities

                                                         (1)           (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
              Learning and Development Activities      0.0912**                0.123*    0.160**      0.179      0.175
                                                       (0.0429)               (0.0693)   (0.0674)    (0.176)    (0.154)

                     Personal Care Activities                      0.0235      -0.0444    -0.0504    0.0279    0.00148
                                                                  (0.0415)    (0.0587)   (0.0535)    (0.104)   (0.098)
                          Observations                   1071          1071     1071       1071        350       350
                     BL Child Development                No            No       No          Yes        No       Yes
                            Sample                       All           All      All         All      Control   Control
              Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors (clustered at HI level) in parentheses. Table
             presents OLS regression coefficients for regression of Cognitive, Language and School Readiness (CLS) child
             development factor on teachers' involvement in (1) Learning and Development Activities and (2) Personal
             Care Activities. Construction of all measures are described in Section 3. Measures of teachers' involvement
             in classroom activities averaged across all teachers in the HI. All regressions control for city effects and
             child gender. Regressions (4) and (6) additionally control for baseline child development as measured by the
             MacArthur Bates CDI and each sub-scale of the ASQ-III.


number of, and thus presumably the time spent on, both learning and development activities and personal care

activities (Table 6). Of the new staff hired, only the classroom assistants were added to staffing of the classes32 .

The reduction in personal care activities is expected and a direct result of the design of the program: the classroom

assistants were supposed to be primarily in charge of receiving kids in the morning, transitions, personal care

routines, preparation of materials, and helping the teacher during the activities. What is surprising is that the

number of learning activities decreased. The available data do not allow us to check whether the new staff are

substituting for teachers also in these activities but we can conclude that teachers are doing less of them. The

associations between teachers' time allocation and child development (Table 5) suggest that while the reduction

in time spent on personal care based activities is unlikely to have detrimental impacts on child development, the

reduction in time spent on learning and development activities may.

   These findings are somewhat similar to findings from the Tennessee's Project STAR which looked at the impacts

of reducing class sizes by one third and adding a teaching aide to regular size classrooms on children's performance.

That study found that while reducing class sizes improved children's performance, especially in kindergarten classes

(Hanushek 1999), the addition of teaching aides had no impact (Mosteller 1995; Gerber, Finn, Achilles, and Boyd-

Zaharias 2001). These findings are consistent with our results and suggest that while the intensity and quality of

time from qualified teachers is an important determinant of children's performance, the introduction of less qualified

staff into the classroom may have very different impacts.

   The unintended reduction in what are likely to be productive classroom activities in response to the government
  32  The socio-emotional and nutrition experts were hired to spend one-on-one time with the children as well as advise teachers and
parents.




                                                                  26
                               Table 6: Impacts on Teacher Reported Classroom Activities

                                  Learning and Development Activities       Personal Care Activities       Reading Activities
                                                    (1)                               (2)                          (3)


             HIM only                             -0.343**                         -0.340**                       -0.094
                                                   (0.138)                          (0.151)                      (0.116)
                                         [p = 0.012, pF W = 0.023]         [p = 0.027, pF W = 0.027]           [p = 0.411]
                                                {p = 0.008}                       {p = 0.011}                  {p = 0.332}

             HIM+FE                                -0.113                           -0.331**                      -0.052
                                                  (0.113)                            (0.157)                     (0.088)
                                         [p = 0.300, pF W = 0.300]         [p = 0.016, pF W = 0.030]           [p = 0.654]
                                                {p = 0.316}                       {p = 0.010}                  {p = 0.586}



       HIM + FE vs. HIM                           0.231**                            0.009                        0.042
                                                  (0.110)                           (0.131)                      (0.115)
                                         [p = 0.040, pF W = 0.075]         [p = 0.951, pF W = 0.951]           [p = 0.638]
                                                {p = 0.008}                       {p = 0.950}                  {p = 0.657}


                  N                                847                                847                          847
       Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 using bootstrap p-values. Standard errors (bootstrapped) in parentheses.
      Single-hypothesis two-sided p-values calculated 2 ways: (i) [bootstrap] and (ii) {randomization - t}. Adjusted two-sided
      p-values (pF W ) are equivalent to bootstrap p-values but adjusted for testing each null hypothesis (null impact of HIM,
      HIM+FE and the comparison) on multiple outcomes through the stepwise procedure described in List, Shaikh, and
      Xu (2016). In particular, we correct for multiple testing across our two categories of classroom activities, in columns
      (1) and (2). Column (3) presents additional exploratory analysis and thus we do not correct for multiple testing here.
      Bootstrapped statistics use block-bootstraps, resampling triplets with replacement, and comprise 5000 iterations. Ran-
      domization inference (5000 iterations) accounts for clustering at HI level and stratification by triplets. All estimates
      control for city effects, tester effects and average baseline scores for MacArthur Bates CDI at the HI level. All measures
      scaled to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one in the control group.


quality improvement program seems to be offset by the addition of the FE enhancement which emphasized the

importance of prioritizing learning and development activities over personal care routines and provided coaching on

productive strategies for implementing these activities. The results in Table 6 suggest that teachers in the HIM+FE

arm reduced the time they spent on the personal care activities, those activities that the classroom assistants are

well qualified to take over, relative to the pure controls, but not the learning and development activities. Relative

to the current status-quo (HIM), the addition of the FE enhancements substantially increases the time teachers

spend on learning and productive activities (Table 6).

   In addition to teacher reported measures, we also have direct observations of the quality of classroom activities

from the ECERS-R instrument, which captures the quality of the infrastructure as well as teaching and care

provision within preschools. These measures are expensive to collect, so they are only available for subset of 172

of the 847 classrooms in the 120 preschools in our sample. However, these data can be used to assess impacts of

the interventions on teachers' practices and classroom processes. Estimates of treatment effects on these measures,

presented in Table 7, suggest that the FE enhancement did not only offset the negative impacts of HIM on the

amount of time teachers spend on "Learning and Development Activities" with the kids, but also had a positive


                                                                 27
                          Table 7: Impact on Directly Observed Classroom Quality (ECERS-R)

                                                             Process Quality           Space and Furnishings
                                                                    (1)                           (2)


                                  HIM only                        -0.022                        0.117
                                                                 (0.244)                       (0.226)
                                                        [p = 0.933, pF W = 0.933]     [p = 0.612, pF W = 0.848]
                                                               {p = 0.933}                   {p = 0.564}

                                  HIM+FE                          0.412*                        0.249
                                                                 (0.225)                       (0.215)
                                                        [p = 0.065, pF W = 0.122]     [p = 0.242, pF W = 0.242]
                                                               {p = 0.058}                   {p = 0.207}



                           HIM + FE vs. HIM                       0.434*                        0.132
                                                                 (0.241)                       (0.198)
                                                        [p = 0.072, pF W = 0.140]     [p = 0.503, pF W = 0.503]
                                                               {p = 0.131}                   {p = 0.491}


                                       N                           172                            172
                           Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 using bootstrap p-values. Standard er-
                          rors (bootstrapped) in parentheses. Single-hypothesis two-sided p-values calculated
                          2 ways: (i) [bootstrap] and (ii) {randomization - t}. Adjusted two-sided p-values
                          (pF W ) are equivalent to bootstrap p-values but adjusted for testing each null hy-
                          pothesis (null impact of HIM, HIM+FE and the comparison) on multiple outcomes
                          through the stepwise procedure described in List, Shaikh, and Xu (2016). In partic-
                          ular, we correct for multiple testing across our two categories of preschool quality,
                          in columns (1) and (2). Bootstrapped statistics use block-bootstraps, resampling
                          HIs with replacement (since not all HIs are covered we do not resample triplets),
                          and comprise 5000 iterations. Randomization inference (5000 iterations) accounts
                          for clustering at HI level and stratification by triplets. All estimates control for city
                          effects and average baseline scores for MacArthur Bates CDI at the center level.
                          Both measures scaled to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one in the
                          control group. Both measures constructed as described in section 4.


effect on the quality of this time, as evidenced by a significant increase of around two fifths of a standard deviation

in "process" quality in the HIM+FE arm relative to both the pure control and the HIM arms33 . We see no change

in the quality of "space and furnishings" in either arm.34

    As well as the pedagogical training component, the FE enhancement contained a reading program which targeted

parents; a change in quality of the home environment is, therefore, another potential mechanism for the positive

impact that the addition of the FE component to HIM had on child development. We find no evidence of this,

however; results in Table 8 show that neither HIM nor HIM+FE had any impact on any of the domains of quality

of the home learning environment measured using the FCI. Even when looking at specific activities within the

sub-scales, we see no impacts on the time that parents spent reading with the child ­ the activity directly targeted

by the FE reading program. We also see no change in the number of times that teachers read stories to their kids
   33 It should be noted that we only have center quality measure for a sub-sample of classes which reduces the precision of our impact

estimates and limits options for more in-depth investigation of this potential mechanism.
   34 We do not report results using individual children outcomes as the limited number of observations yields very imprecise estimates.

Results are available on request.




                                                                     28
in a week (Table 8). These results suggest that the reading program is unlikely to be driving the effect of the FE

enhancement on child development.

   The lack of impacts on the home environment and reading practices in the class (targeted by the reading program

component of FE) combined with an improvement in classroom process quality (targeted by the pedagogical training

program component of FE) suggest that the addition of pedagogical training is what is driving the significant impact

that the FE enhancement has on increasing the efficacy of the government quality improvement program through

(1) offsetting the negative effect that the government program has on the time teachers spend on play and learning

activities with the kids in the classroom; and (2) improving the quality of what teachers do with that time. This

hypothesis is further supported by evidence that the FE enhancement appears to have been more effective in the

smaller centers (Table A.14), where, on average, a higher proportion of teachers (one half vs. one quarter; Table

A.13) received the training.3536 .




   35 This pattern by center size was driven by the fact that only up to three teachers per HI were supposed to participate in the

training.
   36 FE were only able to provide us with very partial data on teacher attendance which do not allow us to link all teachers in our

data in the HIM+FE arm to data on attendance of the pedagogical training program. However, partially linked data combined with
self-reported data from teachers on whether they attended training suggest that a significantly higher proportion of teachers in the
smaller centers were trained.


                                                                29
                                                              Table 8: Impact of HIM and FE on Learning Environment in the Home

                                                              Summary Indices                                                                      Reading Activities and Materials
                                 Play Materials          Play Activities with Mother    Play Activities with Father        Number of Storybooks        Mins Reading with Mother      Mins Reading with Father
                                       (1)                           (2)                            (3)                              (4)                           (5)                           (6)


        HIM only                      0.020                         -0.067                         -0.098                           -0.050                        -4.554                        -6.495
                                     (0.078)                       (0.078)                        (0.074)                          (0.247)                       (10.453)                      (6.793)
                            [p = 0.806, pF W = 0.806]     [p = 0.384, pF W = 0.617]      [p = 0.182, pF W = 0.416]        [p = 0.845, pF W = 0.845]     [p = 0.657, pF W = 0.886]     [p = 0.342, pF W = 0.691]
                                   {p = 0.763}                   {p = 0.368}                    {p = 0.148}                      {p = 0.821}                   {p = 0.618}                   {p = 0.318}

        HIM+FE                        0.109                         0.064                          -0.041                           0.080                         5.380                         -1.398
                                     (0.074)                       (0.065)                        (0.062)                          (0.219)                       (9.064)                       (7.145)
                            [p = 0.142, pF W = 0.354]     [p = 0.316, pF W = 0.512]      [p = 0.500, pF W = 0.500]        [p = 0.720, pF W = 0.918]     [p = 0.556, pF W = 0.904]     [p = 0.835, pF W = 0.835]




   30
                                   {p = 0.120}                   {p = 0.356}                    {p = 0.537}                      {p = 0.694}                   {p = 0.555}                   {p = 0.847}



 HIM + FE vs. HIM                     0.089                         0.131                          0.057                            0.130                         9.933                         5.098
                                     (0.070)                       (0.084)                        (0.084)                          (0.205)                       (8.388)                       (6.522)
                            [p = 0.116, pF W = 0.289]     [p = 0.116, pF W = 0.289]      [p = 0.489, pF W = 0.489]        [p = 0.521, pF W = 0.521]     [p = 0.230, pF W = 0.528]     [p = 0.425, pF W = 0.662]
                                   {p = 0.208}                   {p = 0.088}                    {p = 0.442}                      {p = 0.470}                   {p = 0.220}                   {p = 0.393}


            N                         1848                          1827                            1447                            1848                          1827                          1447
 Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 using bootstrap p-values. Standard errors (bootstrapped) in parentheses. Single-hypothesis two-sided p-values calculated 2 ways: (i) [bootstrap] and (ii)
{randomization - t}. Adjusted two-sided p-values (pF W ) are equivalent to bootstrap p-values but adjusted for testing each null hypothesis (null impact of HIM, HIM+FE and the comparison) on multiple
outcomes through the stepwise procedure described in List, Shaikh, and Xu (2016). In particular, we correct for multiple testing separately across summary outcomes related to the home environment, in
columns (1)-(3), and across outcomes specifically related to reading, in columns (4)-(6). Bootstrapped statistics use block-bootstraps, resampling triplets with replacement, and comprise 5000 iterations.
Randomization inference (5000 iterations) accounts for clustering at HI level and stratification by triplets. All estimates control for gender, city effects, interviewer effects and baseline scores for the play
materials and play activities with mother subscales. All factors scaled to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one in the control group.
5     Conclusions

In this paper we show, within one institutional setting, that different approaches to improving the quality of early

years education can have very different impacts. Our results suggest that providing preschools with additional

resources for hiring and teaching materials without any training on best practices in the classroom is an ineffective

and potentially even detrimental strategy. Complementing such resources with pedagogical training and coaching,

on the other hand, can have significant positive impacts on child development, especially for more disadvantaged

children. Self-reported data suggest that without training on best practices, teachers respond to having more staff

and materials by reducing the time that they spend with the children, including on activities that are important

for child development. In contrast, the addition of pedagogical training prevented any reduction in time teachers'

spent on learning and development focused activities and increased the observed quality of instruction in the class.

    At around 15% of a standard deviation, the estimated positive impact of the enhanced government quality

improvement program on the main cognitive development outcome measure corresponds to 15% of the achievement

gap between children in the top and bottom wealth quintiles in Colombia by age 5 (Bernal, Mart´
                                                                                              inez, and Quintero

2015). Heterogeneity analysis shows that the impact is higher on the more disadvantaged children, for whom the

effect size is much larger at 30% of a standard deviation. To the extent that credible comparisons can be made

between intervention evaluations with different measures of child development and in different populations, the

effects we estimate of the FE quality improvement program are in the ballpark of other studies which look at effects

of children accessing center-based care in Colombia (Nores, Bernal, and Barnett 2019) and other Latin American

countries (Noboa-Hidalgo and Urz´
                                ua 2012; Berlinski et al. 2008; Bernal and Ram´
                                                                              irez 2019; Bernal and Fern´
                                                                                                        andez

2013; Behrman et al. 2014). There is little to guide extrapolation of how these short-run impacts might map onto

long-run outcomes of children in Colombia. However, evidence from further afield, such as evaluations of Head Start

in the US, suggests that programs which achieved short-run effects of similar magnitude can have wide ranging and

persistent positive long-run effects (Garces, Thomas, and Currie 2002; Deming 2009).

    The immediate policy implication of our findings is that the current strategy of the government of Colombia for

improving quality of care in its Hogares Infantiles preschools through scaling up the HIM program may be doing

more harm than good. However, the results also offer guidance on an effective improvement strategy: the addition

of a pedagogical training component following the blue-print of the program designed by the Colombian National

University for Fundaci´
                      on Exito in this study. Ongoing costs of the current government upgrade are $300 per child



                                                         31
per year, raising the total cost of provision to $1300 per child per year. Our results suggest that the impacts of the

government program on child development could be increased from none (possibly negative) to as much as 30% of

a standard deviation for the more disadvantaged children attending these centers by complimenting the hiring of

new staff with appropriate teacher training and coaching.

   A back-of-the-envelope calculation of the costs of scaling-up the pedagogical training component of the FE

program, the component that we argue is key to its impacts on children's development suggest that scaling to new

centers would require an upfront investment of $5827 per HI. However, once this initial investment had been made,

maintaining the proportion of trained teachers through training new teachers and providing less-intensive refresher

training to previously-trained teachers would cost $2206 per HI per year, or $13 per child per year. This additional

cost thus represents 1% of the current amount of $1300 allocated to HIs yearly for each child. See Appendix E for

details of calculations.

   The study design does not allow us to say anything about the stand-alone benefits of the pedagogical program in

the absence of the government's HIM upgrade. While it is probable that a minimum level of physical resources and

staffing may be needed in order for programs focusing on teaching practices to be effective, we cannot tell whether

the HIs in this study had already surpassed such a level before the HIM upgrades. Thus we cannot tell whether FE

would have been effective even if the government had not implemented HIM or whether it is the interaction between

more resources and know-how which is driving the positive impacts in the HIM+FE arm. Nevertheless, we note

that recent overviews suggest that programs that directly target children's day to day classroom experience have

been successful even in contexts with minimal prior resources (Kremer, Brannen, and Glennerster 2013; Murnane

and Ganimian 2014).

   More broadly, this study suggests that widespread reliance on easily observable indicators such as teacher-child

ratios and availability of play materials to judge overall quality of early years education and target investment may

be misguided. Stand-alone improvements in these factors are unlikely to result in the sorts of short and long-run

improvements to human capital that some investments in high quality early childhood interventions have succeeded

in delivering. Our results suggest that one way of achieving such gains is to also give child-care providers the

knowledge and skills to utilize available material and human resources in ways that are most productive for child

development and well-being. The design of programs to facilitate this (and measurement of the degree to which this

happens) continues to present big challenges globally and is likely to be a key hurdle in the path to achieving the SDG




                                                          32
on universal access to quality early childhood care by 2030. Our results, however, offer important promising evidence

that even within the infrastructure available in LMIC contexts it is possible to implement scalable cost-effective

designs of programs which boost the relevant dimensions of child-care quality and deliver significant improvements

in child outcomes.




References

  Agostinelli, F. and M. Wiswall (2016). Estimating the Technology of Children's Skill Formation. Forthcoming

     JPE (March).

  Almond, D., J. Currie, and V. Duque (2018, dec). Childhood Circumstances and Adult Outcomes: Act II. Journal

     of Economic Literature 56 (4), 1360­1446.

  Andrew, A., O. Attanasio, R. Bernal, L. Cordona, S. Krutikova, D. M. Heredia, C. Medina, X. Pe~
                                                                                                na, M. Rubio-

     Codina, and M. Vera-Hernandez (2018, jun). Evaluation of infant development centres: an early years inter-

     vention in Colombia. Technical Report June, International Initiative for Impact Evaluation, USA.

  Andrew, A., O. Attanasio, E. Fitzsimons, S. Grantham-McGregor, C. Meghir, and M. Rubio-Codina (2018, apr).

     Impacts 2 years after a scalable early childhood development intervention to increase psychosocial stimula-

     tion in the home: A follow-up of a cluster randomised controlled trial in Colombia. PLOS Medicine 15 (4),

     e1002556.

  Araujo, M. C., P. Carneiro, Y. Cruz-Aguayo, and N. Schady (2016, aug). Teacher Quality and Learning Outcomes

     in Kindergarten. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1415­1453.

  Araujo, M. C. and N. Schady (2015). Daycare Services: It's All about Quality. In S. Berlinski and N. Schady

     (Eds.), The Early Years, Chapter 4, pp. 91­121. New York: Palgrave Macmillan US.

  Attanasio, O., H. Baker-Henningham, R. Bernal, C. Meghir, D. Pineda, and M. Rubio-Codina (2018, sep). Early

     Stimulation and Nutrition: The Impacts of a Scalable Intervention. Technical report, National Bureau of

     Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

  Attanasio, O., S. Cattan, E. Fitzsimons, C. Meghir, and M. Rubio-Codina (2015, feb). Estimating the Produc-

     tion Function for Human Capital: Results from a Randomized Control Trial in Colombia. Technical report,

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.


                                                         33
Attanasio, O., C. Meghir, and E. Nix (2017). Human Capital Development and Parental Investment in India.

Barnett, W. S., J. T. Hustedt, A. H. Friedman, J. S. Boyd, and P. Ainsworth (2003). The State of Preschool:

   2003 State Preschool Yearbook.

Barnett, W. S., J. T. Hustedt, A. H. Friedman, J. S. Boyd, and P. Ainsworth (2004). The State of Preschool:

   2004 State Preschool Yearbook.

Behrman, J. R., J. Hoddinott, J. A. Maluccio, E. Soler-Hampejsek, E. L. Behrman, R. Martorell, M. Ram´
                                                                                                     irez-

   Zea, and A. D. Stein (2014). What determines adult cognitive skills? Influences of pre-school, school, and

   post-school experiences in Guatemala. Latin American Economic Review 23 (1).

Belfield, C., C. Farquharson, and L. Sibieta (2018, sep). 2018 Annual Report on Education Spending in England.

   Technical report, ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy (CPP) at IFS.

Berlinski, S., S. Galiani, and P. Gertler (2009). The effect of pre-primary education on primary school performance.

   Journal of Public Economics 93 (1-2), 219­234.

Berlinski, S., S. Galiani, and M. Manacorda (2008). Giving children a better start: Preschool attendance and

   school-age profiles. Journal of Public Economics 92 (5-6), 1416­1440.

Bernal, R., O. Attanasio, X. Pe~
                               na, and M. Vera-Hern´
                                                   andez (2019). The effects of the transition from home-based

   childcare to childcare centers on children's health and development in Colombia. Early Childhood Research

   Quarterly 47, 418­431.

Bernal, R. and A. Camacho (2012). La pol´
                                        itica de primera infancia en el contexto de la equidad y movilidad

   social en Colombia. Documentos Cede , 2012­33.

Bernal, R. and C. Fern´
                      andez (2013). Subsidized childcare and child development in Colombia: Effects of Hogares

   Comunitarios de Bienestar as a function of timing and length of exposure. Social Science Medicine 97 (C),

   241­249.

Bernal, R., M. A. Mart´
                      inez, and C. Quintero (2015). Situaci´
                                                           on de ni~
                                                                   nas y ni~
                                                                           nos Colombianos menores de cinco

   a~
    nos, entre 2010 y 2013, Volume 16.

Bernal, R. and S. M. Ram´
                        irez (2019). Improving the quality of early childhood care at scale: The effects of From

   Zero to Forever. World Development 118, 91­105.




                                                       34
Black, M. M., S. P. Walker, L. C. Fernald, C. T. Andersen, A. M. DiGirolamo, C. Lu, D. C. McCoy, G. Fink,

   Y. R. Shawar, J. Shiffman, A. E. Devercelli, Q. T. Wodon, E. Vargas-Bar´
                                                                          on, and S. Grantham-McGregor

   (2017). Early childhood development coming of age: science through the life course. The Lancet 389 (10064),

   77­90.

Blanden, J., K. Hansen, and S. Mcnally (2017). Quality in Early Years Settings and Children' s School Achieve-

   ment. CEP Discussion Paper No 1468 .

Britto, P. R., S. J. Lye, K. Proulx, A. K. Yousafzai, S. G. Matthews, T. Vaivada, R. Perez-Escamilla, N. Rao,

   P. Ip, L. C. H. Fernald, H. MacMillan, M. Hanson, T. D. Wachs, H. Yao, H. Yoshikawa, A. Cerezo, J. F.

   Leckman, and Z. A. Bhutta (2017, jan). Nurturing care: promoting early childhood development. The

   Lancet 389 (10064), 91­102.

Britto, P. R., H. Yoshikawa, and K. Boller (2011). Quality of Early Childhood Development Programs in Global

   Contexts Rationale for Investment, Conceptual Framework and Implications for Equity. 25 (2).

Burchinal, M. R., J. E. Roberts, R. Riggins Jr, S. A. Zeisel, E. Neebe, and D. Bryant (2000). Relating quality of

   center-based child care to early cognitive and language development longitudinally. Child development 71 (2),

   339­357.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. W. Schanzenbach, and D. Yagan (2011). How does your kinder-

   garten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from project star. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4),

   1593­1660.

Cornelissen, T., C. Dustmann, A. Raute, and U. Sch¨
                                                  onberg (2018, dec). Who Benefits from Universal Child

   Care? Estimating Marginal Returns to Early Child Care Attendance. Journal of Political Economy 126 (6),

   2356­2409.

Culhane, J., F. Cunha, I. Elo, and Z. Pham (2016). Measuring Early Investments in Children Early.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill

   Formation. Volume 1 of Handbook of the Economics of Education, pp. 697­812. Elsevier.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010). Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive

   Skill Formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883­931.

Danzer, V. A., M. F. Gerber, T. M. Lyons, and J. K. Voress (1991). Daberon 2: Screening for School Readiness.


                                                      35
   Pro-Ed (Firm).

Datta Gupta, N. and M. Simonsen (2010). Non-cognitive child outcomes and universal high quality child care.

   Journal of Public Economics 94 (1-2), 30­43.

Deming, D. (2009, jun). Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development: Evidence from Head

   Start. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3), 111­134.

Diamond, A. and C. Taylor (1996, may). Development of an aspect of executive control: Development of the

   abilities to remember what I said and to ?Do as I say, not as I do? Developmental Psychobiology 29 (4),

   315­334.

Dunn, L. M., E. R. Padilla, D. E. Lugo, and L. M. Dunn (1986). Test de Vocabulario en Im´
                                                                                        agenes Peabody

   (TVIP). AGS Circle Pines, MN.

Engle, P. L., M. M. Black, J. R. Behrman, M. C. D. Mello, P. J. Gertler, L. Kapiriri, R. Martorell, and M. E.

   Young (2007). Child development in developing countries 3 Strategies to avoid the loss of developmental

   potential in more than 200 million children in the developing world. The Lancet 369 (9557), 229­242.

Engle, P. L., L. C. Fernald, H. Alderman, J. Behrman, C. O'Gara, A. Yousafzai, M. C. de Mello, M. Hidrobo,

   N. Ulkuer, I. Ertem, and S. Iltus (2011, oct). Strategies for reducing inequalities and improving developmental

   outcomes for young children in low-income and middle-income countries. The Lancet 378 (9799), 1339­1353.

Felfe, C. and R. Lalive (2018). Does early child care affect children's development? Journal of Public Eco-

   nomics 159 (January), 33­53.

Garces, E., D. Thomas, and J. Currie (2002, aug). Longer-Term Effects of Head Start. American Economic

   Review 92 (4), 999­1012.

Gerber, S. B., J. D. Finn, C. M. Achilles, and J. Boyd-Zaharias (2001, jun). Teacher Aides and Students' Academic

   Achievement. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 23 (2), 123­143.

Glewwe, P., E. Hanushek, S. Humpage, and R. Ravina (2011, oct). School Resources and Educational Outcomes

   in Developing Countries: A Review of the Literature from 1990 to 2010. Technical report, National Bureau

   of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Hallam, R., B. Rous, S. Riley-Ayers, and D. Epstein (2011). Teacher survey of early education quality. New

   Brunswick, NJ: NIEER.


                                                      36
Hamadani, J. D., F. Tofail, A. Hilaly, S. N. Huda, P. Engle, and S. M. Grantham-McGregor (2010, mar). Use

   of Family Care Indicators and Their Relationship with Child Development in Bangladesh. Journal of Health,

   Population and Nutrition 28 (1), 23­33.

Hanushek, E. A. (1999). Some Findings from an Independent Investigation of the Tennessee STAR Experiment

   and from Other Investigations of Class Size Effects. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 21 (2), 143­

   163.

Hanushek, E. A. (2003, feb). The Failure of Inputbased Schooling Policies. The Economic Journal 113 (485),

   F64­F98.

Hanushek, E. A. and S. G. Rivkin (2006). Chapter 18 Teacher Quality. In Handbook of the Economics of Educa-

   tion, Volume 2, pp. 1051­1078.

Hanushek, E. A. and S. G. Rivkin (2012, sep). The Distribution of Teacher Quality and Implications for Policy.

   Annual Review of Economics 4 (1), 131­157.

Harms, T., R. M. Clifford, and D. Cryer (1998). Early Childhood Environment Scale-Revised Edition.

Havnes, T. and M. Mogstad (2011, may). No Child Left Behind: Subsidized Child Care and Children's Long-Run

   Outcomes. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (2), 97­129.

Havnes, T. and M. Mogstad (2015). Is universal child care leveling the playing field? Journal of Public Eco-

   nomics 127, 100­114.

Heckman, J., R. Pinto, and P. Savelyev (2013, oct). Understanding the Mechanisms Through Which an Influential

   Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2052­2086.

Heckman, J. J. (2006, jun). Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged children. Sci-

   ence 312 (5782), 1900­1902.

Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Yavitz (2010, feb). The rate of return to the

   HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public Economics 94 (1-2), 114­128.

Heckman, J. J. and S. Mosso (2014, aug). The Economics of Human Development and Social Mobility. Annual

   Review of Economics 6 (1), 689­733.

Ichino, A., M. Fort, and G. Zanella (2019, apr). Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Costs of Daycare 0-2 for Children

   in Advantaged Families. Journal of Political Economy , 704075.

                                                    37
Jackson-Maldonado, D., V. A. Marchman, and L. C. Fernald (2013, jul). Short-form versions of the Spanish

   MacArthurBates Communicative Development Inventories. Applied Psycholinguistics 34 (04), 837­868.

Jackson-Maldonado, D., D. J. Thal, L. Fenson, V. A. Marchman, T. Newton, B. T. Conboy, and L. Fenson (2003).

   MacArthur Inventarios del Desarrollo de Habilidades Comunicativas: User's guide and technical manual.

   Baltimore: Brookes Publishing Co.

Kaiser, H. F. (1960). The Application of Electronic Computers to Factor Analysis. Educational and Psychological

   Measurement 20 (1), 141­151.

Kline, P. and C. R. Walters (2016, nov). Evaluating Public Programs with Close Substitutes: The Case of Head

   Start. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4), 1795­1848.

Kremer, M., C. Brannen, and R. Glennerster (2013). The Challenge of Education and Learning in the Developing

   World. Science 340 (April), 297­301.

List, J., A. Shaikh, and Y. Xu (2016). Multiple Hypothesis Testing in Experimental Economics.

Mosteller, F. (1995). The Tennessee Study of Class Size in the Early School Grades. The Future of Children 5,

   113­127.

Murnane, R. and A. Ganimian (2014). Improving Educational Outcomes in Developing Countries: Lessons from

   Rigorous Impact Evaluations.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2002, may). Child-Care Structure Process Outcome: Direct

   and Indirect Effects of Child-Care Quality on Young Children's Development. Psychological Science 13 (3),

   199­206.

Noboa-Hidalgo, G. E. and S. S. Urz´
                                  ua (2012). The Effects of Participation in Public Child Care Centers: Evidence

   from Chile. Journal of Human Capital 6 (1), 1­34.

Nores, M. and W. S. Barnett (2010, apr). Benefits of early childhood interventions across the world: (Under)

   Investing in the very young. Economics of Education Review 29 (2), 271­282.

Nores, M., R. Bernal, and W. S. Barnett (2019, oct). Center-based care for infants and toddlers: The aeioTU

   randomized trial. Economics of Education Review 72, 30­43.

¨
Ozler, B., L. C. Fernald, P. Kariger, C. McConnell, M. Neuman, and E. Fraga (2018). Combining pre-school

   teacher training with parenting education: A cluster-randomized controlled trial. Journal of Development

                                                     38
   Economics 133 (August 2017), 448­467.

Peisner-Feinberg, E. S., M. R. Burchinal, R. M. Clifford, M. L. Culkin, C. Howes, S. L. Kagan, and N. Yazejian

   (2001). The relation of preschool child-care quality to children's cognitive and social developmental trajectories

   through second grade. Child development 72 (5), 1534­1553.

Pe~
  na, E. D. (2007, jul). Lost in Translation: Methodological Considerations in Cross-Cultural Research. Child

   Development 78 (4), 1255­1264.

Rao, N., J. Sun, V. Pearson, E. Pearson, H. Liu, M. A. Constas, and P. L. Engle (2012). Is Something Better Than

   Nothing? An Evaluation of Early Childhood Programs in Cambodia. Child Development 83 (3), 864­876.

Rao, N., J. Sun, J. M. S. Wong, B. Weekes, P. Ip, S. Shaeffer, M. Young, M. Bray, E. Chen, and D. Lee (2014).

   Early childhood development and cognitive development in developing countriess: A rigorous literature review.

   Technical report, Department for International Development.

Romano, J. and M. Wolf (2010). Balanced control of generalized error rates. Annals of Statistics 38 (1), 598­633.

Romano, J. P. and M. Wolf (2005). Stepwise Multiple Testing as Formalized Data Snooping. Econometrica 73 (4),

   1237­1282.

Rosero, J. J. and H. Oosterbeek (2011). Trade-offs between Different Early Childhood Interventions: Evidence

   from Ecuador. Technical report.

Schrank, F. A., K. S. Mcgrew, M. L. Ruef, C. G. Alvarado, A. F. Mu~
                                                                  noz-Sandoval, and R. W. Woodcock (2005).

   Overview and technical supplement (Bater´
                                           ia III Woodcock-Mu~
                                                             noz Assessment Service Bulletin No. 1). Itasca,

   IL: Riverside Publishing.

Skrondal, A. and S. Rabe-Hesketh (2009, jun). Prediction in multilevel generalized linear models. Journal of the

   Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) 172 (3), 659­687.

Squires, J., D. Bricker, and E. Twombly (2002). Ages Stages Questionnaires: Social-emotional. Brookes Pub.

   Co.

Squires, J., D. Bricker, and E. Twombly (2009). Ages Stages English Questionnaires, Third Edition (ASQ-3):

   A Parent-Completed, Child-Monitoring System. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.

Sylva, K., I. Siraj-Blatchford, B. Taggart, P. Sammons, E. Melhuish, K. Elliot, and V. Totsika (2006). Capturing

   quality in early childhood through environmental rating scales. Early Childhood Research Quarterly 21 (1),

                                                       39
   76­92.

The Economist (2019). Republicans and Democrats are taking early education more seriously.

Thomson, G. (1939). The factorial analysis of human ability. British Journal of Educational Psychology 9 (2),

   188­195.

Woodcock, R. W. (1977). Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery. Technical Report.

Yoshikawa, H., D. Leyva, C. E. Snow, E. Trevi~
                                             no, M. Clara Barata, C. Weiland, C. J. Gomez, L. Moreno, A. Rolla,

   N. D'Sa, and M. C. Arbour (2015). Experimental impacts of a teacher professional development program in

   Chile on preschool classroom quality and child outcomes. Developmental Psychology 51 (3), 309­322.

Yoshikawa, H., C. Weiland, J. Brooks-Gunn, M. R. Burchinal, L. M. Espinosa, W. T. Gormley, J. Ludwig, K. A.

   Magnuson, D. Phillips, and M. J. Zaslow (2013). Investing in our future: The evidence base on preschool

   education.

Young, A. (2018, nov). Channelling Fisher: Randomization Tests and the Statistical Insignificance of Seemingly

   Significant Experimental Results*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 163 (7), F691­F703.




                                                     40
A   Additional Tables




                        41
                 Table A.1: Predictors of Attrition at Endline

                                                   (1)          (2)            (3)
 HIM                                            -0.00629       -0.00350       -0.00279
                                                (0.0210)       (0.0207)        (0.161)
 HIM+FE                                          -0.0184        -0.0228        -0.0899
                                                (0.0184)       (0.0180)        (0.142)
 Male                                                           0.0243*        0.0408
                                                               (0.0140)       (0.0251)
 Age at BL (months)                                          -0.00651***   -0.00792***
                                                              (0.00152)      (0.00295)
 Income (million COP)                                         0.0000127      0.0000212
                                                            (0.00000821)   (0.0000140)
 Maternal years of schooling                                   0.000217      0.000116
                                                              (0.00266)      (0.00503)
 ASQ BL factor                                                 -0.00580        0.00391
                                                              (0.00670)       (0.0106)
 Language Development                                           0.00400       -0.00740
                                                              (0.00733)       (0.0139)
 ASQ SE factor BL                                               0.00821        0.00866
                                                              (0.00714)       (0.0145)
 =1 if Maternal Education missing                                0.0248         0.0269
                                                               (0.0692)       (0.0706)
 =1 if ASQ factor missing                                         0.180          0.169
                                                                (0.280)        (0.307)
 HIM # Male                                                                    -0.0431
                                                                              (0.0343)
 HIM # Age at BL (months)                                                      0.00166
                                                                             (0.00416)
 HIM # Income (million COP)                                                -0.00000256
                                                                           (0.0000221)
 HIM # Maternal years of schooling                                            -0.00192
                                                                             (0.00644)
 HIM # ASQ BL factor                                                          -0.00807
                                                                              (0.0173)
 HIM # Language Development                                                    0.00917
                                                                              (0.0184)
 HIM # ASQ SE factor BL                                                        -0.0105
                                                                              (0.0191)
 HIM+FE # Male                                                                -0.00889
                                                                              (0.0340)
 HIM+FE # Age at BL (months)                                                   0.00242
                                                                             (0.00357)
 HIM+FE # Income (million COP)                                              -0.0000215
                                                                           (0.0000174)
 HIM+FE # Maternal years of schooling                                         0.00235
                                                                             (0.00707)
 HIM+FE # ASQ BL factor                                                       -0.0239*
                                                                              (0.0139)
 HIM+FE # Language Development                                                 0.0276
                                                                              (0.0170)
 HIM+FE # ASQ SE factor BL                                                     0.00762
                                                                              (0.0182)
 Constant                                       0.0862***    0.246***          0.269**
                                                 (0.0158)    (0.0637)          (0.116)
 Observations                                     1987         1987            1987
 Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors (clustered at HI level) in
parentheses for regression of a dummy indicating attrition on: (1) treatment status, (2)
treatment status and baseline characteristics and (3) treatment status fully interacted
with baseline characteristics. Attrition defined as not having complete child development
assessment data at endline.




                                           42
                                                                             Table A.2: Child Development Assessments

                            Instrument used                             Dimension of child development measured   Scored using IRT   In CLS factor   In pre-literacy skills factor   In SE skills factor
 TVIP          Test de Vocabulario en Imgenes de Peabody                          Receptive Language                    Yes              Yes                      Yes
 WM5       Woodcock-Muoz: Pruebas de Habilidades Cognitivas 5               Concept formation (cognition)               Yes               *
 WM12      Woodcock-Muoz: Pruebas de Habilidades Cognitivas 12                Fluid reasoning (cognition)                                Yes
 WM14        Woodcock-Muoz: Pruebas de Aprovechamiento 14                         Expressive language                   Yes              Yes                     Yes
 WM17      Woodcock-Muoz: Pruebas de Habilidades Cognitivas 17               Memory for words (cognition)               Yes              Yes                     Yes
 WM21        Woodcock-Muoz: Pruebas de Aprovechamiento 21                          Sound Awareness                      Yes                                       *
 DAB            Daberon-II Screening for School Readiness                           School readiness                    Yes              Yes




 43
 PTT                      Pencil Tapping Task                                      Inhibitory control                                    Yes
                        ASQ:SE: Self Regulation                                     Self Regulation                     Yes                                                                 Yes
                          ASQ:SE: Compliance                                          Compliance                        Yes                                                                 Yes
                        ASQ:SE: Communication                                       Communication                       Yes                                                                 Yes
                     ASQ:SE: Adaptive Functioning                                Adaptive Functioning                   Yes                                                                 Yes
                          ASQ:SE: Autonomy                                             Autonomy                         Yes                                                                 Yes
                            ASQ:SE: Affect                                                Affect                        Yes                                                                 Yes
                    ASQ:SE: Interaction with People                             Interaction with People                 Yes                                                                 Yes
Notes: *:initially included in factor (as set out in pre-analysis plan) but excluded due to low loading(¡0.4)
                                              Table A.3: Validation of Child Cognitive, Language and School Readiness Development Assessments

                                                                                                                     Correlation with
                                                                                                Baseline Child Development
      Instrument          Mean reliability     Age       Problem Solving     Communication      Gross Motor     Fine Motor     Socio-Individual     MacArthur-Bates     Wealth index     Mother's education      N
   TVIP/Peabody                0.879         0.435***        0.193***            0.235***         0.089***         0.106***        0.112***             0.222***          0.241***            0.276***         1832
  WM Cognitive 5               0.278         0.234***         0.050**            0.069***           -0.031           0.028           0.006              0.075***            0.03              0.079***         1839
 WM Achievement 14             0.845         0.342***        0.147***            0.217***         0.076***         0.079***         0.055**             0.211***          0.222***            0.286***         1839
  WM Cognitive 17              0.858         0.348***        0.103***            0.203***         0.085***         0.090***        0.083***             0.223***          0.077***            0.099***         1839
 WM Achievement 21             0.395         0.117***         0.071**            0.090***           -0.036           -0.004        0.074**              0.088***            0.035              0.070**         1081
       Daberon                 0.925         0.517***        0.181***            0.297***         0.083***         0.128***        0.134***             0.240***          0.165***            0.230***         1839
  WM Cognitive 12                            0.364***        0.123***            0.199***          0.053**         0.060***         0.057**             0.242***          0.124***            0.199***         1839
 Pencil Tapping Test                         0.192***        0.090***            0.167***            0.014          0.071**        0.092***             0.180***          0.092***            0.129***         1081
 Notes: Correlation coefficient significantly different from zero at: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Mean reliability defined as (1/se(m )2 )/(1 + 1/se(m )2 ) where se(m ) refers to the standard error on
the child's latent score computed through the empirical bayes' estimator (for measures scored using IRT only). For the correlation coefficient of the measures with age we use the IRT (or count) score before
non-parametric standardization, for all other correlation coefficients we use the IRT (or count) score after non-parametric standardization (removing all age effects). Baseline measures standardised for age. Wealth
index constructed using factor analysis of baseline asset ownership. Years of education of mother as measured at baseline.




     44
                                   Table A.4: Contemporaneous Correlation of Child Cognitive, Language and School Readiness Development Assessments

                                       TVIP/Peabody     WM Cognitive 5      WM Cognitive 12       WM Achievement 14       WM Cognitive 17         WM Achievement 21     Daberon      Pencil Tapping Test
             TVIP/Peabody                    1
             WM Cognitive 5              0.235***                1
             WM Cognitive 12             0.464***            0.151***                1
             WM Achievement 14           0.670***            0.228***            0.465***                   1
             WM Cognitive 17             0.322***           0.0846***            0.283***               0.297***                   1
             WM Achievement 21           0.215***            0.125***            0.128***               0.207***               0.206***                    1
             Daberon                     0.630***            0.254***            0.511***               0.590***               0.434***                0.292***             1
             Pencil Tapping Test         0.319***            0.169***            0.260***               0.271***               0.306***                0.137***         0.467***              1
           Notes: Correlation coefficient significantly different from zero at: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All measures are non-parametrically standardized to remove age effects.
                                                          Table A.5: Validation of Child Socio-Emotional Development Assessments

                                                                                                                Correlation with
                                                                                                  Baseline Child Development
                                                                Self                                          Adaptive                                      Interaction                    Mother's
                               Mean reliability     Age                    Compliance        Communication                   Autonomy          Affect                       Wealth index                N
                                                             Regulation                                      Functioning                                    with People                    education
         Self Regulation            0.563         0.080***      0.228***       0.106***        0.107***        0.132***         0.012         0.122***       0.092***         0.132***      0.130***   1987
           Compliance               0.522           0.017       0.136***       0.162***        0.082***        0.100***         0.008          0.054**       0.104***         0.072***       0.046*    1987
         Communication              0.278           0.011       0.079***        0.048**        0.146***        0.098***         0.027         0.080***       0.094***         0.101***      0.141***   1987
      Adaptive Functioning          0.206         0.078***      0.166***       0.060***        0.062***        0.131***         0.022          0.050**       0.080***         0.067***      0.092***   1987
            Autonomy                0.289          -0.034         0.028          0.014           0.021           0.017         -0.024          0.052**        0.048**         0.094***      0.106***   1987
              Affect                0.008          -0.002           0            0.032           -0.03          -0.044*       0.064***        -0.057**         0.001           -0.019      -0.085***   1987
     Interaction with People        0.381           0.012       0.063***         0.015         0.083***        0.067***        -0.028         0.082***       0.112***         0.099***      0.074***   1987
 Notes: Correlation coefficient significantly different from zero at: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Mean reliability defined as (1/se(m )2 )/(1 + 1/se(m )2 ) where se(m ) refers to the standard
error on the child's latent score computed through the empirical bayes' estimator (for measures scored using IRT only). For the correlation coefficient of the measures with age we use the IRT (or
count) score before non-parametric standardization, for all other correlation coefficients we use the IRT (or count) score after non-parametric standardization (removing all age effects). Baseline
measures standardised for age. Wealth index constructed using factor analysis of baseline asset ownership. Years of education of mother as measured at baseline.




45
                                              Table A.6: Contemporaneous Correlation of Child Socio-Emotional Development Assessments

                                                                     Self                                        Adaptive                                     Interaction
                                                                                Compliance     Communication                    Autonomy          Affect
                                                                  Regulation                                    Functioning                                   with People
                                          Self Regulation              1
                                            Compliance             0.372***           1
                                          Communication            0.346***       0.274***            1
                                       Adaptive Functioning        0.310***       0.178***        0.223***            1
                                             Autonomy              0.270***       0.187***        0.284***        0.183***             1
                                               Affect             -0.0697***       0.00487         0.00508         -0.0341         -0.00198          1
                                      Interaction with People      0.265***       0.238***        0.272***        0.185***         0.298***      -0.0444*          1
                                    Notes: Correlation coefficient significantly different from zero at: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All measures are
                                    non-parametrically standardized to remove age effects.
Table A.7: Factor Loadings for CLS and Pre-literacy Skills factors

                                            Factor Loadings
                              CLS     CLS (exc. PTT)       Pre-literacy Skills
  TVIP                        0.769        0.784                 0.762
  Daberon - total             0.805        0.783
  Pencil Tapping Test         0.472
  Woodcock Munoz - 12         0.587        0.614
  Woodcock Munoz - 14         0.73         0.753                 0.748
  Woodcock Munoz - 17         0.458        0.467                 0.412
  Eigenvalue                  2.548        2.388                  1.31
  Notes: CLS refers to Cognitive, Language and School Readiness. Table
 presents factor loadings from three separate factor analyses. Allocation of
 measures to CLS and pre-literacy skills factors was pre-specified and set out
 in table A.2. CLS (exc. PTT) additionally constructed to obtain a CLS
 measure for the full sample since PTT only collected for children over 48
 months of age. Factors with eigenvalue greater than one retained (Kaiser
 1960); this led to one factor being retained for each analysis.




      Table A.8: Factor Loadings for Socio-Emotional Skills

                                             Factor Loading
                 Self Regulation                   0.612
                 Compliance                        0.497
                 Communication                     0.531
                 Adaptive Functioning              0.416
                 Autonomy                          0.467
                 Interaction with People           0.481
                 Eigenvalue                        1.526
                 Notes: Table presents factor loadings for
                factor analysis of socio-emotional skills mea-
                sures.    Allocation of measures to socio-
                emotional skills factors was pre-specified and
                set out in table A.2. Factors with eigenvalue
                greater than one retained (Kaiser 1960); this
                led to one factor being retained.




           Table A.9: Factor Loadings for Play Materials

                                            Factor Loading
                  Musical toys                     0.485
                  Building toys                    0.664
                  Painting/writing toys             0.3
                  Movement toys                    0.334
                  Fantasy toys                      0.3
                  Story books                      0.518
                  Colouring books                  0.505
                  Shape toys                       0.687
                  Eigenvalue                       1.963
                  Notes: Table presents factor loadings for
                 factor analysis of play materials measures.
                 Factors with eigenvalue greater than one re-
                 tained (Kaiser 1960); this led to one factor
                 being retained.




                                      46
Table A.10: Factor Loadings for Play Activities with Mother

                                            Factor Loading
        Activities with books (minutes)           0.54
        Telling stories (minutes)                0.526
        Play with child's toys (minutes)         0.465
        Draw, paint etc (minutes)                 0.33
        Singing (times)                          0.456
        Go to park, sqaure etc (times)           0.332
        Go out to do chores (times)              0.167
        Go out to play (times)                   0.372
        Naming, counting etc (times)             0.449
        Talking about day etc (times)            0.296
        Watching TV (times)                      0.241
        Dancing (times)                          0.381
        Eigenvalue                                1.87
        Notes: Table presents factor loadings for factor anal-
       ysis of play activities with mother measures. Fac-
       tors with eigenvalue greater than one retained (Kaiser
       1960); this led to one factor being retained.




Table A.11: Factor Loadings for Play Activities with Father

                                            Factor Loading
        Activities with books (minutes)          0.653
        Telling stories (minutes)                0.634
        Play with child's toys (minutes)         0.571
        Draw, paint etc (minutes)                0.537
        Singing (times)                          0.536
        Go to park, sqaure etc (times)           0.437
        Go out to do chores (times)              0.216
        Go out to play (times)                   0.457
        Naming, counting etc (times)             0.529
        Talking about day etc (times)             0.42
        Watching TV (times)                      0.449
        Dancing (times)                          0.404
        Eigenvalue                               2.997
        Notes: Table presents factor loadings for factor anal-
       ysis of play activities with father measures. Fac-
       tors with eigenvalue greater than one retained (Kaiser
       1960); this led to one factor being retained.




                                 47
                                            Table A.12: Impact of HIM and HIM+FE on all Directly Assessed Measures of Child Development


                                 Receptive Language             Fluid                      Expressive                   Memory                       School                      Inhibitory
                                      (TVIP)                  reasoning                     language                   for words                    Readiness                     Control
                                                               (WM12)                       (WM14)                      (WM17)                       (DAB)                         (PTT)

                                             (1)                          (2)                           (3)                        (4)                          (5)                           (6)


            HIM only                       -0.084                       0.006                        -0.084                      -0.072                       -0.003                       0.038
                                          (0.062)                      (0.056)                      (0.069)                     (0.057)                      (0.066)                      (0.072)
                                 [p = 0.169, pF W = 0.540]    [p = 0.916, pF W = 0.991]    [p = 0.221, pF W = 0.545]   [p = 0.203, pF W = 0.580]    [p = 0.968, pF W = 0.968]    [p = 0.588, pF W = 0.909]
                                        {p = 0.201}                  {p = 0.913}                  {p = 0.215}                 {p = 0.255}                  {p = 0.966}                  {p = 0.599}

            HIM+FE                         -0.011                     0.148***                       0.099                       0.021              0.055                        0.100
                                          (0.063)                      (0.057)                      (0.065)                     (0.053)             (0.062)                      (0.072)




48
                                 [p = 0.853, pF W = 0.853]    [p = 0.006, pF W = 0.030]    [p = 0.126, pF W = 0.401]   [p = 0.681, pF W = 0.899]    [p = 0.372, pF W = 0.688]    [p = 0.165, pF W = 0.452]
                                        {p = 0.863}                  {p = 0.011}                  {p = 0.097}                 {p = 0.737}                  {p = 0.356}                  {p = 0.180}



      HIM + FE vs. HIM                     0.073                       0.142**                     0.183***                      0.093*                       0.058                        0.061
                                          (0.063)                      (0.070)                      (0.064)                     (0.056)                      (0.064)                      (0.073)
                                 [p = 0.246, pF W = 0.513]    [p = 0.046, pF W = 0.171]    [p = 0.005, pF W = 0.023]   [p = 0.097, pF W = 0.287]    [p = 0.362, pF W = 0.583]    [p = 0.410, pF W = 0.410]
                                        {p = 0.245}                  {p = 0.036}                  {p = 0.001}                 {p = 0.137}                  {p = 0.353}                  {p = 0.391}


                 N                          1819                          1825                       1825                          1825                         1825                          1073
      Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 using bootstrap p-values. Standard errors (bootstrapped) in parentheses. Single-hypothesis two-sided p-values calculated 2 ways: (i) [bootstrap] and
     (ii) {randomization - t}. Adjusted two-sided p-values (pF W ) are equivalent to bootstrap p-values but adjusted for testing each null hypothesis (null impact of HIM, HIM+FE and the comparison)
     on multiple outcomes through the stepwise procedure described in List, Shaikh, and Xu (2016). In particular, we correct for multiple testing across all outcomes in table. Bootstrapped statistics
     use block-bootstraps, resampling triplets with replacement, and comprise 5000 iterations. Randomization inference (5000 iterations) accounts for clustering at HI level and stratification by triplets.
     All estimates control for gender, city effects, tester effects and baseline scores for MacArthur Bates CDI and each sub-scale of the ASQ-III. All measures scaled to have a mean of zero and standard
     deviation of one in the control group. All measures are age-standardized. See Table A.2 for details of measures.
Table A.13: Proportion of Teachers Completing FE Teacher Training by BL Number of Children

                                          Self-Reported Data    Administrative Data
                                                 (1)                    (2)


                     Bigger BL HI               0.280                  0.255

                     Smaller BL HI              0.452                  0.507


                  p-value on difference         0.037                  0.000
                  Notes: Table shows number of teachers who completed the FE train-
                 ing relative to the number of teachers in the HI at baseline for HIs
                 allocated to the HI+FE group. Self reported data comes from teacher
                 questionnaires at endline. Administrative data comes for records kept
                 by the Colombian National University.




                                                  49
                 Table A.14: Heterogeneity by HI Characteristics

                                                   Heterogeneity by HI Size
                                               CLS                       Pre-literacy
                                                  (1)                        (2)


           HIM only                             0.092                        0.026
                                               -0.099                       -0.097
                                     [p = 0.352, pF W = 0.508]    [p = 0.800, pF W = 0.800]
                                            {p = 0.354}                  {p = 0.791}

 HIM only X Bigger BL HI                      -0.283*                      -0.266*
                                               -0.16                        -0.158
                                     [p = 0.076, pF W = 0.192]    [p = 0.088, pF W = 0.183]
                                            {p = 0.103}                  {p = 0.095}

           HIM+FE                             0.253**                       0.186*
                                               -0.114                       -0.113
                                     [p = 0.029, pF W = 0.069]    [p = 0.100, pF W = 0.165]
                                            {p = 0.023}                  {p = 0.073}

 HIM+FE X Bigger BL HI                         -0.244                      -0.295*
                                                -0.17                       -0.154
                                     [p = 0.152, pF W = 0.152]    [p = 0.054, pF W = 0.111]
                                            {p = 0.153}                  {p = 0.050}


      HIM+FE vs. HIM                           0.161                        0.161
                                              (0.106)                      (0.101)
                                     [p = 0.132, pF W = 0.257]    [p = 0.112, pF W = 0.261]
                                            {p = 0.169}                  {p = 0.130}

     HIM+FE vs. HIM                            0.039                        -0.029
      X Bigger BL HI                          (0.168)                      (0.156)
                                     [p = 0.812, pF W = 0.948]    [p = 0.847, pF W = 0.847]
                                            {p = 0.831}                  {p = 0.853}
                N                              1071                         1819
 Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 using bootstrap p-values. Standard errors
(bootstrapped) in parentheses. Single-hypothesis two-sided p-values calculated 2 ways: (i)
[bootstrap] and (ii) {randomization - t}. Adjusted two-sided p-values (pF W ) are equivalent
to bootstrap p-values but adjusted for testing each null hypothesis (null impact of HIM,
HIM+FE and the comparison) on multiple outcomes through the stepwise procedure de-
scribed in List, Shaikh, and Xu (2016). In particular, we correct for multiple testing across
our two pre-specified child development outcomes and, for each of the two heterogeneity
analyses separately, across the two subgroups. Bootstrapped statistics use block-bootstraps,
resampling triplets with replacement, and comprise 5000 iterations. Randomization infer-
ence (5000 iterations) accounts for clustering at HI level and stratification by triplets. All
estimates control for gender, city effects, tester effects and baseline scores for MacArthur
Bates CDI and each sub-scale of the ASQ-III. All factors scaled to have a mean of zero
and standard deviation of one in the control group. All factors constructed as described in
section 4. Age effects removed from standardized scores prior to factor construction. Each
factor is constructed using the following standardized scores: (i) Cog, Lang and Sch (all
measures): WM12, WM14, WM17, TVIP, DAB and PTT, (ii) Cog, Lang and Sch (exc.
PTT): WM12, WM17, TVIP, WM14 and DAB, and (iii) Pre-literacy skills: WM14, WM17
and TVIP. See Table A.2 for details of measures and factors. Bigger BL HI implies child
was in an HI with above median (155) number of children at baseline.




                                             50
B   Additional Figures




                         51
                                              Figure B.1: Study Flow Diagram




Notes : Wherever there were 15, 16 or 17 18-36 month olds enrolled in an HI at baseline, we included them all in the study. Whenever
   there were 18 or more we randomly selected 17 for inclusion. As pre-specified, we dropped children with a `potential disability'
                         meaning that their Z-score was  -3 for at least one child development measure.




                                                                52
   Figure B.2: Item Characteristic Curves (ICCs) for Cognitive, Language and School Readiness Assessments

                       (a) Receptive Language                                        (b) Concept Formation




                      (c) Expressive Language                                        (d) Memory for Words




                        (e) Sound Awareness                                           (f) School Readiness




Notes: Figures show Item Characteristic Curves (ICCs) for each directly-assessed measure of child development with item-level data.
Using results from our 2-parameter IRT model, they plot, for each item i, the probability that a child answers correctly as a function
of child c's underlying ability cj in skill j . This probability is: P (ycji |cj ) = exp(i + i cj )/(1 + exp(i + i cj )) See Appendix
                                    for details of IRT procedure. Details of measures in Table A.2.




                                                                 53
                  Figure B.3: Item Characteristic Curves (ICCs) for Socio-Emotional Development




 Notes: Figures show Item Characteristic Curves (ICCs) for each maternal-report measure of socio-emotional development. Using
results from our 2-parameter IRT model, they plot, for each item i, the probability that a child's mother answers affirmatively as a
function of child c's underlying ability cj in skill j . This probability is: P (ycji |cj ) = exp(i + i cj )/(1 + exp(i + i cj )) See
                                                                   54
                              Appendix for details of IRT procedure. Details of measures in Table A.2.
            Figure B.4: Item Characteristic Curves (ICCs) for Classroom Quality Assessments (ECERS)




  Notes: Figures show Item Characteristic Curves (ICCs) for our two dimensions of preschool quality, as measured by the ECERS-R.
Using results from our 2-parameter IRT model, they plot, for each item i, the probability that the item was answered affirmatively as a
function of the underlying preschool quality cj in domain j . This probability is: P (ycji |cj ) = exp(i + i cj )/(1 + exp(i + i cj ))
                See Appendix for details of IRT procedure. Details of ECERS-R measure construction in Appendix D.3.


C      Hogares Infantiles in the Context of ECE Policy in Colombia

Hogares Infantiles (HIs) is the oldest, and until 2010 the only, public center-based early education program in

Colombia. HIs are partly-subsidized public preschools which are run by the government's National Family Welfare

Agency, Instituto Colombiano de Bienestar Familiar (ICBF). There are 1,008 HIs across Colombia which have

enrolled 125,000 children per year over the past decade.

    HIs are typically located in fairly well-equipped community centers. They typically have between 3 and 10

teachers each and each teacher cares for a class of, on average, 30 children. HIs provide care for 8 hours a day, 5

days a week. In addition to providing early education, they also provide children with up to 60% of daily nutritional

requirements. The out of pocket costs to parents or carers is around USD10-25 per month.

    HIs serve children aged 6 months to 5 years of age. However, the HIs only take children younger than two when

"it is proven that they do not have a responsible adult to care for them". Correspondingly, the vast majority of

children in HIs are between 2 and 5 years. HIs are intended to target children "from vulnerable working families".

Priority is given to children belonging to households whose SISBEN score (Colombias proxy means test for allocating

social welfare programs) is puts them below the poverty line, and to children who are at the highest risk of not

being able to attend childcare services and being left alone at home.

    In 2011, the government launched the national early childhood strategy From Zero to Forever (De Cero a Siempre,

DCAS henceforth) aimed at increasing access and improving the quality of early childhood services provided to

poor children. The objective was to deliver high-quality early childhood services for 1.2 million children under the



                                                                  55
age of 6 in poverty. As part of the DCAS strategy, the government of Colombia implemented a quality upgrade of

the HI program starting in 2013.




D        Measurements

In this appendix we provide further details of our construction of both measures of child development and measures

of preschool quality.



D.1      IRT Scoring of Child Development Assessments

As discussed in Section 3.1, we utilize item-level data on how each child (or mother for socio-emotional measures)

answered every question to predict the underlying latent constructs that each instrument captured. We use a two-

parameter item response theory (IRT) model to estimate the latent construct or skill that determines how a child

performed on the items comprising that instrument. Specifically, let whether or not child c answers item i correctly

in instrument j depend on the child c 's underlying latent skill j. Call this latent skill j
                                                                                           c and assume that it is


normally distributed across children with zero mean and unit variance. Allowing different items to differ in both

their difficulty ­ how likely is a child of average skill to answer correctly ­ and their discriminatory power ­ how

sensitive the probability of answering correctly is to a child's skill ­ we model the process determining children's

answers as:

                                                     
                                                                      j
                                                     1 if i + i j
                                                                c +        >0
                                                     
                                                                      ci
                                            j
                                           yci   =                                                             (D.1)
                                                     
                                                     0 otherwise
                                                     


       j                                                               j
where yci = 1 if child c answers item i correctly in instrument j and yci = 0 otherwise. We assume that the
         j
errors   ci   are independently and identically distributed as type-I extreme value with variance  2 /6 across items

and individuals. In this set-up i represents an item's difficulty ­ the higher is i the easier an item is ­ and i

represents its discriminatory power ­ the rate at which the probability of answering correctly changes with a child's

skill. We estimate i , i , j
                           c for skill j in two stages. First, we estimate i , i for i  {1, 2, ...I } using maximum


likelihood, integrating out the unobserved j
                                           c using adaptive Gauss­Hermite quadrature. Second, we use empirical


Bayes estimators of the latent skill j
                                     c of each child c (Skrondal and Rabe-Hesketh 2009). We take the mean of the




                                                            56
empirical posterior distribution of j                                             j                              ^i .
                                    c conditional on the child's item responses y c , imposing our estimates ^i, 

Again, we use adaptive Gauss­Hermite quadrature to integrate over the prior distribution of j
                                                                                            c.
                                                                                                               37




D.2       Age standardization

We age-standardize our child-development scores ^ j . To do so, we non-parametrically estimate the age-specific
                                                  c

      ^ (
mean, E  ^j          control
          c |agec , Tc
                                                  ^ (
                             = 1)), and variance, V  ^j          control
                                                      c |agec , Tc
                                                                                                       control
                                                                         = 1)), of the control group (Tc       = 1)) using

locally weighted regressions of ^j      ^j ^ ^j           control
                                 c and (c - E (c |agec , Tc       = 1)))2 on age. We then construct age standardized

z-scores as follows:


                                                     ^j
                                                             ^j         control
                                                      c - E (c |agec , Tc       = 1)
                                              mj
                                               c =                                                                  (D.2)
                                                         ^ (
                                                         V  ^j          control = 1)
                                                             c |agec , Tc



D.3       Constructing Preschool Quality Measures from the ECERS-R

As discussed in Section 3.2, the ECERS-R is comprised of 43 individual items which each measuring a different

aspect of quality, for example encouraging children to communicate. Each item is formed of around 10 sub-items

grouped under the headings inadequate, minimal, good and excellent to which the observer must answer true or false.

However, the official procedure, which we followed, for administering the sub-items turned out to be poorly suited

to our context. In particular, the procedure dictates that if the observer answers true to any of the sub-items listed

under the inadequate heading, all of which are negatively phrased, then on that item the classroom is categorized

as inadequate and the observer does not proceed to answer the sub-items in the other categories. Similar stopping

rules apply to the other categories. The difficulty lies in the fact that often a positive answer to a negatively-phrased

inadequate item would not seem to preclude a positive answer to a positively-phrased minimal, good or excellent

item. For example, in the previously mentioned item, answering true to very few materials accessible that encourage

children to communicate does not preclude that the observer could have also answered positively to staff balance

listening and talking appropriately for age and abilities of children during communication activities but following

the official procedure if an observer did answer positively to the former then they would not answer the latter at all.

Given that for many, or even most, of the classrooms in our sample many of the inadequate items were judged to

be true we have a huge amount of missing observations for later sub-items. Indeed, averaged across all classrooms

41.9% of the 129 minimal sub-items and 78.9% of the 136 good sub-items are not answered. This creates unstable
  37   To ensure parameter estimates were stable we only used items attempted by at least 20% of the sample.



                                                                 57
IRT parameter estimates when including sub-items with many missing values in a relatively small sample.

    Given the number of non-random missing values for items categorized as minimal, good and excellent we drop

these items from our analysis and construct measures that use only the inadequate items that are, by construction,

non-missing for all classrooms. This unfortunately implies that the sub-items making up our quality measures are

the absence of poor practices rather than the presence of good practices. We drop items with very low variance

( 0.10) and estimate separate underlying latent constructs for a classrooms process quality and structural quality

using a two-parameter IRT model, as described in equation (D.1). In doing so, we group together all sub-items

in the Personal Care Routines, Language and Literacy, Learning Activities, Interaction and Program Structure

subscales to construct a measure of process quality while using items in the Space and Furnishings subscale to

construct a measure of structural quality. To increase the sample size for estimating IRT parameters we pool

ECERS-R measures from baseline and endline giving a total sample of 296 observations. We drop items that were

found to be preventing model convergence.




E      Costs of Pedagogical Training Program

We argue that the pedagogical training program is the key component of FE in terms of generating impacts on

children's cognition, language and school readiness. FE provided us with the total cost of this component (COP

419546284, or USD 233081 at February 2013 exchange rate of 1800 COP/USD). With this budget, FE provided

completed training for 99 teachers from the 40 HIs in the HIM+FE treatment arm.38 This represented 32% of

teachers who worked in those 40 HIs. We thus estimate that the initial one-off cost to roll out the pedagogical

training program to new HIs, at the same intensity as achieved the impacts we see in this study (i.e. training 32%

of teachers), would be USD 5827 per HI or USD 35 per child attending an HI.

    However, it is unreasonable to assume that the same intensity of training program would be required year after

year for FE to sustain its impacts on successive cohorts. Rather, we calculate the costs of maintaining a ratio of

training 32% of staff, which implies providing training for 32% of new staff, and the costs of providing a yearly

refresher training to all teachers who have already been trained which we assume would cost 25% of the costs of

the full training. Given these assumptions, we estimate that the ongoing cost per center of maintaining the results
   38 More teachers began training however, for consistency, we calculate costs relative to the number completing. Presuming the drop-

out rates seen during the study are similar to what they would be if the program were scaled, this makes no difference. We also note
that in some cases other staff (headteachers, teaching assistants etc) also completed the training. To be as conservative as possible in
calculating costs we simply calculate cost per teacher completing rather than cost per person. This means that our projected costs also
allow the same proportion of other staff to receive training as they did in the trial.



                                                                  58
of the pedagogical training program would be USD 2206 per year and the cost per child would be USD 13 per year.

All data, assumptions and formulae used in these calculations are shown in Table D.1.

   In interpreting these costs, there are two points to note. First, to train 100% of teachers, rather than 32%, would

be more costly. However, since the benefits found in this study were from training 32% of teachers we consider this

the most meaningful cost. We would expect benefits to children's development to be larger if a greater proportion

of teachers were trained. Second, our cost figures are based on 32% of all teachers in the center receiving the

training, irrespective of the age they teach, and the cost per child figure is based on the total number of children

in the center. Our study children were between 1 and 3 at baseline and between 3 and 5 at endline. Given only

2.7% of teachers report that they primarily teach children younger than one year, we consider the training of all

teachers relevant for generating the treatment effect. Moreover, we note that teachers' propensity to complete the

training appears independent of the age of the children they teach. Therefore, we include all teachers and children

of all ages in the costing.




                                                         59
                                     Table D.1: Rough costs of scaling Pedagogical Training component of FE

                                                                                                                           Source
            Costs of pedagogical training program
     (1)    Total cost of FE pedagogical training program                                                  USD 233,081     FE
     (2)    Number of teachers who completed training                                                                99    FE
     (3)    Cost per teacher completing training                                                           USD 2,354.35    (1)/(2)


            Actual intensity of pedagogical training program in FE treatment arm
     (4)    Total number of teachers in HIs allocated to HIM+FE treatment arm                                        313   Endline survey
     (5)    Proportion of teachers who completed training in HIM+FE treatment arm                                   0.32   (2)/(4)


            Projected one-off cost per center of training 32% of teachers




60
     (6)    Average number of children per center                                                                  166     Endline survey
     (7)    One-off cost per center of training 32% of teachers                                           USD 5,827.03     (1)/40
     (8)    One-off cost per child of training 32% of teachers                                              USD 35.10      (7)/(6)


            Projected ongoing cost of maintaining 32% of teachers trained (inc. yearly refresher training)
     (9)    Proportion of one-off costs required to complete yearly refresher training                              0.25   Assumption
     (10)   Average number of teachers per HI                                                                       7.05   Endline survey
     (11)   Average number of new teachers per HI per year (number who joined in 2014)                               1.6   Endline survey
     (12)   Yearly cost per center of training 32% of new teachers                                          USD 1,191.47   (3)x(5)x(11)
     (13)   Yearly cost per child of training 32% of new teachers                                              USD 7.18    (12)/(6)
     (14)   Yearly cost per center of refresher training for all previously trained teachers                USD 1,014.61   [(10)-(11)]x(9)x(3)x(5)
     (15)   Yearly cost per child of refresher training for all previously trained teachers                    USD 6.11    (14)/(6)
     (16)   Yearly cost per center of maintaining 32% of teachers trained (inc. yearly refresher training) USD 2,206.08    (12)+(14)
     (17)   Yearly cost per child of maintaining 32% of teachers trained (inc. yearly refresher training)    USD 13.29     (13)+(15)
