                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE IMPACT OF THE ACA MEDICAID EXPANSION ON DISABILITY PROGRAM
                             APPLICATIONS

                                        Lucie Schmidt
                                     Lara Shore-Sheppard
                                         Tara Watson

                                      Working Paper 26192
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26192


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




The Russell Sage Foundation generously provided financial support for this project through grant
number #94-17-03. This research was also supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration
through grant #5 DRC12000002-06 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the
SSA Disability Research Consortium which facilitated data acquisition. We are grateful to
Tokunbo Oluwole and Lynn Fisher at the Social Security Administration for providing us with
data. We thank Diane Alexander, Misha Dworsky, Melanie Guldi, Lee Lockwood, Austin
Nichols, Laura Wherry, and participants in seminars at the University of Georgia, Georgia State,
Cornell, Syracuse, UC Davis, University of Central Florida, the National Tax Association, the
Association for Public Policy and Management, the Society of Labor Economists, the Russell
Sage Foundation, and the American Society of Health Economists for helpful comments. Louisa
Abel, Mary Beth Dato, and Casey DeLano provided excellent research assistance. The findings
and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of SSA,
any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lucie Schmidt, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Tara Watson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of the ACA Medicaid Expansion on Disability Program Applications
Lucie Schmidt, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Tara Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 26192
August 2019
JEL No. I10,I13

                                           ABSTRACT

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) expanded the availability of public health insurance, decreasing
the relative benefit of participating in disability programs but also lowering the cost of exiting the
labor market to apply for disability program benefits. In this paper, we explore the impact of
expanded access to Medicaid through the ACA on applications to the Supplemental Security
Income (SSI) and Social Security Disability Income (SSDI) programs. Using the fact that the
Supreme Court decision of June 2012 made the Medicaid expansion optional for the states, we
compare changes in county-level SSI and SSDI caseloads in contiguous county pairs across a
state border. We find no significant effects of the Medicaid expansion on applications or awards
to either SSI or SSDI, and can reject economically meaningful impacts of Medicaid expansions
on applications to disability programs.

Lucie Schmidt                                     Tara Watson
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Williams College                                  Williams College
201 Schapiro Hall                                 24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267                            Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER                                          and NBER
lschmidt@williams.edu                             tara.watson@williams.edu

Lara Shore-Sheppard
Department of Economics
Williams College
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER
lshore@williams.edu
I. Introduction

       One of the primary goals of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 was to expand

health insurance coverage and reduce the number of uninsured. Expanded eligibility for

Medicaid was to be an important element in achieving this goal, in the process fundamentally

changing the nature of Medicaid (Buchmueller, Ham, and Shore-Sheppard 2016). From its

inception, Medicaid had been narrowly targeted at only subgroups of the poor: those who were

elderly, disabled, or single parent families who also qualified for cash assistance. By including a

provision intended to expand Medicaid to cover all individuals with family incomes up to 138

percent of the federal poverty level, the ACA initiated a significant increase in the availability of

public insurance beyond those narrowly targeted groups. Prior to the Medicaid expansion, one

path to public health insurance coverage for working-age adults was to participate in one of the

two major federal disability benefit programs: Supplemental Security Income (SSI--the

federally financed program providing cash assistance to low-income individuals with disabilities)

offers a path to Medicaid, and Social Security Disability Income (SSDI--the portion of the

Social Security program that pays benefits to workers with sufficient work history who have

become disabled) allows for access to Medicare after a two-year waiting period. This long-

standing link between disability program participation and public health insurance coverage

means that changes in the health insurance policy landscape could affect applications to SSI or

SSDI. This paper investigates whether the availability of health insurance for adults regardless

of disability status affects the decision to apply for disability benefit programs.

       Understanding the effects of the ACA Medicaid expansion on disability benefit

applications is important. Evidence suggests that roughly 13 to 19 percent of the population have

disabilities, and about half of those are in the ages 18-64 population that would be most likely to




                                                                                                    1
be affected by the ACA (Brault 2012, p. 4). In addition, rates of disabling health conditions and

disability benefit receipt have grown substantially in recent decades (Autor and Duggan 2003,

Case and Deaton 2015). The growth in disability benefit receipt is of particular concern given

the sizeable public outlays on these programs (approximately $143 billion for SSDI and $55

billion for SSI respectively in 2017 (Center on Budget and Policy Priorities 2018, Social Security

Administration 2018), and concerns about the possible work disincentives associated with these

programs. More generally, understanding the relationship between health insurance provision

and disability assistance has implications for cost-benefit analysis of health policy and an

understanding of cross-program interactions.

       In this paper, we explore the impact of expanded access to Medicaid on applications to

disability benefit programs. We rely on the fact that the Supreme Court decision of June 2012

made the ACA Medicaid expansion optional to the states. We exploit the facts that not all states

chose to expand health insurance, that the timing of expansions varied across those states that did

choose to expand, and that some states had more generous income eligibility limits even before

expansion.

       Although state variation in expansion status and timing would seem to suggest that a

difference-in-differences design would be appropriate, the parallel trends assumption required

for such a design is suspect in the case of disability programs. Figure 1 shows that levels of and

trends in SSI applications over time at the state level vary across the different types of states

(early expanders, regular expanders, and those states that never expanded) prior to the expansion.

To better identify the causal effect of Medicaid expansion, we take inspiration from the

minimum wage literature and use adjacent counties on either side of a state border to estimate the

effect of Medicaid expansions.




                                                                                                     2
       In particular, we use county-level data on SSI and SSDI applications obtained from the

Social Security Administration to examine contiguous county pairs. Our identification is based

on approximately 500 such pairs within which one state took up the Medicaid expansion and the

other did not. Relative to a broad comparison of counties in states that expanded and those that

did not, counties bordering each other are more likely to share similar labor markets, are more

likely to be affected by the same local trends, and are more likely to share macroeconomic

shocks. A border county approach that controls for county pair by year fixed effects allows us to

focus narrowly on differences arising from the ACA Medicaid expansion choice. 1 Our primary

results use a continuous measure of the state Medicaid income eligibility limits over time, which

allows us to exploit additional variation across states and over time in Medicaid income

eligibility, although we also show that results are similar if we examine a binary indicator for

expansion as is common in the existing literature.

       Using data from the Census Bureau's Small Area Health Insurance Estimates at the

county level, we first show that the border-county expansion discontinuity strategy finds

negative Medicaid expansion effects on uninsurance, with magnitudes similar to those found in

the existing literature. We then examine county-level data from the Social Security

Administration on applications to SSI and SSDI. The results suggest no significant relationship

between the ACA Medicaid expansion and applications to either disability program, and we can

rule out economically meaningful impacts in either direction. For comparison with the existing



1
  One concern that might arise with this identification strategy is the possibility that individuals
might migrate across county lines in order to obtain Medicaid. However, evidence to date
suggests that any such migration is likely to be minimal. Goodman (2017) finds no evidence of a
migration response to the ACA Medicaid expansion at the public-use microdata area (PUMA)
level, consistent with findings by Schwartz and Sommers (2014) for earlier health insurance
expansions. The results suggest that low-income people do not migrate in response to Medicaid
eligibility, and the authors can rule out all but very small migration responses.


                                                                                                   3
literature, we also estimate state difference-in-differences and state border discontinuity models,

and find that the results are similar across identification strategies. Prior to the implementation of

the ACA, some scholars predicted that it would reduce health insurance motivated disability

enrollment (Kennedy and Blodgett 2012), while there was also a possibility that health insurance

access would reduce job lock and promote disability program applications. Our results suggest

that neither of these predictions materialized; we find no net impact of the ACA Medicaid

expansions on disability program applications or awards.



II. Background

        To participate in SSI or SSDI, individuals must be determined to have a disability as

defined by the Social Security Administration (SSA). In addition to a medical diagnosis, the

individual must demonstrate the inability to engage in "substantial gainful activity"--work that

would pay more than a set amount. 2 Thus, to qualify for either program, individuals must work

very little or not at all. Beyond those requirements, the two programs have different sets of

eligibility criteria for potential beneficiaries. To receive SSI, an individual must have income and

resources below certain standards, but need not have a work history. To receive SSDI, on the

other hand, an individual need not have limited resources (for example, the individual could have

extensive assets and a spouse with high earnings), but must have sufficient work history before a

period of non-work to qualify.

        Since the process for determining whether an individual meets the medical standard for

disability is lengthy, an individual with a disability faces the prospect of a substantial delay



2
 The disability determination process contains five steps, of which the substantial gainful
activity test is the first. See Lahiri et al. (1995) for a detailed discussion of the disability
determination process.


                                                                                                      4
between the time of application and the time of disability determination. From application to

initial decision takes on average four months. One third of applicants receive a successful

decision on appeal, and appealing to the highest level (to the administrative law judge) usually

takes two years (Duggan, Kearney, and Rennane 2016). Moreover, for SSDI there is a five-

month waiting period after disability begins before payments can begin and an additional 24

months before Medicare can begin.

       In the absence of a robust public health insurance program, applying for disability may

require going without health insurance for a period of months or years. The restriction on gainful

activity means potentially SSI- or SSDI-eligible individuals with disabilities are unlikely to

obtain health insurance through their employer, the most common source of health insurance for

nonelderly adults in the United States. In the case of SSI, it is also unlikely that the recipient

would have health insurance through a spouse's employer, as most jobs offering health insurance

would pay a salary that exceeds the very low household income limits for SSI.

       There are several pathways through which the changes in health insurance access

provided by the ACA Medicaid expansion may affect SSI and SSDI applications. First, the

Medicaid expansion represents an alternative means of obtaining health insurance that does not

require participation in a disability program. From the time of its enactment until the ACA,

Medicaid has had a categorical requirement--that is, only individuals who are members of an

eligible category could receive coverage under Medicaid. These categories include children and

their parents, and the disabled, blind, and elderly, with each category having its own set of

income limits. 3 With Medicaid eligibility expanded to all low-income adults, individuals with



3
 Prior to the ACA, some states received permission to extend coverage to limited groups of
childless adults under a waiver of the federal rules. We account for this waiver coverage in our
empirical work.


                                                                                                     5
disabilities have the option to enroll in Medicaid without going through the onerous process of

applying for cash SSI or SSDI benefits. We refer to this as the "alternative source of health

insurance" channel. If this channel is important, it would suggest that Medicaid expansions could

reduce applications to disability programs.

       Second, as Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2014) point out, without public health

insurance, some disabled individuals do not apply for disability benefits because they would lack

health insurance coverage throughout the lengthy application process. The expansion of

Medicaid access through the ACA may allow disabled individuals to quit their jobs to apply for

disability benefits, reducing health-insurance-related "employment lock." The Medicaid

expansion could affect all members of a family with a disabled person; since disability program

participation leads to insurance coverage only for the disabled individual, Medicaid expansion

could allow multiple members of a family to have insurance coverage even if the former primary

earner began receiving SSI or SSDI. This "employment lock" pathway would tend to increase

disability applications.

       Third, expanded access to Medicaid may make individuals more aware of the possibility

of eligibility for additional public programs. Specifically, as individuals apply for Medicaid, they

may be directed by state offices to apply for disability benefits if they are considered to be

eligible. This "information channel" would tend to increase applications to disability programs.

       Finally, by improving access to health insurance, Medicaid may give individuals

additional resources to diagnose and document health conditions, ultimately leading to higher

rates of disability program applications, and possibly higher success rates for existing

applications. It is also possible that access to health insurance improved health, leading to lower

rates of disability in the future and thus lower applications. These health-related channels are




                                                                                                      6
unlikely to be evident in the early years of the Medicaid expansion, however, and we do not

expect to see evidence of them in the time period we study.

         In sum, the various pathways by which Medicaid expansion could affect disability

program applications go in both directions. In the analysis we use in this paper it will not be

possible to distinguish the relative magnitude of the different pathways; we will only be able to

see the sign and magnitude of any net effect. We expect estimated effects to be smaller for SSDI

than for SSI because SSI is means-tested and more likely to be taken up by individuals under 138

percent of the poverty line, the noncategorical Medicaid income threshold in most expansion

states. SSDI has a work history requirement, implying that potential SSDI recipients are

relatively higher income, so the Medicaid expansion may be relatively less important for this

group.

         Our focus in this paper is on applications to disability programs, since that is the initial

margin upon which Medicaid expansion may have an impact. To provide further information

about the relative disability status of applicants and to understand the implications for the

disability programs, we also examine new awards of disability benefits. If applicants who are

marginal--in the sense that their decision to apply is changed by the expansion of Medicaid--

have less severe impairments, then a change in applications may not translate into a change in

awards.

         The Medicaid expansion also has potential implications for disability program caseloads

through its impact on awards (and perhaps impacts on exits). However, there are serious

limitations to the empirical investigation of disability caseloads per se because they are a stock

that evolves slowly. Disability programs usually have very low exit rates (Raut 2017; SSA 2004;

Duggan, Kearney, and Rennane 2016), and as a result, the stocks do not respond as quickly to




                                                                                                        7
external policy changes as flows do. In addition, caseloads reflect policy and economic changes

in previous periods, so it is unclear how long it would take for any Medicaid expansion impacts

to become apparent in caseloads.

        In the context of welfare caseloads following the 1996 welfare reform, Klerman and

Haider (2004) show that a static model of stocks is likely to be misspecified. A static stock

model suffers from omitted variables bias; in particular, such a model omits necessary lags of the

explanatory variables and interactions between the lags. Their intuition for this finding is that

since the stock depends on previous economic conditions and policies, even under the extremely

restrictive assumption of no duration dependence, information about previous conditions is

necessary to explain caseload sizes. This is likely more of a concern for disability programs,

which by design have long spells of participation. Thus, to understand the impacts of ACA

Medicaid expansions, we focus on applications and awards rather than caseloads.



III. Previous Literature

        There is a small but growing literature on the relationship between public health

insurance and disability programs, although relatively few papers have examined applications.

Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2014) examine county-level disability program applications in

Massachusetts following changes in access to public health insurance from the health insurance

reform in 2006, comparing the change in county-level disability program applications in

Massachusetts relative to the change in a group of counties in comparison states. They find

modest increases in disability applications (1­3 percent) in Massachusetts relative to neighboring

states in the first year after reform, and no difference after the first year.




                                                                                                    8
        A recent paper by Levere et al. (2019) examines child SSI applications following state

Medicaid expansions in the 1990s. The authors use a state-age-year simulated eligibility

approach and find no effect of state Medicaid eligibility expansions on SSI applications overall.

However, they do find a negative effect of Medicaid eligibility on SSI applications in the subset

of states for which SSI recipients required separate paperwork to obtain Medicaid. These

negative impacts are evident in both the short and long run applications to SSI for affected

children.

        Baicker et al. (2014), studying a randomized lottery offering Medicaid to some residents

of Oregon, also examine disability programs as outcomes. The authors focus primarily on

caseload or participation measures but also report some findings on applications in a footnote.

They characterize their findings as "suggestive evidence of statistical effect on SSDI and SSI

applications, but not one that was economically meaningful (e.g., Medicaid coverage may cause

about a 1 percentage point increase in applications to each program, and perhaps a half a

percentage point increase in approvals for SSDI)." The results for disability participation are

insignificant.

        Chatterji and Li (2017) examine the impact of public insurance expansions that took

place in three states (Connecticut, Minnesota, and California) and the District of Columbia

between 2010 and 2013 on the percent of state nonelderly population receiving SSI. All four

"states" (including DC as a state) had previously offered some public health insurance to low-

income adults and the expansions represented a transition from pre-existing state or local

insurance programs. Typically, those previous programs had limits on benefits or the number of

enrollees, and both the previous programs and the expansion programs varied substantially by

state. As a result, Chatterji and Li examine each state separately using a synthetic control




                                                                                                    9
approach, and find an effect that is statistically distinguishable from zero only in Connecticut: a

marginally statistically significant 0.11 percentage point reduction in SSI receipt. They also

report trying to examine SSI application rates but being unable to form suitable synthetic

controls for application rates for those four states.

        Anand et al. (2019) is the work most similar to ours, examining the response to the ACA

Medicaid expansion using quarterly administrative data from the Social Security Administration

on application rates by Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA). The authors carefully match

PUMAs based on pre-2014 characteristics, keeping only those PUMAs in expansion and non-

expansion states (where expansion is defined as of January 2014) that match closely with at least

one other PUMA. They use these expansion and non-expansion PUMAs in their matched sample

in a straightforward difference-in-differences regression of the application rate by PUMA and

quarter, thus comparing all matched expansion PUMAs to matched non-expansion PUMAs

rather than focusing on comparing outcomes in the close matches to each other. They find that

SSI applications were slightly higher in PUMAs in states that expanded in the first quarter of

2014 than in non-expansion PUMAs between one and five quarters after the expansion. There is

some evidence of dissimilar pre-expansion trends in the expansion and non-expansion groups,

however, raising the question of whether the effect they find is due to the expansion or

differential underlying trends related to recession recovery.

        Two other papers, Burns and Dague (2017) and Soni et al. (2017), focus exclusively on

stock measures such as participation and caseloads. Burns and Dague (2017) investigate

Medicaid expansions to childless adults that occurred prior to most ACA-related expansions

between 2001 and 2013. The authors use individual data from the American Community Survey,

comparing states with coverage for childless adults to states without coverage and also




                                                                                                 10
estimating similar specifications comparing differences in income eligibility limits for childless

adults across states. They find that when a state covers childless adults under Medicaid SSI

participation is lower by 0.17 percentage points, a 7 percent relative decrease. Soni et al. (2017)

use a state difference-in-differences approach to examine the ACA Medicaid expansion,

comparing SSI participation in states that expanded Medicaid as of 2015 with participation in

states that did not expand Medicaid or did not expand until after 2015. They report results

suggesting that the number of SSI recipients in a state fell by about 3500 per year in expansion

states relative to nonexpansion states (a 3.3 percent change in participation) in expansion states

relative to nonexpansion states after 2014. 4 In sum, the existing literature tends to find

economically small but mixed effects of Medicaid eligibility expansion on disability

applications, and estimated participation and caseload effects tend to be negative or near zero.

       Our work contributes to the existing literature in several important ways. First, we focus

on applications and awards, which as discussed above are the key margins upon which Medicaid

expansion may have an impact and are not susceptible to the estimation problems faced by static

models of caseload stocks. Second, we use a new identification strategy (differences in adjacent

county pairs that differ in their Medicaid expansion status) that, compared to a state differences

model, more plausibly delivers an unbiased estimate. Third, we allow for a rich specification of

Medicaid eligibility, treating the Medicaid expansion not just as something that turns "on" or not

at a given time, but allowing for the possibility of differential effects based on the levels of

Medicaid income eligibility limits prior to the ACA expansion.



4
  The Soni et al. results appear to be sensitive to specification. In particular, we find that
specifications using similar data but caseload rates (recipients per population) instead of numbers
of recipients show no impact of the expansion. Also, their participation results appear sensitive to
the inclusion of lagged unemployment rates, as Klerman and Haider's (2004) results would
suggest (results available from the authors).


                                                                                                   11
IV. Empirical Approach

        To identify the impact of expanded access to Medicaid via the ACA on SSI and SSDI

applications and awards, we use variation in noncategorical Medicaid eligibility (that is,

Medicaid eligibility that does not require the individual to establish the presence of a disability or

a dependent child) resulting from the June 2012 Supreme Court decision making the Medicaid

expansion optional to the states. Like other studies of the ACA, we take advantage of variation

by state and over time in the Medicaid expansion. A key empirical challenge is that there is non-

randomness including a strong geographic correlation in which states chose to expand, and the

outcomes of interest may be trending differently in different parts of the country. For example,

trends in disability status are different in Southern states than from states outside the South, and

the fact that many of the non-expansion states are in the South could lead to spurious correlation

between expansion status and applications to disability programs. Indeed, Figure 1 presents

visual evidence that trends in SSI application rates prior to the ACA differed between states that

would become early expansion, later expansion, and non-expansion states. To address this

challenge, we conduct our analysis at the county level, and compare changes in disability benefit

participation within contiguous county pairs, where one county is in a state that expanded while

the other is in a state that did not.

        The county border approach has been used effectively to study the employment effects of

state minimum wages (see Dube, Lester, and Reich 2010, 2016). Counties bordering each other

are more likely to share similar labor markets, are likely to be affected by the same local trends,

and are more likely to share macroeconomic shocks than are counties that do not share a

common border (Allegretto et al. 2013; Dube, Lester, and Reich 2016). This research design

allows us to focus narrowly on differences arising from the ACA Medicaid expansion choice by




                                                                                                   12
comparing changes over time in outcomes from U.S. counties on either side of a state border. In

this approach, the identifying assumption is that the change in the outcome of interest in the

county in the non-expanding state is a reasonable counterfactual estimate for how the outcome of

interest would have changed in its neighboring county across the border if the Medicaid

expansion had not occurred.

       A simple illustration of the nature of our research design can be seen in Figure 2, where

the sub-state divisions shown are counties, and contiguous border county pairs that differed in

their Medicaid expansion status as of April 2014 are highlighted. At that time, there were 488

discordant county pairs (where one county was in a state that had expanded Medicaid and the

neighboring county was in a state that did not) out of a total of 1197 county pairs. In addition, we

take advantage of two sources of variation not visible in Figure 2. First, states had different

income eligibility limits for Medicaid prior to the ACA expansion, which means that the ACA

expansion represented a more substantial increase in access to public insurance in some states

than in others. Second, the timing of Medicaid expansion was not uniform, with some states

choosing to expand earlier or in a gradual way, and others choosing to expand later. 5 Some

states began to expand starting in 2010, and while 21 states officially adopted the ACA Medicaid

expansion on January 1, 2014, other states did not expand until later in 2014 or subsequent

years. 6 We incorporate expansions through 2016 in most specifications.

       States typically have three Medicaid income limits applying to working-age adults. The

noncategorical limit applies to all adults regardless of family structure or disability status. As of



5
  The number of county pairs that are discordant using this method is considerably higher,
varying by year from a high of 913 discordant county pairs in 2010 to 768 in 2015.
6
  There is also some variation at the county level in the timing in California, which was the only
state to roll out its early Medicaid expansion on a county-by-county basis, although we do not
exploit the within-California variation in our border county design.


                                                                                                    13
2010, only eight states (including D.C.) had any eligibility for adults that had neither dependents

nor a disability; in seven of these states eligibility ranged from 73 to 110 percent of the poverty

line, and D.C. had a limit of 211 percent. All states had categorical eligibility for parents and

individuals with disabilities in 2010, with limits ranging from 17 to 215 percent of the poverty

line for parents and 65 to 150 percent of the poverty line for individuals with disabilities. 7 In

states that adopted the ACA Medicaid expansions, the noncategorical limit was set to a minimum

of 138 percent of poverty (almost always set exactly at 138 percent), effectively setting 138

percent as a floor for parents and those with disabilities as well.

       Because a disability benefit determination would be necessary before the disability limit

would apply, the relevant Medicaid limit for individuals making a decision about the value of

disability benefits or facing "employment lock" is the parent or noncategorical income limit. We

cannot distinguish between parents and non-parents in the applications data, and because a

majority of adults do not have dependent children at a given point in time (especially older

working age adults who are more likely to have a disability), the noncategorical income limit is

most relevant.

       We consider the following difference-in-differences specification estimated on a sample

of all counties in the continental U.S. for the period 2010-2016:

                     (1)




7
  Prior to the ACA, there were two eligibility pathways to Medicaid for individuals with
disabilities: SSI-related eligibility and poverty-related eligibility. In most states, SSI-related
eligibility includes all individuals eligible for federal SSI payments or for the optional state
supplements. The income cutoffs for SSI recipients were typically below the poverty line, and in
some states individuals with disabilities could access Medicaid with higher incomes.



                                                                                                     14
where yct denotes the various outcomes of interest (described in detail in the Data section below)

for county c in time t, where t denotes year. The variable MedicaidLimits(c)t, which is typically

set at the state level (and thus denoted by s(c)), is the Medicaid noncategorical income limit, that

is, the baseline income limit that applies to adults whether or not they have children or

disabilities. It is measured as a percentage of the Federal poverty line. The vector Xct includes

time-varying controls such as demographic characteristics, and c and t are county and time

fixed effects, included to account for unmeasured heterogeneity in outcomes across space and

time that may be correlated with expansion status. 8 This equation corresponds to the approach

commonly used in the ACA Medicaid expansion literature thus far, although it has typically been

estimated at the state level or individual level with state and year fixed effects rather than at the

county level. The identifying assumption implicit in this approach is that after accounting for

county-specific and time-specific fixed effects, outcomes in counties with different levels of

noncategorical Medicaid income limits would be changing in the same way over time if the

expansion had not occurred. We estimate this model using our county-level data, clustering our

standard errors at the state level to account for the fact that the variation in expansion status is at

the state level.

        The county border discontinuity approach requires limiting the data to border counties

and restructuring the data so that each county is observed once per year per adjacent pair. A

county which is part of more than one county pair could be observed multiple times, and the




8
 We also try including county unemployment rates in our specifications, but including them
does not substantively change our estimates (see Appendix Tables 4 and 5).


                                                                                                     15
regressions are re-weighted so that the final weight of the county is proportional to population. 9

Standard errors are adjusted accordingly.

       Using the restructured data, we estimate a modified version of equation (1) :

                   (2)

where the subscript p denotes a county pair and pt is a pair-specific time effect instead of a

national time effect. The use of the pair-specific time effect means that we are using only

variation in expansion status within each contiguous border county pair. The identifying

assumption is thus that a difference in expansion status within a contiguous border county pair is

uncorrelated with pair-specific unobservables, that is, within a pair the outcome in the county

with the expansion would have changed in the same way as in the non-expansion county if the

expansion had not occurred. To determine the impact of the loss of statistical power resulting

from moving to a smaller number of counties in our estimation sample, we estimate the model of

equation (1) on the subsample of counties used in the estimates of equation (2) and examine the

changes both in parameter estimates and in confidence intervals as we change samples and

estimation strategies.



V. Data

       We combine data from a number of different sources for the analysis. Our primary

outcomes of interest are applications and awards for SSI and SSDI, which were constructed for

us at the county level by the Social Security Administration. 10 We use data from 2010-2016 for



9
  As a robustness check we also estimate our models without weighting and find similar results
(see Appendix Tables 4 and 5).
10
   SSDI applications and awards by county were estimated using the most recently updated Title
II Disability Research Files, while the same measures for SSI are estimates from the most


                                                                                                  16
applications to determine the effect of the current Medicaid noncategorical limit. Given that there

is likely to be a delay in awards relative to applications, we use data from 2011 through 2017 to

analyze awards, and allow both the current and lagged Medicaid limits to have an effect. We

denominate these county aggregates by estimates of the prime age (20-64) population from the

Census Bureau.

       In addition to disability program applications and awards, we examine health insurance

coverage at the county level. While other researchers have already shown that the Medicaid

expansion was associated with a significant increase in health insurance coverage (see, for

example, Kaestner et al. 2017, Courtemanche et al. 2017, and others), it is useful to investigate

whether a similar increase can be seen at the county level using our border county identification

strategy. Health insurance coverage data at the county level are only available from the Census

Bureau's Small Area Health Insurance Estimates (SAHIE) program, which produces estimates of

the fraction with and without health insurance coverage by age, sex, and income group at the

county level. 11 The SAHIE estimates are model-based, incorporating information from the

American Community Survey, federal tax return data, data on Supplemental Nutrition Assistance

Program caseloads, Medicaid and Children's Health Insurance Program caseloads, Census

population estimates, County Business Patterns, and the 2010 Census.

       We determine the noncategorical Medicaid income eligibility limits from a variety of

sources. The primary sources for Medicaid income eligibility levels are reports published by the

Kaiser Family Foundation (Cohen Ross et al. 2009, Heberlein et al. 2011, Heberlein et al. 2012,




recently updated Title XVI Disability Research Files. Applications and awards are for the
calendar year, reported in June of the following year.
11
   While we would also like to examine Medicaid coverage rates, unfortunately such data do not
exist at the county level.


                                                                                                    17
Heberlein et al. 2013, Brooks et al. 2015, Brooks et al. 2016, Kaiser Commission on Medicaid

and the Uninsured 2013) and the Urban Institute's TRIM3 program rules database supplemented

by information from state plan amendments available from the Centers for Medicare and

Medicaid Services and state websites.

        The county level control variables include the share of the county level population that is

non-Hispanic black, the share that is Hispanic, and the share ages 50-64 from annual Census

Bureau estimates. In robustness tests, we control for the unemployment rate, which we obtained

from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Local Area Unemployment series, but we do not include

these in our main specifications due to potential endogeneity. We determine which counties are

contiguous using two files from the Census Bureau: a 2015 county adjacency file, which lists all

adjacent counties, regardless of type of adjacency, and a county adjacency file from 1991 which

gives the type of adjacency. We adjusted the 2015 county pair list to keep only counties that

share a common land border or that are separated by a body of water but connected by a bridge

or boat. 12

        Table 1 presents summary statistics for 2010 and 2016, broken out by sample (all

counties versus contiguous counties). Both SSI applications and awards decline significantly

during our sample time period as the economy recovers from the Great Recession. The two

samples are very similar in their unemployment rates, but the contiguous counties sample has

slightly higher rates of disability receipt and percentages of black residents and older residents,

and slightly lower percentages of Hispanic residents.




12
  We eliminated counties that meet at a corner only and counties that are separated by a body of
water and that have no direct bridge or boat connection. We also merged incorporated cities in
Virginia that were entirely contained within another county into that county.


                                                                                                      18
VI. Results

A. Descriptive Analysis

       While the county border discontinuity approach has strong intuitive appeal since it

narrows the comparison to an arguably more similar counterfactual, it is important to evaluate it

against the typical difference-in-differences approach that is common in the literature. While it is

not possible to test the models against each other explicitly, since each involves a different

identifying assumption, various methods of examining the validity of these models have been

suggested in the literature (see Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010, 2016), Allegretto, et al. (2013),

and Neumark, Salas, and Wascher (2014)). In Appendix Table 1, we show that mean differences

in values of SSI and SSDI applications and awards, as well as our covariates, are smaller for

contiguous pairs in data from before the ACA generally became effective (2010-2011) than they

are for pairs formed by matching every other county from outside the state with each county in

the data.

       As a second set of descriptive analyses, we divide both the all-county sample and the

contiguous county sample into two groups: those in states that ever expanded Medicaid and those

in states that did not, where "ever expanded" is defined as having a noncategorical eligibility

limit above zero at some point during the 2010-2016 period. We then regress dependent

variables of interest on the interaction of the "ever expanded" dummy with dummies for each

year (using 2010 as the baseline), controlling for county fixed effects and fraction black, fraction

Hispanic, and fraction ages 50 to 64. The models also include either year fixed effects (for the

all-county sample) or county pair by year fixed effects (for the contiguous county sample), so the

coefficients represent the effect of being an expansion county in a particular year relative to

being a non-expansion county (either in general or the border pair county) in that year, after




                                                                                                    19
accounting for 2010 level differences. These regressions are somewhat analogous to equations

(1) and (2). However, they do not account for when a particular county experienced its

expansion and they do not account for differential levels of the noncategorical limit in different

states.

          Figures 3-6 show graphically the coefficients on the year-by-ever-expanded interaction,

where a value of zero indicates that expansion and non-expansion states did not differ in that

outcome in that year conditional on the covariates. In each pair of graphs, the top panel shows

the all county specification and the bottom panel shows the contiguous county specification,

where the plotted coefficients reflect the difference in the outcome variable for each "ever

expansion" county relative to its adjacent "never expansion" county.

          Figure 3 shows the results of these analyses with the noncategorical Medicaid income

limit as the dependent variable--that is, these graphs show evidence of the policy change. As

expected, the difference between expansion and non-expansion counties grows dramatically in

2014 when most states implemented their Medicaid expansion. The results are similar in both

specifications, although the comparison of contiguous counties in the bottom panel indicates that

the difference in the noncategorical limit between "ever expansion" counties and adjacent "never

expansion" counties remained near zero until 2014 because 2011 to 2013 expanders are less

heavily represented in the contiguous county sample.

          Figures 4a and 4b show the results of a comparable graphical analysis for uninsurance

rates (Figure 4a) and uninsurance rates among individuals with family incomes below 250

percent of the federal poverty line (Figure 4b). Again the results are fairly similar for the two

specifications, with neither showing evidence of differential trends prior to 2014, and both

specifications demonstrating relative declines in uninsurance starting in 2014. Consistent with




                                                                                                    20
bigger differential policy changes in 2014 in the contiguous county sample, the contiguous pairs

strategy indicates relative reductions in uninsurance starting in 2014 in expansion counties that

are particularly pronounced.

       By contrast, the graphical analysis of SSI applications and awards (Figures 5a and 5b)

raise the possibility of differential trends between expansion and non-expansion states remaining

even after including controls in the difference-in-differences specification. Although the pre-

2014 differences are not statistically different from zero in either specification, they are smaller

in the contiguous county pair specification, suggesting that trends in the bordering counties may

be more similar to those of their neighbors than trends in ever-expanding and never-expending

states more generally.

       The difference in the two specifications is even more notable in the case of SSDI (Figures

6a and 6b): SSDI applications appear to be trending upward in expansion counties relative to

non-expansion counties prior to 2014 (i.e. SSDI was declining less quickly in expansion

counties), casting doubt on the validity of a differences-in-differences approach. The use of the

border county design results in pre-2014 differences that are much closer to zero. These figures

suggest that the county border pair design yields a more believable counterfactual for our

outcomes of interest. Although SSDI applications are the only outcome with pre-2014 expansion

versus non-expansion trends that are significantly different from each other, the fact that the

trend differences appear muted for all disability program outcomes we study when using the

border pair design leads us to prefer the border pair specification. However, we also show results

from a straightforward differences-in-differences design for reference.




                                                                                                    21
B. Insurance Rates

       We now turn to our main regression analyses. As a first step, we document that the effect

of Medicaid on uninsurance seen in the prior literature can be replicated using the county border

pair design. In Table 2, we present the effects of higher noncategorical Medicaid income

eligibility limits on uninsurance. Column (1) presents analysis for the all-county sample with

county fixed effects and year fixed effects, analogous to the standard difference-in-differences

model. Column (2) uses the same differences-in-differences specification, but restricts to the

smaller sample of contiguous county pairs, and therefore shows (relative to Column (1)) any

differential effects in the border county sample relative to the all county sample. Column (3)

incorporates county pair by year fixed effects as described in equation (2) above. The county pair

approach suggests that an expansion in the noncategorical income limit from 0 to 100 percent of

the poverty line is associated with a reduction of uninsurance of about 1.3 percentage points. For

comparison, the typical expansion was moving from an income limit of 0 percent to 138 percent

of the poverty line, and the mean uninsurance rate in 2010 (prior to the ACA) was 18.7 percent.

Therefore, a typical expanding county reduced uninsurance by about 1.7 percentage points

relative to an adjacent non-expanding county, around 9 percent of the baseline uninsurance level.

       In Columns (4) through (6) of Table 2, we use the same set of specifications, but instead

examine the percent of the population with family incomes under 250 percent of the federal

poverty level that is uninsured. The coefficients here are larger in magnitude, which is

unsurprising since we expect the effects of the ACA Medicaid expansion to be concentrated in

the low-income group. Our preferred specification in column (6) includes county pair by year

fixed effects, and these results suggest that increasing the Medicaid income limit from 0 to 100

percent of the federal poverty line reduced uninsurance by 2.1 percentage points. Expansion




                                                                                                   22
counties moving from 0 to 138 percent of the poverty line would therefore be estimated to have

experienced a reduction in uninsurance in the low-income group of 2.9 percentage points

compared to bordering counties. This is again around a 10 percent reduction in uninsurance for

this group relative to the baseline mean of 29.5 percent in 2010. Overall, our results in Table 2

show that our contiguous border counties approach finds similar effects of the ACA Medicaid

expansion on insurance to prior research using a state differences-in-differences approach.

C. SSI and SSDI Applications

       In Table 3 we turn to our main estimates of interest, the impact of higher noncategorical

Medicaid income eligibility limits on applications for the SSI and SSDI disability programs.

Panel A shows results for SSI applications. As in Table 2, Column 1 presents results from our all

counties sample with county- and year-fixed effects, most analogous to the standard difference-

in-differences models estimated in the previous literature. It shows a small positive estimated

coefficient that is not significantly different from zero. Column 2 presents the same

specification, but on the set of border counties, while Column 3 adds county pair by year fixed

effects, so that results are driven entirely from variation within contiguous county pairs. The

estimated coefficients decrease in magnitude when we move to the contiguous counties sample

in Column 2, and fall even more when we include the county pair by year fixed effects in

Column 3, but all three coefficients are statistically insignificant. Using our preferred

specification, the range of coefficients within the confidence interval are -0.05 per 100 to 0.05

per 100 working age adults, suggesting that we can reject full expansion (i.e. moving from zero

to 138 percent of the federal poverty line) effect sizes of five percent or greater relative to

baseline applications.




                                                                                                    23
       Panel B presents results for SSDI applications, and shows a similar pattern. None of the

models provide evidence that the higher Medicaid income limits created by the ACA Medicaid

expansion had impacts on applications to the SSDI program, and as with SSI, we can reject

effect sizes of five percent or greater relative to baseline using our preferred specification.

D. SSI and SSDI Awards

       In Table 4, we examine SSI (Panel A) and SSDI (Panel B) awards in the years 2011-

2017. Columns (1), (3), and (5) look at the contemporaneous effect of expansions on SSI awards

in the three specifications, and none suggest any relationship. Given the length of time between

initial applications and ultimate awarding of benefits, in the even-numbered columns we allow

Medicaid income limits to affect awards in the current period and also with a one-year lag. This

approach also yields no significant results. There are no significant results looking at SSDI

awards in Panel B. In sum, using a variety of specifications, the results suggest a fairly precisely

estimated zero for the relationship between Medicaid and disability awards.

E. Robustness

       In the Appendix, we examine the robustness of results to additional specification

decisions. Appendix Tables 2 and 3 repeat the analysis for disability applications and awards

using a binary expansion indicator rather than a continuous variable. We define a county to have

expanded if its noncategorical income limit is higher than zero. This approach, like the

continuous variable approach, does not suggest any relationship between ACA Medicaid

expansions and disability program applications (Appendix Table 2) or awards (Appendix Table

3).

       In Appendix Tables 4 (for applications) and 5 (for awards), we test the robustness of our

results to a number of alternate specifications. For ease of presentation, we only present results




                                                                                                  24
from the specification with county border pair by year effects, and we only present the awards

coefficients from regressions that include both the current and the lagged noncategorical income

limit. In each table, Column 1 presents the baseline results from Tables 3 and 4. In Column 2,

we omit states that expanded prior to 2014 from the analysis. 13 The early portion of the Medicaid

expansion in these states was often less robust than the 2014 expansions in that income limits

were often lower than 138 percent and there were sometimes limits on program availability.

Excluding early expander states from the analysis makes no substantive difference to the results.

        In Column 3, we add a control for the unemployment rate. We prefer models that

exclude the unemployment rate because employment decisions may respond to the Medicaid

expansion directly, so controlling for unemployment may be over-controlling. Local economic

conditions should be largely captured by pair-year controls in our preferred specification. While

the unemployment rate is a positive and significant predictor of applications and awards, the

coefficients on the noncategorical income limit for both applications and awards remain close to

zero and statistically insignificant.

        Finally, we explore the impact of missing data on our analysis. In the SSA data, counties

are excluded if they have fewer than ten applications or awards for the given disability program

in a particular year. This could cause a bias if Medicaid expansions affected whether counties

met that threshold, and could weaken generalizability of the findings if small counties were very

different from other counties in their response to Medicaid. To check the sensitivity our results,

in Column 4 we incorporate all counties with missing values and set the count of applications or

awards equal to ten. The findings are not meaningfully affected. An alternative approach to




13
 These states include California, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Massachusetts,
Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, and Vermont.


                                                                                                 25
dealing with missing data is to drop all counties that ever had population below a certain level.

In Column 5 we drop all counties with population below the 25th percentile population in our

sample (11,200). Again, our results are largely unchanged and continue to show no effect of the

Medicaid expansion on disability applications or awards. In Column 6 we estimate unweighted

regressions (allowing small counties to be weighted equally as larger counties), and continue to

find no significant effects.

       Finally, in Columns 7 and 8 we follow Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2014) and examine

whether there are heterogeneous responses to the Medicaid expansion by the level of pre-ACA

uninsurance coverage. They find that the total number of disability applications (SSDI and SSI

combined) increased in counties with relatively high rates of health insurance coverage prior to

the Massachusetts reform (consistent with the release of employment lock) while applications for

SSI decreased in counties with low rates prior to the reform (consistent with a decrease in the

relative value of SSI). However, our estimates for applications (in Table 7) and awards (in Table

8) show no evidence of significant differences between counties with high versus low

uninsurance rates prior to the Medicaid expansion.

F. State-Level Analysis

       For comparability to the previous literature, in Appendix Table 6 we show how results

from our county-level analysis on SSI and SSDI applications compare to the state-level

equivalents. 14 Columns 1 and 2 repeat the results from Table 3 using a standard county



14
  We aggregate our county-level applications and awards data to the state level, setting counties
with missing values to 10 before aggregating. State-level applications and awards data are
available from the Social Security Administration for SSI, but not for SSDI. For SSI we
compared our aggregated data to the published SSI counts, and while they differ slightly due to
differences in the reporting time frame (our DRF estimates are reported in June of the following
year, while the published SSI estimates are reported as of December of the given calendar year),
discrepancies are generally 1% of the total or smaller.


                                                                                                    26
differences-in-differences (Table 3, Column 1) and county-border pair design (Table 3, Column

3). The next two columns show analogous results using state-level data. Column 3 presents the

standard state difference-in-difference estimates. Column 4 uses only variation in Medicaid

income eligibility limits between contiguous state pairs, using the same idea as in the county

border-pair design, although it exploits different variation than in the county version of the

analysis. For applications, while the straight difference-in-differences in Column 1 (for the

county data) and Column 3 (for the state data) tend to show positive estimated coefficients,

coefficients turn negative when the border pair by year fixed effects are included. These are

generally not statistically different from zero (but become marginally significant and negative for

state-level SSDI applications). Appendix Table 7 presents the same exercise for SSI and SSDI

awards and shows similar patterns.



VII. Discussion and Conclusion

       In this paper, we use a contiguous county approach to examine whether the ACA

Medicaid expansion affected disability program applications. Despite strong evidence of

increases in insurance coverage due to the Medicaid expansion using the county border

discontinuity identification strategy, there is no evidence supporting a relationship between

Medicaid availability and the decision to apply for the SSI or SSDI disability programs. We also

find no significant effects of higher noncategorical Medicaid income eligibility limits on SSI or

SSDI awards. These null results are robust across a variety of specifications and models.

       Theory predicts possible countervailing impacts of Medicaid availability on the decision

to apply for Medicaid. Our estimates indicate that there was little or no net impact of the




                                                                                                 27
Medicaid expansion portion of the Affordable Care Act on disability program applications, and

consequently no effect on awards.

       Despite the lack of a relationship with disability programs, there is potential for spillover

effects across other safety net programs. For example, in other work (Schmidt, Shore-Sheppard,

and Watson 2019), we examine the impacts of the ACA Medicaid expansion on participation in

the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and receipt of the Earned Income Tax

Credit (EITC). Our results suggest that the Medicaid expansion increased SNAP and EITC

participation in counties that expanded relative to nearby counties that did not expand.

Considering such spillover effects may be important when assessing the full costs and benefits of

the ACA Medicaid expansion.




                                                                                                  28
References

Allegretto, Sylvia, Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer. 2013. "Credible Research
Designs for Minimum Wage Studies." IZA Discussion Paper No. 7638.

Anand, Priyanka, Jody Schimmel Hyde, Maggie Colby, and Paul O'Leary. 2019. "The Impact of
Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions on Applications to Federal Disability Programs."
Forum for Health Economics and Policy 21(2).

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline
in Unemployment." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1):157-205.

Baicker, Katherine, Amy Finkelstein, Jae Song, and Sarah Taubman. 2014. "The Impact of
Medicaid on Labor Market Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from the Oregon
Health Insurance Experiment." American Economic Review 104(5):322-328.

Brault, Matthew W. 2012. "Americans With Disabilities: 2010." United States Bureau of the
Census Current Population Reports, P70-131.

Brooks, Tricia, Joe Touschner, Samantha Artiga, Jessica Stephens, and Alexandra Gates.
2015. "Modern Era Medicaid: Findings from a 50-State Survey of Eligibility, Enrollment,
Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP as of January 2015." Kaiser
Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured Policy Brief #8681.

Brooks, Tricia, Sean Miskell, Samantha Artiga, Elizabeth Cornachione, and Alexandra Gates.
2016. "Medicaid and CHIP Eligibility, Enrollment, Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies as of
January 2016: Findings from a 50-State Survey." Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the
Uninsured Policy Brief #8824.

Buchmueller, Thomas, John C. Ham, and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2016. "The Medicaid
Program." In Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States vol. 1, edited
by Robert A. Moffitt, 21-136. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Burns, Marguerite and Laura Dague. 2017. "The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility on
Supplemental Security Income Program Participation." Journal of Public Economics 149: 20-34.

Case, Anne and Angus Deaton. 2015. "Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white
non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st century." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
112(49): 15078-15083.

Center for Budget and Policy Priorities. 2018. "Chartbook: Social Security Disability
Insurance." Available at https://www.cbpp.org/research/social-security/chart-book-social-
security-disability-insurance.




                                                                                             29
Chatterji, Pinka, and Yue Li. 2017. "Early coverage expansions under the Affordable Care Act
and Supplemental Security Income participation." The Journal of the Economics of Ageing 10:
75-83.

Cohen Ross, Donna, Marian Jarlenski, Samantha Artiga, and Caryn Marks. 2009. "A
Foundation for Health Reform: Findings of a 50 State Survey of Eligibility Rules, Enrollment
and Renewal Procedures, and Cost-Sharing Practices in Medicaid and CHIP for Children and
Parents During 2009." Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured Policy Brief #8028.

Congressional Budget Office. 2016. "Social Security Disability Insurance: Participation and
Spending." Report, June 15. Available at https://www.cbo.gov/publication/51443.

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata.
2017. "Early Impacts of the Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Medicaid
Expansion and Non-Expansion States." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36 (1): 178-
210.

Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. "Minimum Wage Effects Across
State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties." Review of Economics and Statistics
92(4): 945-964.

Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester and Michael Reich. 2016. "Minimum Wage Shocks,
Employment Flows, and Labor Market Frictions." Journal of Labor Economics 34(3): 663-704.

Duggan, Mark, Melissa S. Kearney, and Stephanie Rennane. 2016. "The Supplemental Security
Income Program." In Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States vol. 2,
edited by Robert A. Moffitt, 1-58. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Goodman, Lucas. 2017. "The Effect of the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansion on
Migration." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36(1): 211-238.

Heberlein, Martha, Tricia Brooks, Jocelyn Guyer, Samantha Artiga, and Jessica Stephens. 2011.
"Holding Steady, Looking Ahead: Annual Findings of a 50-State Survey of Eligibility Rules,
Enrollment and Renewal Procedures, and Cost-Sharing Practices in Medicaid and CHIP, 2010-
2011." Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured Policy Brief #8130.

Heberlein, Martha, Tricia Brooks, Jocelyn Guyer, Samantha Artiga, and Jessica Stephens. 2012.
"Performing Under Pressure: Annual Findings of a 50-State Survey of Eligibility, Enrollment,
Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP, 2011-2012." Kaiser Commission on
Medicaid and the Uninsured Policy Brief #8272.

Heberlein, Martha, Tricia Brooks, Joan Alker, Samantha Artiga and Jessica Stephens. 2013.
"Getting into Gear for 2014: Findings from a 50-State Survey of Eligibility, Enrollment,
Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP, 2012­2013." Kaiser Commission
on Medicaid and the Uninsured Policy Brief #8401.




                                                                                               30
Kaestner, Robert, Bowen Garrett, Jiajia Chen, Anuj Gangopadhyaya, and Caitlyn Fleming. 2017.
"Effects of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Supply."
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36 (3): 608-642.

Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. 2010. "Medicaid Financial Eligibility:
Primary Pathways for the Elderly and People with Disabilities."
https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/8048.pdf

_____. 2013. "A Look at Section 1115 Medicaid Demonstration Waivers Under the ACA: A
Focus on Childless Adults." Issue Brief.
https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/10/8499-a-look-at-section-1115-
medicaid-demonstration-waivers.pdf

Kennedy, Jae, and Elizabeth Blodgett. 2012. "Health Insurance­Motivated Disability Enrollment
and the ACA." New England Journal of Medicine 367 (12): e16.

Klerman, Jacob, and Steven J. Haider. 2004. "A Stock-Flow Analysis of the Welfare Caseload."
Journal of Human Resources 39(4):865-886.

Lahiri, Kajal, Denton R. Vaughan, and Bernard Wixon. 1995. Modeling SSA's Sequential
Disability Determination Process Using Matched SIPP Data. Social Security Bulletin 58: 3-42.

Levere, Michael, Sean Orzol, Lindsey Leininger, and Nancy Early. 2019 . "Contemporaneous
and long-term effects of children's public health insurance expansions on Supplemental Security
Income participation." Journal of Health Economics 64: 80-92.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2014. "Disability Insurance and
Health Insurance Reform: Evidence from Massachusetts." American Economic Review 104
(5):329-335.

Neumark, David, J. M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014. "Revisiting the Minimum Wage-
Employment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?" Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 67(Supplement):608-648.

Raut, Lakshmi K. 2017. "Exits from the Disability Insurance Rolls: Estimates from a
Competing-Risks Model." Social Security Bulletin 77(3): 15-38.

Schmidt, Lucie, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Tara Watson. 2019. "The Impact of Expanding Public
Health Insurance on Safety Net Program Participation: Evidence from the ACA Medicaid
Expansion." Williams College working paper.

Schwartz, Aaron and Benjamin D. Sommers. 2014. "Moving for Medicaid? Recent Eligibility
Expansions Did Not Induce Migration from Other States." Health Affairs 33(1):88-94.




                                                                                             31
Social Security Administration. 2004. "Trends in the Social Security and Supplemental Security
Income Disability Programs Available at
https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/chartbooks/disability_trends/sect02.html.

Social Security Administration. 2018. "Annual Statistical Supplement, 2018." Available at
https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2018/7a.html - table7.a4.

Soni, Aparna, Marguerite E. Burns, Laura Dague, and Kosali I. Simon. 2017. "Medicaid
Expansion and State Trends In Supplemental Security Income Program Participation." Health
Affairs 36 (8): 1485-1488.

Watts, Molly O'Malley, Elizabeth Cornachione, and MaryBeth Musumeci. 2016. "Medicaid
Financial Eligibility for Seniors and People with Disabilities in 2015." Kaiser Family
Foundation report. Available at http://kff.org/medicaid/report/medicaid-financial-eligibility-for-
seniors-and-people-with-disabilities-in-2015/.




                                                                                               32
Figure 1: SSI Application Rates by Expansion Status




                                                      33
   Figure 2: Contiguous Border County Pairs in the US with a Medicaid Expansion Differential,
                                         April 2014




Source: Medicaid expansion status determined from data on state actions collected by the Kaiser
Family Foundation.




                                                                                                34
Figure 3
                                                                                Difference in Medicaid Income Limit
                                                                          in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
  Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group




                                                                                                       All Counties
                                          on Medicaid Income Limit
                                           -.5 0       .5   1 1.5




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



                                                                                         Contig Counties Controlling for Pair-Year
       on Medicaid Income Limit
        -.5 0       .5   1 1.5




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



Note: Coefficients from regressions on 2010-2016 data that includes county fixed effects and
controls for fraction black, fraction Hispanic, and fraction ages 50 to 64. The top panel includes
year fixed effects and the bottom panel includes county pair by year fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                                       35
Figure 4a
                                                                                 Difference in Uninsurance Rate
                                                                          in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
  Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group




                                                                                                       All Counties
                                                                2
                                                on Unins Rate
                                             -4     -2     0




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



                                                                                         Contig Counties Controlling for Pair-Year
                             2
             on Unins Rate
          -4     -2     0




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



Figure 4b
                                                                            Difference in Low-Income Uninsurance Rate
                                                                          in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
  Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group




                                                                                                       All Counties
                                         on Low-Income Unins Rate
                                           -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



                                                                                         Contig Counties Controlling for Pair-Year
      on Low-Income Unins Rate
        -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



Note: Coefficients from regressions on 2010-2016 data that includes county fixed effects and
controls for fraction black, fraction Hispanic, and fraction ages 50 to 64. In each graph the top
panel includes year fixed effects and the bottom panel includes county pair by year fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                                       36
Figure 5a
                                                                                  Difference in SSI Applications
                                                                          in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
  Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group




                                                                                                       All Counties
                                                                .4
                                             on SSI Apps Per 100
                                           -.4 -.2 0       .2




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



                                                                                         Contig Counties Controlling for Pair-Year
                             .4
          on SSI Apps Per 100
        -.4 -.2 0       .2




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



Figure 5b
                                                                                     Difference in SSI Awards
                                                                          in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
  Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group




                                                                                                       All Counties
                                           on SSI Awards Per 100
                                           -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



                                                                                         Contig Counties Controlling for Pair-Year
        on SSI Awards Per 100
        -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



Note: Coefficients from regressions on 2010-2016 data that includes county fixed effects and
controls for fraction black, fraction Hispanic, and fraction ages 50 to 64. In each graph the top
panel includes year fixed effects and the bottom panel includes county pair by year fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                                       37
Figure 6a
                                                                                 Difference in SSDI Applications
                                                                          in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
  Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group




                                                                                                       All Counties
                                            on SSDI Apps Per 100
                                           -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



                                                                                         Contig Counties Controlling for Pair-Year
         on SSDI Apps Per 100
        -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



Figure 6b
                                                                                    Difference in SSDI Awards
                                                                          in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
  Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group




                                                                                                       All Counties
                                          on SSDI Awards Per 100
                                           -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



                                                                                         Contig Counties Controlling for Pair-Year
       on SSDI Awards Per 100
        -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1




                                                                             everexp11     everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



Note: Coefficients from regressions on 2010-2016 data that includes county fixed effects and
controls for fraction black, fraction Hispanic, and fraction ages 50 to 64. In each graph the top
panel includes year fixed effects and the bottom panel includes county pair by year fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                                       38
           Table 1: Summary Statistics ­ Weighted Means by Sample and by Year

Variable                                      All      Contiguous     All       Contiguous
                                            Counties    Counties    Counties     Counties
                                            Sample      Sample      Sample       Sample

                                             2010        2010        2016         2016



SSI Applications per 100 working age         1.569       1.629       0.787        0.823
adults
SSDI Applications per 100 working age        1.547       1.618       0.987        1.048
adults
SSI Awards per 100 working age adults        0.453       0.475       0.271        0.289
SSDI Awards per 100 working age adults       0.540       0.579       0.311        0.340
Medicaid Noncategorical Income Limit >0      0.125       0.175       0.618        0.708
(Y/N)
Medicaid Noncategorical Income Limit (%      0.128       0.188       0.902        1.025
of FPL)
Percent Nonhispanic Black                    13.281      14.114     13.616        14.509
Percent Hispanic                             16.455      12.171     18.002        13.690
Percent population aged 50-64                19.077      19.568     19.550        20.064
Unemployment rate                             9.729       9.614      4.938         5.036


Observations                                 3088        2394        3088         2394
Unique Counties                              3088        1140        3088         1140




                                                                                    39
                           Table 2: Effects of ACA Medicaid Income Limits
                 on Percent Uninsured and Percent Low Income Uninsured, 2010-2016

                              (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)
                         All Counties      Contig         Contig      All Counties      Contig         Contig
                           Sample         Counties       Counties       Sample         Counties       Counties
                                          Sample         Sample                        Sample         Sample

                                                                        Percent    Percent    Percent
                           Percent        Percent        Percent      Low-Income Low-Income Low-Income
                          Uninsured      Uninsured      Uninsured      Uninsured  Uninsured  Uninsured

Noncategorical income        -0.365        -0.844*      -1.270***       -1.167**      -1.717***      -2.053***
Limit                       (0.290)        (0.440)        (0.290)        (0.465)        (0.608)        (0.438)
% Non-Hispanic black        0.913*           0.609       0.331**           0.545          0.164         -0.378
                            (0.488)        (0.440)        (0.145)        (0.704)        (0.543)        (0.310)
% Hispanic                   -0.447         -0.373         -0.113         -0.301         -0.416          0.203
                            (0.359)        (0.763)        (0.365)        (0.499)        (0.885)        (0.641)
% ages 50-64                  0.037       1.008***          0.086         -0.191        0.819*          -0.126
                            (0.516)        (0.320)        (0.235)        (0.629)        (0.427)        (0.439)

Observations                21,630         16,758         16,758         21,630         16,758         16,758

County FE                    YES            YES            YES            YES            YES            YES
Year FE                      YES            YES            NO             YES            YES            NO
County Pair*Year FE          NO             NO             YES            NO             NO             YES

      Dependent variable is the percent of individuals uninsured in a county or the percent of individuals
      with family incomes under 250% of poverty uninsured in a county from the Small Area Health
      Insurance Estimates 2010-2016. Estimates are weighted by prime-age population. Robust
      standard errors clustered on state in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                       40
                       Table 3: Effects of ACA Medicaid Income Limits
             on SSI and SSDI Applications per 100 Working Age Adults, 2010-2016

                                     (1)                   (2)                     (3)
                             All Counties Sample     Contig Counties         Contig Counties
                                                        Sample                  Sample

Panel A. SSI Applications
Noncategorical income               0.031                 0.019                    0.003
limit                              (0.025)               (0.035)                  (0.025)
% Nonhispanic black                0.043*                 0.062                  0.137***
                                   (0.024)               (0.039)                  (0.043)
% Hispanic                          0.011                 0.051                   -0.076*
                                   (0.030)               (0.047)                  (0.042)
% ages 50-64                      0.073***              0.095***                   0.074
                                   (0.023)               (0.029)                  (0.046)
Observations                       20,651                16,109                   16,109

Panel B. SSDI Applications
Noncategorical income                0.017                0.016                    -0.000
limit                              (0.021)               (0.026)                  (0.020)
% Nonhispanic black                0.037**              0.065***                 0.104***
                                   (0.017)               (0.023)                  (0.028)
% Hispanic                           0.014               0.058*                    -0.037
                                   (0.027)               (0.029)                  (0.030)
% ages 50-64                      0.052***              0.052***                   0.048
                                   (0.017)               (0.019)                  (0.032)
Observations                        20,977               16,340                   16,340


County FE                           YES                    YES                     YES
Year FE                             YES                    YES                     NO
County Pair*Year FE                 NO                     NO                      YES

 Notes: Estimates are weighted by population. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***
 p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                            41
                         Table 4: Effects of the ACA Medicaid Income Limits
                   on SSI and SSDI Awards per 100 Working Age Adults, 2011-2017

                              (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                         All Counties All Counties     Contig        Contig        Contig        Contig
                           Sample       Sample        Counties      Counties      Counties      Counties
                                                      Sample        Sample        Sample        Sample
Panel A: SSI Awards
Noncategorical income       0.006          0.002        0.007         0.001         0.002          0.001
Limit                      (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.009)      (0.006)        (0.007)       (0.006)
Noncategorical income                      0.007                      0.010                        0.003
limit (lagged)                           (0.004)                    (0.006)                      (0.005)
% Non-Hispanic black      0.019***      0.019***       0.029**      0.028**       0.047***      0.047***
                           (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.012)      (0.012)        (0.013)       (0.013)
% Hispanic                   0.000         0.001         0.007        0.006         -0.013        -0.014
                           (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.010)      (0.010)        (0.012)       (0.012)
% ages 50-64               0.012**       0.012**       0.020**      0.020**        0.027**       0.027**
                           (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.008)      (0.008)        (0.012)       (0.012)
Observations                18,742        18,742        14,491       14,491         14,491        14,491

Panel B: SSDI Awards
Noncategorical income       0.006          0.001        0.012         0.006         -0.003        -0.002
Limit                      (0.012)       (0.007)       (0.012)       (0.007)       (0.008)       (0.006)
Noncategorical income                      0.009                      0.010                       -0.002
limit (lagged)                           (0.008)                     (0.009)                     (0.006)
% Non-Hispanic black        -0.006        -0.006        0.010         0.010       0.022***      0.022***
                           (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.004)       (0.004)
% Hispanic                   0.004         0.004      0.026***      0.025***        -0.009        -0.009
                           (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.010)       (0.010)
% ages 50-64               0.021**       0.021**        0.012         0.012          0.011         0.011
                           (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)
Observations                19,785        19,785       15,463        15,463        15,463        15,463

County FE                   YES          YES           YES            YES            YES         YES
Year FE                     YES          YES           YES            YES            NO          NO
County Pair*Year FE          NO           NO           NO             NO             YES         YES
      Notes: Estimates are weighted by population. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***
      p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                 42
 Appendix Table 1: Mean Absolute Difference Between Counties in Contiguous Pairs and
                          Noncontiguous Pairs Pre-ACA

                                             Mean Absolute Difference Between
                                                         Counties
                                            Contiguous pairs Noncontiguous pairs
SSI applications per 100 working age adults   0.6264***          0.9924***
                                               (0.0254)           (0.0156)

SSDI applications per 100 working age adults     0.5514***           0.8482***
                                                  (0.0208)            (0.0116)

SSI awards per 100 working age adults            0.1859***           0.2756***
                                                  (0.0069)            (0.0040)

SSDI awards per 100 working age adults           0.2016***           0.2803***
                                                  (0.0095)            (0.0041)

Noncategorical income limit                      0.0998***           0.1082***
                                                  (0.0163)            (0.0077)

Unemployment rate                                1.8417***           3.4619***
                                                  (0.0669)            (0.0465)

Percent in poverty                               4.3600***           7.0222***
                                                  (0.1634)            (0.1059)

Percent non-Hispanic black                       4.9843***          12.9056***
                                                  (0.3438)           (0.3445)

Percent Hispanic                                 4.1791***           9.7866***
                                                  (0.2987)            (0.3082)

Percent aged 50-64                               2.1945***           3.0226***
                                                  (0.0797)            (0.0478)

Notes: The first column shows the mean absolute difference in the values of the variables
between counties in a contiguous pair in the 2010-2011 data. The second column shows the
mean absolute difference between pairs formed by matching each county in the contiguous
county sample with all possible other counties not in the same state. (***) indicates mean is
different from 0 at p<0.01.



                                                                                                43
         Appendix Table 2: Robustness Tests Effects of the ACA Medicaid Expansion
           on SSI and SSDI Applications per 100 Working Age Adults, 2010-2016

                                     (1)                     (2)                       (3)
                             All Counties Sample       Contig Counties           Contig Counties
                                                          Sample                    Sample

Panel A. SSI Applications
Expansion                           0.018                    -0.004                   0.002
                                   (0.037)                  (0.044)                  (0.026)

Observations                       20,651                   16,109                   16,109

Panel B. SSDI Applications
Expansion                           0.004                    -0.000                   0.004
                                   (0.029)                  (0.031)                  (0.021)

Observations                       20,977                   16,340                   16,340


County FE                           YES                      YES                      YES
Year FE                             YES                      YES                      NO
County Pair*Year FE                 NO                       NO                       YES

 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for whether a state had a nonzero noncategorical
 Medicaid income limit. Estimates are weighted by population. Regressions control for percent
 of population that is non-Hispanic Black, percent of population that is Hispanic, and percent of
 population aged 50-64. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                44
                       Appendix Table 3: Effects of the ACA Medicaid Expansion
                    on SSI and SSDI Awards per 100 Working Age Adults, 2011-2017

                              (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
                         All Counties All Counties       Contig        Contig         Contig        Contig
                           Sample       Sample          Counties      Counties       Counties      Counties
                                                        Sample        Sample         Sample        Sample
Panel A: SSI Awards
Expansion                    0.005         -0.000         0.001         -0.005        0.001          -0.005
                            (0.008)       (0.006)        (0.011)       (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.009)
Expansion                                   0.009                        0.010                        0.010
      (lagged)                            (0.005)                      (0.007)                      (0.009)
Observations                18,742        18,742         14,491        14,491         14,491        14,491

Panel B: SSDI Awards
Expansion                    0.004         -0.001         0.005         0.002         -0.001         -0.002
                            (0.013)       (0.009)        (0.014)       (0.009)       (0.008)        (0.006)
Expansion                                   0.009                       0.005                         0.001
(lagged)                                  (0.010)                      (0.010)                      (0.007)
Observations                19,785        19,785         15,463        15,463         15,463        15,463

County FE                     YES           YES            YES           YES             YES           YES
Year FE                       YES           YES            YES           YES             NO            NO
County Pair*Year FE           NO            NO             NO             NO             YES           YES
      Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for whether a state had a nonzero noncategorical
      Medicaid income limit. Estimates are weighted by population. Regressions control for percent
      of population that is non-Hispanic Black, percent of population that is Hispanic, and percent of
      population aged 50-64. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                    45
   Appendix Table 4: Effects of the ACA Medicaid Income Limits on SSI and SSDI Applications per 100 Working Age Adults,
                                                2010-2016, Robustness Tests

                                 (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)     (6)         (7)         (8)
                              Main Spec      No early    Control for    Missings      Dropping Unweighted   Below       Above
                                                                                               th
                               (Table 3     expanders     Unemp         set to 10    lowest 25              median      Median
                                Col 3)                     Rate                       pctile pop          uninsurance uninsurance

Panel A. SSI Applications
Noncategorical income            0.003        -0.041        0.005         0.003         0.004        -0.018        -0.024        -0.006
Limit                           (0.025)      (0.033)       (0.024)       (0.025)       (0.026)      (0.044)       (0.040)       (0.036)
Unemployment rate                                           0.030
                                                           (0.020)
Observations                    16,109        14,549       16,109        16,758        12,411        16,109        9,013         7,096

Panel B: SSDI Applications
Noncategorical income            -0.000       -0.027         0.002        -0.001        0.000        -0.023        -0.025        -0.004
Limit                           (0.020)      (0.030)       (0.019)       (0.019)       (0.021)      (0.038)       (0.031)       (0.030)
Unemployment rate                                          0.033**
                                                           (0.012)
Observations                    16,340        14,776        16,340       16,758        12,411        16,340        9,064         7,276


County FE                        YES           YES          YES           YES           YES           YES          YES           YES
Year FE                          NO            NO           NO            NO            NO            NO           NO            NO
County Pair*Year FE              YES           YES          YES           YES           YES           YES          YES           YES

  Notes: Dependent variable is the Medicaid noncategorical income limit as a percent of the federal poverty line. Estimates are
  weighted by population, except where otherwise noted. Regressions control for percent of population that is non-Hispanic Black,
  percent of population that is Hispanic, and percent of population aged 50-64. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
  p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                        46
    Appendix Table 5: Effects of the ACA Medicaid Income Limits on SSI and SSDI Awards per 100 Working Age Adults,
                                              2011-2017, Robustness Tests

                             (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
                          Main Spec      No early     Ctrl for  Set missing    Drop     No weights   Below       Above
                                         expand      Unemp rate    to 10    bottom 25th              median      median
                                                                               pctile              uninsurance uninsurance
Panel A: SSI Awards
Noncategorical income       0.001         -0.001        0.001         0.000        0.000         0.002         0.002        -0.006
Limit                      (0.006)       (0.009)      (0.006)        (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.009)      (0.010)
Noncategorical income       0.003         -0.005        0.004         0.003        0.003         -0.003        0.003        -0.008
limit (lagged)             (0.005)       (0.006)      (0.005)        (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.017)
Unemployment rate                                     0.010**
                                                      (0.005)
Observations                14,491       13,056        14,491        16,758       12,288        14,491        8,397         6,094

Panel B: SSDI Awards
Noncategorical income       -0.002        -0.002        -0.001        -0.002       -0.002        -0.004        0.004        -0.011
Limit                      (0.006)       (0.010)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.012)       (0.010)      (0.011)
Noncategorical income       -0.002        -0.007        -0.001        -0.002       -0.001        -0.012        0.002        -0.021
limit (lagged)             (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.011)       (0.008)      (0.013)
Unemployment rate                                     0.017***
                                                       (0.004)
Observations                15,463       13,923        15,463        16,758       12,407        15,463        8,843         6,620

County FE                     YES           YES           YES          YES          YES           YES           YES           YES
Year FE                        NO            NO           NO            NO           NO            NO            NO           NO
County Pair*Year FE           YES           YES           YES          YES          YES           YES           YES           YES
Notes: Dependent variable is the Medicaid noncategorical income limit as a percent of the federal poverty line. Estimates are
weighted by population, except where otherwise noted. Regressions control for percent of population that is non-Hispanic Black,
percent of population that is Hispanic, and percent of population aged 50-64. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                      47
        Appendix Table 6: State-Level vs County-Level Analyses of SSI and SSDI
                                Applications, 2010-2016

                                   (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)
                                  All             Contig                All            Contig
                                Counties         Counties              States           States
                                Sample           Sample               Sample           Sample

Panel A. SSI Applications
Noncategorical income            0.031             0.003               0.041            -0.043
Limit                           (0.025)           (0.025)             (0.028)          (0.030)
Observations                    20,651            16,109                343              1,498

Panel B. SSDI Applications
Noncategorical income            0.017             -0.000              0.024           -0.029*
Limit                           (0.021)           (0.020)             (0.023)          (0.017)
Observations                    20,977            16,340                343             1,498

County or State FE                YES              YES                 YES              YES
Year FE                           YES              NO                  YES              NO
Pair*Year FE                      NO               YES                 NO               YES


 Each cell represents the coefficient on the noncategorical Medicaid income limit from a separate
 regression. Dependent variable is the number of SSI applications per 100 working age adults.
 State regressions include contiguous 48 states plus the District of Columbia; some state-years are
 missing. Estimates are weighted by prime-age population. Robust standard errors clustered on state
 in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                 48
        Appendix Table 7: State-Level and County-Level Analyses of SSI and SSDI Awards,
                                           2011-2017

                          (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)     (5)                (6)        (7)        (8)
                          All      All     Contig   Contig   All                All      Contig     Contig
                        Counties Counties Counties Counties States             States     States     States
                        Sample Sample Sample Sample Sample                    Sample     Sample     Sample

Panel A: SSI Awards
Noncategorical income     0.006      0.002     0.002      0.001      0.008     0.003     -0.011*     -0.008
limit                    (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.007)    (0.006)    (0.007)   (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.005)
Noncategorical income                0.007                0.003                0.008                 -0.007
limit (lagged)                      (0.004)              (0.005)              (0.005)               (0.005)
Observations             18,742     18,742     14,491    14,491       343       343       1,498       1,498

Panel B: SSDI Awards
Noncategorical income     0.006      0.001     -0.003     -0.002     0.010     0.003    -0.013** -0.008*
limit                    (0.012)    (0.007)   (0.008)    (0.006)    (0.012)   (0.008)    (0.006) (0.005)
Noncategorical income                0.009                -0.002               0.011              -0.009
limit (lagged)                      (0.008)              (0.006)              (0.009)            (0.007)
Observations             19,785     19,785     15,463    15,463       343       343       1,498    1,498

County or State FE        YES        YES        YES       YES        YES        YES        YES       YES
Year FE                   YES        YES        NO        NO         YES        YES        NO        NO
Pair*Year FE              NO         NO         YES       YES        NO         NO         YES       YES

     Each cell represents the coefficient on the noncategorical Medicaid income limit from a separate
     regression. Dependent variable is the number of SSI awards per 100 working age adults. State
     regressions include contiguous 48 states plus the District of Columbia; some state-years are
     missing. Estimates are weighted by prime-age population. Robust standard errors clustered on state
     in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                    49
