                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE TEXTBOOK CASE FOR INDUSTRIAL POLICY:
                              THEORY MEETS DATA

                                    Dominick G. Bartelme
                                       Arnaud Costinot
                                       Dave Donaldson
                                    Andrés Rodríguez-Clare

                                      Working Paper 26193
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26193


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




We are grateful to Susanto Basu, Jonathan Eaton, Giammario Impullitti, Yoichi Sugita, and
David Weinstein for discussions, to Daniel Haanwinckel and Walker Ray for outstanding
research assistance, and to many seminar and conference participants for comments. Costinot and
Donaldson thank the NSF (grant 1559015) for financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Dominick G. Bartelme, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andrés Rodríguez-
Clare. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Textbook Case for Industrial Policy: Theory Meets Data
Dominick G. Bartelme, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
NBER Working Paper No. 26193
August 2019
JEL No. F1,F10,F11,F12,F13,F14,F17

                                          ABSTRACT

The textbook case for industrial policy is well understood. If some sectors are subject to external
economies of scale, whereas others are not, a government should subsidize the first group of
sectors at the expense of the second. The empirical relevance of this argument, however, remains
unclear. In this paper we develop a strategy to estimate sector-level economies of scale and
evaluate the gains from such policy interventions in an open economy. Our benchmark results
point towards significant and heterogeneous economies of scale across manufacturing sectors, but
only modest gains from industrial policy, below 1% of GDP on average. Though these gains can
be larger in some of the alternative environments that we consider, they are always smaller than
the gains from optimal trade policy.

Dominick G. Bartelme                             Dave Donaldson
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics, E52-554
University of Michigan                           MIT
238 Lorch Hall                                   50 Memorial Drive
611 Tappan Avenue                                Cambridge, MA 02142
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                              and NBER
dbartelm@umich.edu                               ddonald@mit.edu

Arnaud Costinot                                  Andrés Rodríguez-Clare University
Department of Economics, E52-534                 of California at Berkeley
MIT                                              Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive                                Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Cambridge, MA 02142                              and NBER
and NBER                                         andres1000@gmail.com
costinot@mit.edu
1    Introduction
The textbook case for industrial policy is well understood. In sectors subject to external
economies of scale, private marginal costs of production are lower than social ones. This
creates a rationale for Pigouvian subsidies equal to the difference between the two, with
the associated welfare gains equal to the area of the Harberger triangle located between
the demand and social marginal cost curves, as illustrated in Figure 1.
    The empirical relevance of the previous considerations is another matter. In his origi-
nal discussion of optimal industrial policy, Pigou (1920) already noted: "Attempts to de-
velop and expand [these theoretical results] are sometimes frowned upon on the ground
that they cannot be applied to practice. For, it is argued, though we may be able to say
that [...] economic welfare would be increased by granting bounties to industries falling
into one category and by imposing taxes on those falling into another category, we are
not able to say which of our categories the various industries of real life belong."
    One hundred years later, the challenges that Pigou identified remain obstacles to the
pursuit of industrial policy. The goal of our paper is to narrow this gap between theory
and data. We first show how to estimate economies of scale across sectors using data that
is commonly available. Having identified the sectors that should be subsidized at the ex-
pense of others, we then explore the welfare gains from optimal industrial policies as well
as how trade openness, and the access to trade policy instruments, may affect the design
of industrial policy and its welfare implications. Our main finding is that even under
an optimistic scenario where governments aim to maximize social welfare and have full
knowledge of the structure of externalities across sectors, gains from industrial policies
appear relatively modest, somewhat smaller than those from optimal trade policy.
    Section 2 presents our theoretical framework. We study a Ricardian economy with
multiple sectors, each subject to external economies of scale. Our focus on this environ-
ment is motivated by its long intellectual history, dating back to Marshall (1920), Gra-
ham's (1923) famous argument for trade protection, and the formal treatment of external
economies of scale in Chipman (1970) and Ethier (1982), as well as the recent emergence
of Eaton and Kortum's (2002) Ricardian model as a workhorse model for quantitative
work. Within each sector, external economies of scale may affect both the physical pro-
ductivity of firms as well as the quality of the goods that they produce. In a competitive
equilibrium, firms do not internalize the fact that when they increase sector size they
raise its quality-adjusted productivity. In the presence of the optimal trade policy, the

                                            1
                          Price
                                     D


                                                                          MC ( Q)
                                     SMC
                                                                           MC ( Q )
                             s




                                 O            Q                   Q       Quantity

                       Figure 1: The Textbook Case for Industrial Policy

Notes: Due to external economies of scale in a sector, social marginal cost SMC does not equal private
marginal cost MC and so output Q is less than the social optimum Q . The optimal industrial policy is a
subsidy s = MC ( Q ) - SMC ( Q ), which would give rise to gains equal to the area of the grey triangle.


optimal production subsidy is equal to the elasticity of productivity with respect to size
and exactly compensates the firm for the marginal effect of its output decision on sector
productivity.
    Section 3 turns to identification. We show that external economies of scale can be
non-parametrically identified in this environment from standard data on international
trade flows. The starting point of our empirical strategy is the observation that in each
destination and within each sector, trade flows from different origins reflect the optimal
demand for labor services from these countries. Provided that this demand system is
invertible, changes in trade flows therefore reveal changes in the effective prices of these
services. Once the prices of labor services have been revealed, we can estimate external
economies of scale by measuring the extent to which an exogenous increase in sector size
lowers such prices.
    Section 4 imposes parametric restrictions to implement the previous general strategy
with trade and production data that are commonly available. Within each sector, we as-
sume: (i ) that productivity is a log-linear function of size, so that we have constant scale
elasticities; and (ii ) that the demand for labor services from different countries takes the
Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) form, so that we have constant trade elasticities.1

   1 These parametric restrictions are satisfied by the multi-sector gravity models analyzed in Kucheryavyy

et al. (2017), a set that includes models with perfect competition and external economies of scale, as in this
paper, but also models with monopolistic competition and free entry, in which case scale effects arise from
product differentiation and love of variety within industries, as in Krugman (1980).

                                                      2
Under these restrictions, the (log of the) price of labor services from a country is pro-
portional to (the log of) its sector size, with a slope given by the scale elasticity; and the
revealed (log of the) price of labor services is proportional to (the log of) its bilateral ex-
ports, with a slope given by the inverse of the trade elasticity. Given existing estimates
of sector-level trade elasticities in the literature, we can therefore estimate sector-level
scale elasticities using a log-linear regression of bilateral exports, adjusted by the trade
elasticity, on sector size.
    Since idiosyncratic productivity differences across countries and sectors affect both
sector size and bilateral exports, identification requires a demand-side instrumental vari-
able (IV) that is positively correlated with sector size yet uncorrelated with productivity
shocks. To construct such an instrument, we first estimate the upper-level elasticity of
substitution between goods from different sectors. Given an estimate of this elasticity, we
then compute the demand residuals that rationalize observed expenditure shares across
sectors and countries. Under the assumption that these demand residuals are uncorre-
lated with idiosyncratic productivity shocks, the product of demand residuals, in each
country-sector pair, and population, in each country, provides a valid (and, in practice,
strong) instrument for sector size at the country level. Importantly, our identification
strategy deliberately draws on cross-sectional variation alone, so as to isolate the long-
run notion of scale economies that animates the textbook case for industrial policy.
    Drawing on a dataset comprising 61 of the world's largest countries from 1995-2010,
our results point to statistically significant scale elasticities in every 2-digit manufacturing
sector, with an average of 0.13. There is also substantial heterogeneity, with sector-level
estimates ranging from 0.07 to 0.25. Interestingly, the previous numbers are below the
inverse of the trade elasticity in all sectors, implying that our estimated scale elasticities
are weaker than those implicitly assumed in trade models with monopolistic competition
à la Krugman (1980) or Melitz (2003).2
    Three auxiliary findings lend support to the validity of these estimates. First, con-
sistent with expected simultaneity bias in an open economy under elastic demand, in
which sector size responds positively to productivity, in every sector we find that our
demand-based IV estimate is lower than its corresponding OLS estimate. Second, con-
sistent with our demand-based IV, these results are largely invariant to the inclusion of
flexible supply-side controls. And finally, while our baseline estimates are obtained from
pooling across multiple cross-sections, we obtain very similar estimates from each cross-

   2 Costinotand Rodríguez-Clare (2013) and Kucheryavyy, Lyn and Rodríguez-Clare (2017) offer detailed
discussions of the relationship between trade elasticities and scale effects in Krugman (1980) and Melitz
(2003).

                                                   3
section separately.
    Section 5 uses our empirical estimates to evaluate the gains from industrial policy and
to compare them to the gains from trade policy. We focus on the case of an economy that
is large enough to affect the price of its own good relative to goods from other countries,
but too small to affect relative prices in the rest of the world as well as other countries'
employment and expenditure across sectors. For such a small open economy, the optimal
policy consists of a mix of trade and industrial policy: sector-specific export taxes--equal
to the inverse of one plus the trade elasticity--to improve the country's terms-of-trade,
as well as sector-specific production subsidies--equal to the scale elasticity--to address
external economies of scale.
    We define the gains from industrial and trade policy as the difference between welfare
when both optimal trade taxes and production subsidies are in place and welfare when
only the other policy, either the export tax or the production subsidy, is in place. Despite
large and pervasive external economies of scale, we find that gains from industrial policy
in our baseline calibration are hardly transformative. They range from 0.40% of GDP for
the United States to 1.36% for Luxembourg, with larger gains for more open economies.
On average, gains from optimal industrial policy are equal to 0.69%. To put this number
in perspective, the average gains from optimal trade policy that we estimate in the same
environment are equal to 0.95% of GDP.3
    Consistent with the importance of terms-of-trade considerations, we also find that
pure Pigouvian taxes may backfire, with Ireland, for instance, experiencing a welfare loss
of 1.49% when Pigouvian taxes are not accompanied by optimal export taxes. This tension
reflects the fact that our empirical estimates of scale elasticities tend to be negatively cor-
related with trade elasticities. As a result, sectors whose output should be expanded, for
Pigouvian reasons, are also those whose exports should be contracted, for market power
reasons.
    Section 6 explores the sensitivity of these conclusions to the values of various struc-
tural parameters, including scale and trade elasticities, as well as more substantial de-
partures from our baseline Ricardian model. Among other things, we allow for multiple
factors of production and input-output linkages across sectors. Though some of these
extensions predict significantly larger gains from policy interventions, they all point to-
wards gains from industrial policy that are modest relative to the gains from trade policy.
    Because of the prominence of industrial policy in accounts of development and un-
   3 These  numbers refer to the welfare change in the country implementing the policy in question. Of
course, from a global standpoint, trade policy is a beggar-thy-neighbour policy, as improvements in one
country's terms-of-trade necessarily occur at the expense of another country, whereas industrial policy is
not.

                                                    4
derdevelopment, a number of theoretical and empirical papers have discussed the ra-
tionale and potential consequences of industrial policy, as reviewed in Harrison and
Rodríguez-Clare (2010). This includes recent reduced-form work on the consequences of
the Napoleonic blockade (Juhasz, 2018), South Korea's transition to a military dictatorship
(Lane, 2017), and a place-based manufacturing investment subsidy in the UK (Criscuolo
et al., 2019), as well as theoretical work on optimal industrial policy in the presence of
financial frictions (Itskhoki and Moll, 2019 and Liu, 2018). There is, however, a dearth of
work that has tried to combine both theory and empirics in order to estimate the benefits
that textbook industrial policy could achieve in practice.
     A notable exception is Lashkaripour and Lugovskyy (2018), which studies a monop-
olistically competitive environment à la Krugman (1980) where the elasticity of substi-
tution between domestic varieties may differ from the elasticity of substitution between
domestic and foreign varieties. In this model, the scale elasticity is indirectly determined
by the elasticity of substitution between domestic varieties, whereas the trade elasticity
is determined by the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign varieties, so
estimates of these two demand elasticities, obtained from monthly exchange rate varia-
tion in Colombia, can be used to calculate the effects of optimal policy. In contrast, our
empirical strategy directly identifies scale elasticities from the responses of sector-level
productivity, as revealed by exports, to changes in sector size caused by long-run varia-
tion in domestic demand.
     Our estimates also relate to a large literature that uses gravity models for counterfac-
tual analysis. As discussed by Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2013) and Kucheryavyy et
al. (2017), the quantitative predictions of these models hinge on two key elasticities: trade
elasticities and scale elasticities. While the former have received significant attention in
the empirical literature, as discussed in Head and Mayer (2013), the latter have not. Scale
economies, when introduced in gravity models, are instead indirectly calibrated using
information about the elasticity of substitution across goods in monopolistically compet-
itive environments; see e.g. Balistreri, Hillberry and Rutherford (2011). One of the goals
of our paper is to offer more direct and credible evidence about scale elasticities for use
in quantitative multi-sector gravity models.
     Finally, our methods for estimating sector-level scale economies build on a large em-
pirical literature concerned with estimating production functions in industrial organiza-
tion and macroeconomics--see Ackerberg et al. (2007) and Basu (2008) for reviews. Com-
pared to the former, we make no attempt at estimating internal economies of scale at the
firm-level. Rather, we focus on external economies at the sector level, which sector-level
trade flows reveal. Our focus on economies of scale at the sector level is therefore closer


                                             5
in spirit to Caballero and Lyons (1992) and Basu and Fernald (1997). A key difference be-
tween our approach and theirs is that we do not rely on measures of real output, or price
indices, collected by statistical agencies. Instead, we use estimates of the demand for
foreign factor services, as in Adao, Costinot and Donaldson (2017), to infer the effective
prices of those services. This provides a theoretically-grounded way to adjust for quality
differences across origins within the same sector, as well as an approach that works sym-
metrically for a large set of countries around the world. We come back to these issues in
Section 3.2.
    Finally, the general idea of using trade data to infer economies of scale bears a di-
rect relationship to empirical tests of the home-market effect; see e.g. Head and Ries
(2001), Davis and Weinstein (2003), and Costinot et al. (2019). Indeed, the home-market
effect--that is, a positive effect of demand on exports--implies the existence of economies
of scale at the sector level. Our empirical strategy is also closely related to previous work
on revealed comparative advantage; see e.g. Costinot, Donaldson and Komunjer (2012)
and Levchenko and Zhang (2016). The starting point of these papers, like ours, is that
trade flows contain information about relative costs of production, a point also empha-
sized by Antweiler and Trefler (2002).


2     Theory

2.1    Environment
Consider an economy comprising many countries, indexed by i or j = 1, ..., I , and many
sectors, indexed by k = 1, ..., K. Each sector itself comprises many goods, indexed by  .


Technology. Technology is Ricardian. In any origin country i, the same composite factor,
equipped labor, is used to produce all goods in all sectors.4 We let Li denote the fixed
supply of labor in country i. For any sector k, output of good  in country i that is
available for consumption in country j is given by

                                       qij,k ( ) = Aij,k ( )lij,k ( ),




    4 Thisrules out cross-sectoral differences in either factor intensity or input-output linkages in our base-
line analysis. We introduce both of these features in Section 6.2.

                                                      6
where lij,k ( ) denotes the amount of labor used by firms from an origin country i to
produce and deliver good  to a destination country j.5 Transportation costs, if any, are
reflected in Aij,k ( ). In turn, these productivities are given by

                                                                A
                                    Aij,k ( ) = ij,k ( ) Aij,k Ek ( L i ,k ).

Here ij,k ( ) and Aij,k are exogenous while Ek A ( L ) captures economies of scale as a func-
                                                    i ,k
                                                    ´
tion of total sector-level employment, Li,k =  j lij,k ( )d . For expositional purposes,
we shall simply refer to Li,k as sector size.6


Preferences. There is a representative agent with weakly separable preferences in each
country. The utility of the representative agent in a destination country j is given by

                                          Uj = Uj (Uj,1 , .., Uj,K ),

with Uj,k the subutility associated with goods from sector k,

                                   Uj,k = Uj,k ({ Bij,k ( )qij,k ( )}i, ).

In this expression, qij,k ( ) denotes the total amount of good  from sector k produced in
country i and sold to consumers in country j and Bij,k ( ) is an origin-destination-sector-
specific taste shock that captures quality differences. We assume that subutility Uj,k is
homothetic, that standard Inada conditions hold, and that demand for goods within a
sector satisfies the connected substitutes property, as defined in Arrow and Hahn (1971).
This will guarantee the invertibility of the demand for labor services in the rest of our
analysis. Finally, just as with productivity, we allow quality to be affected by sector size,

                                                                 B
                                    Bij,k ( ) =  ij,k ( ) Bij,k Ek ( L i ,k ).

                            A ( L ) E B ( L ) denote the joint effect of external economies of
Below we let Ek ( L j,k )  Ek    j,k k     j,k
scale operating on the supply and demand sides.


    5 The above specification assumes constant returns to scale at the level of goods  but does not require

constant returns to scale at the level of firms. As is well understood, constant returns to scale at the good
level may reflect the free entry of heterogeneous firms, each subject to decreasing returns to scale, as in
Hopenhayn (1992). Appendix A.1 makes that point explicitly; we return to it in Section 3.2.
    6 To keep the focus of our analysis on the textbook case for industrial policy, we restrict external effects

to occur within a given sector in a country and rule out the possibility of external effects that spill over
across sectors or countries.

                                                        7
Taxes. There are three types of taxes in all countries. Production in a given sector k may
be subject to an ad-valorem production subsidy, s j,k , which creates a wedge between the
prices faced by firms and consumers in country j. Imports and exports in a given sector
                                            m , and an export tax, t x . The first trade tax
k may also be subject to an import tariff, tij ,k                    ji,k
creates a wedge between the price paid by consumers in country j and the price received
by firms in country i = j, whereas the second creates a wedge between the price received
by firms in country j and the price paid by consumers in country i. Net revenues from
taxes and subsidies are rebated through a lump-sum transfer, Tj , to the representative
agent in country j.


2.2   Competitive Equilibrium
We focus on a competitive equilibrium with external economies of scale. In equilibrium,
consumers maximize utility taking as given good prices, wages, taxes, and the size of
each sector; firms maximize their profits, also taking as given good prices, wages, taxes,
and the size of each sector; and all markets clear. The formal definition of a competitive
equilibrium can be found in Appendix A.2.
    To prepare our analysis of optimal policy, it is convenient to focus on the exchange of
labor services between countries, as in Adao et al. (2017). Let Lij,k denote the demand,
in efficiency units, for labor from country i in country j within a given sector k, and let
Vj ({ Lij,k }i,k ) denote the utility of the representative agent in country j associated with a
given vector of labor demand,

            Vj ({ Lij,k }i,k )  max{q         ~ij,k ( )}i, j,k, U j ( {U j,k ( {  ij,k (  ) q
                                    ~ij,k ( ),l                                             ~ij,k }i, )}k )

                             ~ij,k  ij,k ( )l
                             q               ~ij,k ( ) for all  , i, and k,
                             ^
                                  ~ij,k ( )d  Lij,k for all i and k.
                                  l

In a competitive equilibrium, the labor services demanded by country j from different
origins and sectors, { Lij,k }i,k , the labor services exported by country j towards different




                                                          8
destinations, { L ji,k }i = j,k , and the sector sizes in country j, { L j,k }k , must solve

                                            max                                 ~ ij,k }i,k )
                                                                          Vj ({ L                                            (1a)
                            ~ ij,k }i,k ,{ L
                           {L              ~ ji,k }i = j,k ,{ L
                                                              ~ j,k } k

                                                 m ~
                                     cij,k (1 + tij ,k ) Lij,k                          c ji,k (1 - t x      ~
                                                                                                      ji,k ) L ji,k + Tj ,   (1b)
                           i = j,k                                            i = j,k

                                                 ji,k L                         ~ j,k , for all k,
                                                      ~ ji,k  (1 + s j,k ) Ej,k L                                            (1c)
                                                  i

                                                                 L
                                                                 ~ j,k  L j ,                                                (1d)
                                                                   k

where Ej,k  Ek ( L j,k ) measures external economies of scale;  ji,k  1/( Aij,k Bij,k ) captures
systematic productivity and quality differences; and cij,k  ij,k wi /[(1 + si,k )(1 - tij                         x )E ]
                                                                                                                   ,k i ,k
corresponds to the effective price of labor from country i in country j and sector k--that
is, the wage wi adjusted by the export tax tij      x , the production subsidy s , the systematic
                                                      ,k                                           i ,k
productivity and quality differences ij,k , and the external economies of scale Ei,k .
     Equation (1b) is the trade balance condition. It states that the value of labor services
imported by country j is no greater than the value of its exports. Equations (1c) captures
technological constraints; it states that total demand for labor services across destinations
i, adjusted by the bilateral exogenous efficiency term  ji,k , can be no greater than the total
supply, in efficiency units, in country j and sector k. The term Ej,k reflects the fact that
because of economies of scale, an increase in sector size leads either to larger quantities or
higher quality goods being produced with a given amount of labor, and hence an increase
in the amount of labor services supplied in efficiency units. Since firms do not internalize
this effect, Ej,k is taken as given in the above problem. Finally, equation (1d) is the labor
market clearing condition; it states that the sum of labor allocated across sectors k can be
no greater than the total labor supply in country j.
                                                       m )c L ]/(                             m )c
     For future reference, we let xij,k = [(1 + tij      ,k ij,k ij,k         i [(1 + ti       j,k i j,k Li j,k ]) denote
the share of expenditure in destination j on labor services from country i in sector k. In a
Ricardian environment, this also corresponds to the share of expenditure on goods from
sector k produced in country i. In what follows, we shall simply refer to { xij,k } as trade
shares. As shown in Appendix A.3, trade shares in a perfectly competitive equilibrium
are given by
                                              m                           m
                          xij,k = ij,k ((1 + t1 j,k ) c1 j,k , ..., (1 + t I j,k ) c I j,k ),                         (2)

where the function  j,k  (1 j,k , ...,  I j,k ) is homogeneous of degree zero, invertible, and
determined by Uj,k , {i,k ( )} and {  ij,k ( )}.




                                                                               9
2.3    Optimal Policy
We now turn to the analysis of optimal policy. By optimal, we mean the vector of trade
and production taxes or subsidies that maximize the utility of the representative agent
in a given country j, taking as given policies in other countries. We further assume that
country j is small in the sense that it can only affect the price of its own good relative
to goods from other countries: relative prices, sector-level employment, and sector-level
expenditure in the rest of the world are all taken as exogenously given by its government.
As argued below, this restriction is irrelevant for the structure of optimal industrial policy,
which is our main focus in this paper.
    We proceed in two steps. First, we consider the problem of a government that can
directly choose consumption and production in order to maximize utility in country j.
Second, we show how the solution to that planning problem can be decentralized through
sector-level production and trade taxes.


Government Problem.             The problem of country j's government is

                                            max                                 ~ ij,k }i,k )
                                                                          Vj ({ L                                     (3a)
                            ~ ij,k }i,k ,{ L
                           {L              ~ ji,k }i = j,k ,{ L
                                                              ~ j,k } k

                                                              ~ ij,k 
                                                        cij,k L                          c ji,k ( L        ~ ji,k ,
                                                                                                  ~ ji,k ) L          (3b)
                                              i = j,k                          i = j,k

                                                 ji,k L
                                                      ~ ji,k  Ek ( L
                                                                   ~ j,k ) L
                                                                           ~ j,k , for all k,                         (3c)
                                                  i

                                                                 L
                                                                 ~ j,k  L j .                                         (3d)
                                                                   k

There are two key differences between problems (1) and (3).
    First, country j's government internalizes sector-level economies of scale, Ek ( L             ~ j,k ),
whereas firms and consumers do not. This explains why Ek ( L      ~ j,k ) in equation (3c) depends
on the choice variable, L~ j,k , rather than its equilibrium value, L j,k , as in equation (1c). This
creates a rationale for Pigouvian taxation--that is, production subsidies, {s j,k }--that may
be non-zero at the optimum.
    Second, the government recognizes its market power on foreign markets, whereas
firms and consumers do not. In the small open economy case that we focus on, country
j's government takes import prices, cij,k  ij,k wi /[(1 + si,k )(1 - tij   x ) E ], as given for any
                                                                            ,k i ,k
origin country i = j. But it internalizes the fact that export prices, c ji,k ( L ji,k ), are a function




                                                                          10
of its own exports, L ji,k , with this function implicitly given by the price c ji,k that solves

                                                                                    (1 + t m
                                                                                           ji,k ) c ji,k L ji,k
               m                          m
   ji,k ((1 + t1 i,k ) c1i,k , ..., (1 + t Ii,k ) c Ii,k )   =                 m )c                       m                       ,   (4)
                                                                  i = j (1 + t i i,k i i,k Li i,k + (1 + t ji,k ) c ji,k L ji,k


with the equilibrium costs of other exporters, {ci i,k }i = j , as well as their exports of labor
services, { Li i,k }i = j , taken as given. The fact that firms and consumers ignore such effects
creates a rationale for export taxes, {t x   ji,k }i,k , that manipulate country j's terms-of-trade.


Implementation. To characterize the structure of optimal policy, we compare the solu-
tions to (1) and (3) and derive necessary conditions on production subsidies and trade
taxes such that the two solutions coincide.
                                                                                      ~ j,k } k ,
     Consider first the solution to (3). The first-order conditions with respect to { L
{L~ ji,k }i = j,k , and { L
                          ~ ij,k }i,k imply

                                   [ Ek ( L j,k ) L j,k + Ek ( L j,k )] j,k =  j ,
                                j [c ji,k ( L ji,k ) L ji,k + c ji,k ( L ji,k )] =  ji,k  j,k ,
                                             dVj ({ Lij,k }i,k )/dLij,k =  j cij,k , if i = j,
                                             dVj ({ Lij,k }i,k )/dLij,k = ij,k  j,k , if i = j.

where  j , { j,k } and  j denote the values of the Lagrange multipliers associated with
constraints (3b)-(3d) at the optimal allocation.
   Now suppose that the same allocation arises at the solution to (1). The first-order
conditions associated with this problem imply

                                 (1 + s j,k ) Ek ( L j,k )e     e
                                                          j,k =  j ,

                               e        x                                e
                               j (1 - t ji,k ) c ji,k ( L ji,k ) =  ji,k  j,k ,

                                dVj ({ Lij,k }i,k )/dLij,k = e       m
                                                             j (1 + tij,k ) cij,k , if i = j,

                                dVj ({ Lij,k }i,k )/dLij,k = ij,k e
                                                                  j,k , if i = j,


where e       e           e
        j , {  j,k }k and  j denote the values of the Lagrange multipliers associated with
constraints (1b)-(1d). A comparison of these two sets of first-order conditions leads to the
following proposition.

Proposition 1. For a small open economy j, the unilaterally optimal policy consists of a combi-




                                                                    11
nation of production and trade taxes such that, for some s j , t j > -1,

                                                       d ln Ek
                         1 + s j,k = (1 + s j )(1 +               ), for all k,
                                                      d ln L j,k
                                                      d ln c ji,k
                         1 - tx
                              ji,k   = (1 + t j )(1 +             ), for all i and k,
                                                      d ln L ji,k
                              m
                         1 + tij ,k = 1 + t j , for all i and k.


    The two shifters, s j and t j , reflect two distinct sources of tax indeterminacy. First, since
labor supply is perfectly inelastic, a uniform production tax or subsidy s j only affects
the level of factor prices in country j, but leaves the equilibrium allocation unchanged.
Second, a uniform increase in all trade taxes again affects the level of prices in country
j, but leaves the trade balance condition and the equilibrium allocation unchanged, an
expression of Lerner Symmetry. In the rest of our analysis, we normalize both s j and t j to
zero. Hence optimal trade policy only requires export taxes, whereas optimal industrial
policy only requires production subsidies.
    It is worth noting that while we have focused on the case of a small open economy,
this restriction is only relevant for the structure of optimal trade policy, which would
depend, in general, on the entire vector of imports and exports by country j. The optimal
                                                       d ln Ek
Pigouvian tax, in contrast, is always given by d        ln L j,k . Formally, this derives from the fact
that the technological constraints (1c) and (3c) are unchanged in the case of a large open
economy, as described in Appendix A.4.


3    Identification
Section 2 highlights the importance of two structural objects for optimal policy design: (i )
 j,k , which determines trade shares in the rest of the world and, in turn, export prices for
country j; and (ii ) Ek , which determines external economies of scale across sectors. Under
the assumption that demand in each sector satisfies standard Inada conditions and the
connected substitutes property,  j,k is invertible and non-parametrically identified from
variation in cij,k under standard orthogonality conditions, as discussed in Adao, Costinot
and Donaldson (2017). Our goal in this section is to provide conditions under which,
given knowledge of  j,k , Ek is non-parametrically identified as well.
     The basic idea is to start by inverting demand in order to go from the trade shares,
which are observed, to the effective prices of labor services, which are not. Once the
prices have been inferred, we can then estimate external economies of scale by measuring


                                                      12
the extent to which an exogenous increase in sector size lowers such prices.


3.1    Non-Parametric Identification of External Economies of Scale
               -1
Formally, let ij ,k ( x1 j,k , ..., x I j,k ) denote the effective price of the labor services from country
i in country j and sector k, up to some normalization. For any pair of origin countries, i1
and i2 , and any sector k1 , equation (2) implies

                           -1
                           i j,k ( x1 j,k1 , ..., x I j,k1 )
                              1     1
                                                                           Ek1 ( Li2 ,k1 )     wi     ~ i j,k
                                                                                                      
                      ln   -1
                                                                 = ln                      + ln 1 + ln 1 1 ,
                                                                           Ek1 ( Li1 ,k1 )     wi2    ~ i2 j,k 1
                             j,k ( x1 j,k1 , ..., x I j,k1 )
                           i                                                                          
                              2     1


with                     m )] / [(1 - t x )(1 + s )]. Taking a second difference relative to
     ~ ij,k  [ij,k (1 + tij ,k         ij,k      i ,k
another sector k2 , we therefore have

               -1                                              -1
               i j,k ( x1 j,k1 , ..., x I j,k1 )
                  1    1
                                                               i j,k ( x1 j,k2 , ..., x I j,k2 )
                                                                  1    2
          ln   -1
                                                       - ln    -1
                                                                                                                                     (5)
               i
                 2 j,k 1
                         ( x1 j,k1 , ..., x I j,k1 )           i
                                                                 2 j,k 2
                                                                         ( x1 j,k2 , ..., x I j,k2 )
                                                       Ek1 ( Li2 ,k1 )     Ek ( Li ,k )    ~ i j,k
                                                                                                      ~ i j,k
                                                                                                      
                                            = ln                       - ln 2 2 2 + ln 1 1 - ln 1 2 .
                                                       Ek1 ( Li1 ,k1 )     Ek2 ( Li1 ,k2 ) ~ i2 j,k 1
                                                                                                      ~ i2 j,k 2
                                                                                                      

Given two origin countries, i1 and i2 , two sectors, k1 and k2 , and a destination country
j, equation (5) is a nonparametric regression model with endogenous regressors and a
linear error term,
                                       y = h(l ) + ,

where the endogenous variables, y and l , the function to be estimated, h(·), and the error
term, , are given by

                                         -1                                              -1
                                         i j,k ( x1 j,k1 , ..., x I j,k1 )
                                            1    1
                                                                                         i j,k ( x1 j,k2 , ..., x I j,k2 )
                                                                                            1    2
                            y  ln        -1
                                                                                 - ln    -1
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                         i
                                           2 j,k 1
                                                   ( x1 j,k1 , ..., x I j,k1 )           i
                                                                                           2 j,k 2
                                                                                                   ( x1 j,k2 , ..., x I j,k2 )
                             l  ( L i1 ,k 1 , L i2 ,k 1 , L i1 ,k 2 , L i2 ,k 2 ),
                                     Ek1 ( Li2 ,k1 )           Ek ( Li ,k )
                       h(l )  ln                     - ln 2 2 2 ,
                                     Ek1 ( Li1 ,k1 )           Ek2 ( Li1 ,k2 )
                                     ~ i j,k
                                                     ~ i j,k
                                                     
                                   ln 1 1 - ln 1 2 .
                                     ~ i2 j,k 1
                                                     ~ i2 j,k 2
                                                     

Economically speaking, the endogeneity of the regressors, E[ |l ] = 0, simply reflects the
fact that sectors with higher productivity, higher quality, or lower trade costs in a given
origin country will also tend to have larger sizes. The identification of h(·) therefore


                                                                           13
requires a vector of instruments.
    Newey and Powell (2003) provide general conditions for nonparametric identification
in such environments. Specifically, if there exists a vector of instruments z that satis-
fies the exclusion restriction, that E[ |z] = 0, as well as the completeness condition, that
E[ g(l )|z] = 0 implies g = 0 for any g with finite expectation, then h(·) is nonparamet-
rically identified. As shown in Appendix A.5, once h(·) is identified, both Ek1 and Ek2
are also identified, up to a normalization that is irrelevant for policy analysis. In the next
section, we will propose such a vector of instruments and use it to estimate sector-level
external economies of scale.


3.2    Discussion
Before turning to our empirical analysis, we briefly discuss the robustness of our ap-
proach as well as some of the relative costs and benefits of this approach as compared to
alternative methods for estimating scale economies.


Perfect versus Imperfect Competition. The nonparametric identification of external
economies of scale above is conducted under the assumption of perfect competition, in
which prices are equal to unit costs. This assumption allows us to infer how variation
in sector sizes affects costs, and hence economies of scale, by estimating how the varia-
tion in sector sizes affects prices, as revealed by trade shares. While this might suggest
that perfect competition is critical for our empirical strategy, this is not the case, as an
example (developed formally in Appendix A.6) illustrates. Suppose that we introduce
an imperfectly competitive retail sector that buys goods at their marginal costs and sells
these goods at a profit. In this economy, retailers will impose different markups on differ-
ent goods, but markups in sector k and country j will still be a function of (c1 j,k , ..., c I j,k ),
and hence we can still express trade shares as a function of these prices,  j,k (c1 j,k , ..., c I j,k ),
as well as estimate this function from variation in cij,k . Hence, external economies are
nonparametrically identified under the same conditions as under perfect competition, re-
gardless of whether good prices are equal to their marginal costs or not.7



   7 This  establishes that perfect competition is not critical for our empirical strategy, not that there does
not exist imperfectly competitive models under which variation in markups would affect our inferences
about the magnitude of external economies of scale. Costinot et al. (2019) discuss one such example. In
their model, an increase in the number of firms producing in a given origin country and sector lowers
the markup charged by those firms everywhere, leading to a decrease in the prices faced by importing
countries, absent any external economies of scale.

                                                      14
Internal versus External Economies of Scale. As we have already noted, our model is
consistent with the existence of internal economies of scale at the firm-level, provided that
there is free entry in the production of each good, as in Hopenhayn (1992) and Appendix
A.1. If so, as the total number of workers employed to produce a good  increases,
the measure of entering firms increases in a proportional manner, while the number of
workers per firm remains unchanged, making firm-level economies of scale irrelevant
for our results. Absent free entry, production functions at the good level may no longer
be constant returns and economies of scale estimated at the sector level may therefore
reflect a mixture of both internal and external economies of scale. This concern offers an
additional motive for estimating demand and scale functions, as we do below, through
the use of relatively long-run variation, in which the assumption of free entry is more
appropriate.


Alternative Methods for Estimating External Economies of Scale. We have established
above how one can use data on trade shares, { xij,k }, and sector sizes, { Li,k }, to identify
external economies of scale Ek . An obvious benefit of this empirical strategy is that trade
data are easily available for a large number of countries, sectors, and years. An obvi-
ous cost is that identification relies on knowledge of the  j,k system. While  j,k is also
required, independently from Ek , for the design and evaluation of optimal policy, if one
were interested in Ek alone then alternative estimation methods would also be available.
We discuss such alternatives here.
   In many settings researchers have access to micro-level data. On the production side,
such data can be used to estimate firm-level production functions such as,

                                         A
                                    q = Ek ( L i ,k ) F ( l ,  ),

where  is an index of productivity that may vary across firms producing the same good
 in country i and sector k, as discussed further in Appendix A.1. This would amount
to first estimating F (l , ) and then estimating Ek A ( L ) by investigating how firms' pro-
                                                         i ,k
ductivity residuals relate to sector size, with a similar need for instrumental variables as
discussed in Section 3.1. Similarly, with micro-level data on consumption and prices one
could estimate the (potentially extremely high-dimensional) within-sector demand sys-
tem for all goods and then infer Ek B ( L ) by estimating how firms' demand residuals are
                                         i ,k
affected by exogenous increases in sector size. Our approach instead folds the estimation
of these two micro-level functions, production functions and demand systems, into a sin-
gle macro-level function, the effective demand (in any destination j) for factor services


                                                15
from country i in sector k given by ij,k . One downside of this approach is that it does not
allow us to separately identify Ek    A ( L ) and E B ( L ), but it does identify the combination,
                                           i ,k     k    i ,k
               A ( L ) E B ( L ), which is all that will matter for optimal industrial policy.
Ek ( Li,k ) = Ek    i ,k k    i ,k
     Another approach would draw on macro-level data on sector-level quantity indices
Qi,k . Provided that these indices have been constructed so as to correctly adjust for qual-
ity and variety differences, an estimate of how exogenous changes in sector sizes, Li,k ,
affect Qi,k would also identify Ek . The key difference between this macro approach and
ours therefore boils down to the the nature of the quality adjustment. In our case, this ad-
justment derives from the estimation of demand for factor services from different coun-
tries and the associated residuals. In the case of the macro-data approach, it is left to the
statistical agency in charge of computing price deflators.8


4     Estimation
The characteristics of textbook industrial policy hinge on the extent of external economies
of scale. In Section 2, we have shown how optimal industrial policy can be constructed
given knowledge of Ek (·). In Section 3, we have further demonstrated how knowledge
of this function could be obtained, nonparametrically, from conventional data and ex-
ogenous variation in sector size. In this section we describe the empirical procedure that
we use to obtain estimates of this function, before using them in Section 5 to assess the
consequences of industrial policy.


4.1    Parametric Restrictions
The identification results presented in Section 3 are asymptotic in nature. They reveal
conditions under which, in theory, one could point-identify external economies of scale,
Ek , in all sectors with a dataset that includes an infinite sequence of economies. In this
context, we have established that, given an exogenous shifter of sector sizes, one can
identify external economies of scale by tracing out the impact of changes in sector sizes
on prices, as revealed by changes in equilibrium trade shares.


    8 While the appropriate exact price index is only obtainable with knowledge of the entire within-sector
demand system, in many contexts one can more easily construct a first-order approximation to that index,
such as Laspeyres or Paasche. However, in the economic environment that we consider in Section 2.1, there
may not exist a single-output technology at the country-sector level because, within a sector, different goods
may be sold by the same country to different destinations. In such cases, there is no theoretically grounded
expenditure function that the measured price index would be a first-order approximation to. Focusing on
trade in factor services circumvents this concern.

                                                     16
    In practice, researchers have limited data variation from which to learn about the rel-
atively aggregate and long-run phenomena involved in external economies of scale. For
example, as we discuss below, the dataset we use here includes only four time periods
and 61 countries. So, estimation inevitably needs to proceed parametrically. In the rest of
our analysis, we impose the following functional-form assumptions on the factor demand
system ij,k and external economies of scale Ek at all times t:

                                                                                          m,t t           -k
                          m,t t                       m,t t
                                                                                   ((1 + tij ,k ) cij,k )
              ij,k ((1 + t1 j,k ) c1 j,k , ..., (1 + t I j,k ) c I j,k )   =                    m,t
                                                                                                t )-k
                                                                                                               ,   (6)
                                                                               i ((1 + ti j,k )ci j,k
                                                                   t            t k
                                                             Ek ( Li ,k ) = ( L i ,k ) .                           (7)

These choices have the advantage of focusing our empirical analysis on the elasticities
that matter for the design of optimal policy. Equation (6) states that bilateral trade shares
between an origin country i and a destination j in any sector k satisfy a gravity equa-
tion with trade elasticity k . Costinot et al. (2012) describe a multi-sector extension of
Eaton and Kortum (2002) that provides micro-theoretical foundations for such a func-
tional form. The same micro-foundations can be invoked in the presence of external
economies of scale, as in Kucheryavyy et al. (2017). Equation (7) allows external economies
of scale to vary across sectors, as is critical for industrial policy considerations, but re-
stricts the elasticity of external economies k to be constant within each sector.
    In addition, for the purposes of assessing the welfare gains from optimal policy, which
also depends on the sector-level elasticity of demand, as Figure 1 illustrates, we must
specify the upper-level utility function Uj . This also plays a role in our instrumental
variable estimation procedure below. We do so under the assumption that the elasticity
of substitution across manufacturing sectors is constant as well. Hence, we can express
country j's share of expenditure on a manufacturing sector k  M, across all origins, as

                                                         exp(tj,k )( Pjt,k )1-
                                       xt
                                        j,k   =                                         ,                          (8)
                                                      l  M exp(tj,l )( Pjt,l )1-

where  is the elasticity of substitution between sectors, tj,k is an exogenous preference
parameter, and Pjt,k is sector k's price index in country j given by

                                                                                    -1/k
                                   Pjt,k                      m,t t
                                                       ((1 + tij ,k ) cij,k )
                                                                              -k
                                                                                            .                      (9)
                                                  i




                                                               17
One feature to note about the functional forms in equations (6)-(9) is that all level-shifters
can change over time, but the elasticities {k }, {k }, and  cannot. This implies that,
while we use data from multiple time periods, this is not necessary for estimation; we
could proceed instead with data from just one time period. Choosing the former over the
latter merely allows us to take advantage of the increased statistical precision that comes
from pooling the data from multiple cross-sections.


4.2    Empirical Strategy
We now discuss our procedure for obtaining estimates of scale elasticities k .


Baseline Specification. Let xijt
                                 ,k denote the trade share of exporter i for importer j in
sector k and period t. Given equations (6) and (7), equation (5) simplifies into

      1         xit1 j,k2      1            xit1 j,k1                        t
                                                                            Li                                     t
                                                                                                                  Li
                                                                               2 ,k 1                                2 ,k 2
         ln                  -    ln                           = k1 ln                   - k2 ln
      k2        xit            k1           xit                              t
                                                                            Li                                     t
                                                                                                                  Li
                   2 j,k 2                     2 j,k 1                         ,k
                                                                               1    1                                ,k
                                                                                                                      1   2

                                                                                                           ~ it j,k
                                                                                                                                 ~ it j,k
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               1 1                   1 2
                                                                                         + ln                 t           - ln                  .
                                                                                                           ~ i j,k
                                                                                                                                 ~ it j,k
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               2 1                  2       2


The fixed-effect counterpart of this difference-in-difference specification is

                                  1      t         t    t           t                                    t
                                    ln( xij ,k ) = ij + j,k + k ln Li,k +                                ij,k ,                                     (10)
                                  k

where ij t and t represent exporter-importer-year and importer-sector-year fixed effects,
                j,k
respectively, and ijt  - ln     t .9 Equation (10) will be our baseline specification.
                              ~ ij
                     ,k            ,k
    Three features of this specification are worth emphasizing. First, because sector size
  t
Li,k would respond endogenously to the idiosyncratic productivity shocks that are part
of ijt , ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of equation (10) would be biased, as al-
      ,k
ready discussed in Section 3. Hence, estimation of the supply-side parameter k requires
demand-side instrumental variables for sector size Li    t . Second, because we aim to es-
                                                          ,k

   9 Fixing   some exporter i2 and sector k2 , these fixed effects satisfy the following structural relationships:

                                                   t
                                                  xij                                        t
                                                                                           ~ ij
                                                                                           
                              t       1               ,k                                        ,k
                              ij         ln                2
                                                                - k2 ln( Lit,k2 ) + ln               2
                                                                                                             ,
                                      k2          xit                                     ~ it
                                                                                          
                                                    2 j,k 2                                  2 j,k 2
                                      1
                              jt,k      ln( xit2 j,k ) - k ln( Li
                                                                t
                                                                  2 ,k
                                                                       ) + k2 ln( Lit2 ,k2 ) + ln ~ it2 j,k .
                                      k



                                                                     18
timate the long-run scale elasticities k that motivate textbook industrial policy, we de-
liberately exploit long-run, cross-sectional variation alone; put differently, it is important
that exporter-sector fixed effects do not appear in equation (10). Finally, because equa-
tion (10) includes exporter-importer-year fixed effects, which are necessary in order to
control for the exporter's wage wit and any differences in aggregate productivity, it can-
not be estimated separately sector-by-sector. Formally, one should therefore think of the
endogenous variables as the entire vector of sector sizes, {ln Lit } , interacted with a full
                                                                  ,k k
set of K sector indicators. Identification therefore requires at least K instrumental vari-
ables that shift sector sizes in independent directions. We now describe a procedure for
constructing such variables.

Construction of Instrumental Variables. To construct demand-side, cross-sectional in-
struments for sector size, we propose to start from estimates (to be described below) of
country-and-sector-level demand shocks, exp(tj,k ), in equation (8). Because {exp(tj,k )}k
govern expenditure shares, rather than levels, we then formulate a prediction for the lev-
                                                                           t
els of country j's demand for goods from sector k as D t             t
                                                         j,k  exp(  j,k ) L j , using data on
                       t
total population L j . Finally, given those demand-side estimates, we construct the K in-
strumental variables for (log) sector size ln Lit , interacted with K sector indicators, as
                                                 ,k
                                t
(log) predicted demand ln( D j,k ), interacted with the same K sector indicators. This pro-
vides a (just-identified) 2SLS system.10 The exclusion restriction being imposed is that
after conditioning on importer-exporter-year and importer-sector-year fixed effects, pre-
dicted demand in country i and sector k at year t, ln( D t j,k ), is mean-independent of the
supply-side shocks, { it j ,k }.11
    To obtain estimates of country-and-sector-level demand shocks,       ^tj,k , we use data on
                                    t        t denote the expenditure by importer j on all
sector-level expenditures. Let X j   ,k   i Xij ,k
goods (from all origins i) in manufacturing sector k at time t and let x t         t          t
                                                                         j,k  X j,k /  s  M X j,s
be the share of expenditures in sector k as a share of total manufacturing expenditures.
If upper-level preferences were Cobb-Douglas ( = 1), we would directly infer that
exp( ^t         t
      j,k ) = x j,k , up to a normalization. But more generally, we also need estimates of
   10 One unusual feature of our 2SLS estimation system of equations is that the first-stage equation involves

a more aggregate level of variation than the (bilateral) second-stage equation. However, this poses no diffi-
culties of interpretation or inference given that we cluster the standard errors in all of the following regres-
sions (first-stage and second-stage) at the exporter-sector level. In addition to correcting for unrestricted
forms of serially correlated errors over time, this clustering procedure has the advantage of correcting for
the purely mechanical within-group (that is, within-exporter-sector-year) correlation in the first-stage.
   11 We note that in this model 2SLS is a limited-information approach to consistent estimation of the scale

elasticity parameters k . But relative to full-information approaches, which would use the full structure of
the model to derive an efficient nonlinear estimator, linear 2SLS offers the benefit of simplicity and draws
on finite-sample theory that is relatively well understood.

                                                      19
                            ^ t , and the elasticity of substitution, 
sector-level price indices, P                                         ^ , to recover the demand
                             j,k
residuals in equation (8). Appendix B.1 describes in detail how we obtain those by (i ) in-
ferring sector-level price indices, P^j,k , from importer-sector-year fixed effects in a gravity
equation and (ii ) instrumenting those prices with country population times a full set of
sector indicators, drawing on the supply-based logic of our economies of scale model.12


4.3        Measurement
To estimate scale elasticities k in equation (10) using predicted demand as instruments,
we need measures of trade shares xij  t , population Lt , and sector size, L . We discuss
                                       ,k              i                    i ,t
each of these in turn.


Trade Shares. We obtain data on bilateral trade flows Xij t from the OECD's Inter-Country
                                                           ,k
Input-Output (ICIO) tables. This source documents bilateral trade among 61 major ex-
porters i and importers j, listed in Table B.8, within each of 34 sectors k (27 of which are
traded, with 15 in manufacturing) defined at a similar level to the 2-digit SIC, and for
each year t = 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2010. The 15 manufacturing sectors k, listed in Table
1, are those for which we aim to estimate k .13 Since ICIO tables also include domestic
        t in all sectors, we can measure trade shares directly as x t = X t /       t
sales Xii ,k                                                        ij,k    ij,k l Xlj,k .


                                                                              t
Population. We take our preferred measure of population Li from the "POP" variable
in the Penn World Tables version 9.0. In practice this variable is highly correlated with
alternative measures such as the total labor force.


Sector Size. According to the baseline model developed here, the total wage bill in a
sector is equal to total sales across all destinations, wit Li
                                                             t =
                                                               ,k
                                                                      t , and total employment
                                                                   j Xij ,k
across sectors is equal to total labor supply, which further implies wit Li     t =         t .
                                                                                      k  j Xij ,k


   12 In   the presence of k > 0, we know that a country j's productivity in any sector k will be increasing
in Ltj,k . While sector size Lt
                              j,k is endogenously determined, a natural candidate to predict such sector scale
(especially for the empirically relevant case of low import penetration in most sectors) is the country's
                                            t
overall scale, driven by its population L j . We expect this overall country size to have a differential impact
on productivity, and hence price reduction, across sectors depending on the relative strength of economies
                                                                               t
of scale k . This suggests constructing IVs from the interaction between L j and k . Since k is unknown
at this stage--indeed, our procedure for estimating k relies on knowledge of the parameter  that is the
                                                                 t
goal here--we simply construct IVs from the interaction of L j and a set of sector indicators. In line with
the previous logic, we will later confirm that there is a strong (inverse) correlation between the first stage
coefficients here, on each sector interaction variable, and the sector's corresponding estimate of k .
    13 We omit sector 18, Recycling and Manufacturing NEC, from the estimation.



                                                      20
                                                       ¯ t as a proxy for labor supply
Combining these two observations, and using population L i
                                                                    t
                                                                 j Xij
 t , we can therefore measure sector size Lt as
Li                                                                  t
                                                                       ,k   ¯ t .14
                                                                            L
                                           i ,k               k  j Xij ,k
                                                                              i



4.4    Estimates of Scale Elasticities
Auxiliary Results. The estimation of scale elasticities k requires estimates of two aux-
iliary parameters: (i) the elasticity of substitution between manufacturing sectors , to
construct our demand-side instruments; and (ii) trade elasticities k in each sector, to con-
struct our dependent variables. We begin with a discussion of these auxiliary estimates.
    Our estimate of  is reported in Table B.2, with the corresponding first-stage results in
Table B.1. The IV estimate is  = 1.47, which is lower than the OLS estimate (of  = 3.35)
as is consistent with the presence of increasing returns at the sector level. When supply
curves slope downwards, positive demand shocks lead to reductions in prices. Hence,
the OLS estimate of the impact of prices on expenditure shares, which confounds a truly
downward-sloping demand curve with the negative correlation between demand shocks
and prices, will be an underestimate of 1 - , leading to an overestimate of .
    Trade elasticities k in manufacturing sectors have already been estimated by various
researchers. For our baseline analysis, we take the median estimate, within each sector,
from the following recent studies: Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2018), Caliendo and
Parro (2015), Giri, Yi and Yilmazkuday (2018), and Shapiro (2016). The resulting estimates
are described in Table B.3. We explore the sensitivity of our results to using alternative
trade elasticities in Section 6.1.


Main Results. OLS estimates of k from equation (10) are reported in column (1) of Ta-
ble 1. All of these estimates imply precisely-estimated economies of scale (i.e. k > 0) but,
as discussed, we expect OLS to deliver biased estimates of true economies of scale. For
this reason we turn to the IV estimation procedure documented in Section 4.2. Recall that
this corresponds to a 2SLS system in which there are 15 endogenous variables (the vari-
         t interacted with an indicator variable for each sector) and 15 instruments (the
able ln Li ,k
                     t
               t L , again interacted with an indicator variable for each sector). While this
variable ln i   ,k i
means that there are 15 first-stage equation estimates to report (each with 15 coefficients),
the F-statistic from each of these first-stage equations is large, as reported in columns (4)

   14 Given this measure of sector size, any discrepancy between population and labor supply in efficiency
                                                                                               ¯t
                                                                                         t = t L
units is therefore also implicitly part of the error term in equation (10). That is, if Li   i i , then the error
term also includes k ln  it , with our exclusion applying to this term as well--though, as we describe in
Section 4.4, our estimates are robust to the inclusion of controls for per-capita GDP interacted with sector-
year dummies, which lends support to this assumption.

                                                       21
Table 1: Estimates of Sector-Level Scale Elasticities (k )
                                                                      Reduced-        First-stage      SW
                                            OLS           2SLS          form             F-stat       F-stat
Sector                                      (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)
Food, Beverages and Tobacco                 0.19           0.16           0.10          87.20         394.3
                                           (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.02)
Textiles                                    0.14           0.12           0.06          56.70         349.9
                                           (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.02)
Wood Products                               0.13           0.11           0.05          15.50         210.7
                                           (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.01)
Paper Products                              0.14           0.11           0.05          55.60         661.9
                                           (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.01)
Coke/Petroleum Products                     0.09           0.07           0.03          14.20         299.1
                                           (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)
Chemicals                                   0.23           0.20           0.17          31.10         335.8
                                           (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.02)
Rubber and Plastics                         0.29           0.25           0.22          39.13         436.0
                                           (0.02)         (0.03)         (0.03)
Mineral Products                            0.16           0.13           0.08          40.50         405.0
                                           (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.01)
Basic Metals                                0.13           0.11           0.07          14.40         254.0
                                           (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)
Fabricated Metals                           0.16           0.13           0.07          57.10         421.1
                                           (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.01)
Machinery and Equipment                     0.15           0.13           0.07          66.40         401.6
                                           (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)
Computers and Electronics                   0.10           0.09           0.04          18.60         290.5
                                           (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)
Electrical Machinery, NEC                   0.11           0.09           0.03          45.90         419.5
                                           (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)
Motor Vehicles                              0.17           0.15           0.15          39.80         390.2
                                           (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.02)
Other Transport Equipment                   0.17           0.16           0.11          24.00         381.6
                                           (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.02)

Notes: Column (1) reports the OLS estimate, and column (2) the 2SLS estimate, of equation (10). Column
(3) reports the reduced form coefficients. The instruments are the log of (country population × sectoral
demand shifter), interacted with sector dummies. Column (4) reports the conventional F-statistic, and
column (5) the Sanderson-Windmeijer F-statistic, from the first-stage regression corresponding to each row.
All regressions control for importer-sector-year fixed-effects and (asymmetric) trading pair-year effects.
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the exporter-sector level. The number of obserations (unique
exporter-importer-sector-years) is 207,542.



                                                    22
and (5), so potential concerns about finite-sample bias from weak instruments seem not
to apply here. The first-stage coefficient estimates themselves are summarized in Table
B.4.15
    The 2SLS estimates of k are reported in column (2) of Table 1. These are our preferred
estimates of the strength of economies of scale within each of the 15 manufacturing sectors
in our sample. The results point to substantial economies of scale--with an average scale
elasticity of 0.13--that are statistically significantly different from zero in every sector. At
the same time, there is widespread heterogeneity, with estimates ranging from k = 0.07
in the Coke/Petroleum Products sector to k = 0.25 in the Rubber and Plastics sector. We
can easily reject the hypothesis of coefficient equality at the 1% level. This heterogeneity
is important for the scope for industrial policy, as we discuss in Section 5.
    Another feature of these estimates is that, in each sector, the OLS estimate of k is
larger than its corresponding 2SLS estimate. This downward OLS bias is to be expected
in an open economy in which countries specialize in sectors where they have a compara-
tive advantage; further, it is consistent with our finding that the elasticity of substitution
between sectors, , is greater than one, which magnifies the impact of productivity differ-
ences on specialization.
    Finally, column (3) reports the reduced-form parameter estimates of the impact of pre-
dicted (log) demand, ln( Dit,k ), on the dependent variable, 1 ln( xijt ). We see that countries
                                                                       ,k
                                                                k
with higher predicted demand in a sector tend to have larger exports in that sector. This
is again consistent with the the existence of increasing returns at the sector level, which
implies that positive shocks to domestic demand cause lower prices and, in turn, greater
exports. This is a manifestation of the home-market effect.16


Robustness. The estimates of k in Table 1 are obtained from pooling across four cross-
sections: 1995, 2000, 2005 and 2010. As a first robustness check, we consider each of these
cross-sections separately. The new estimates of k , displayed in Table B.5, are very similar.
The largest relative change in scale elasticities, across all sector and year estimates, is that

   15 Specifically, Table B.4 reports, for each first-stage regression, that the demand residual-based IV for

any given sector has a strong correlation with its own sector size and a far weaker correlation with any
other sector's size. Consequently, as seen in column (4) of Table 1, the conventional F-statistic from the
15 instruments in each first-stage equation is large and the Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) F-statistic in
column (5), which assesses the extent to which each first-stage is affected by independent variation in the
instruments from that in the other 14 first-stages, is considerably larger.
   16 Echoing that view, the first-stage results corresponding to the estimation of the elasticity substitution

 reported in Table B.1 show that the impact of country size on sector-level prices is negative in all sectors
but one. Further, the correlation between these sector-specific first-stage coefficients and the estimates of
k is -0.94, which is strongly consistent with the negative correlation one would again expect to obtain if
sectors with stronger scale economies see larger price reductions due to scale.

                                                      23
for the Mineral Products sector which changes from 0.13 in the baseline to 0.16 for 2005.
In addition, the lowest SW F-statistic across these 60 first-stage regressions is 101.8. These
findings highlight how it is fundamentally stable, cross-sectional variation that drives our
estimates of k .
    The 2SLS estimates of k in Table 1 further requires that unobserved determinants of
comparative advantage, which are absorbed in the error term ij       t
                                                                       ,k of equation (10), are
orthogonal to our instruments. As an additional robustness check, we now explore the
sensitivity of our estimates to controlling for systematic sources of Ricardian comparative
advantage.
    A prominent source of Ricardian comparative advantage stems from differences in
institutions across countries and the differential implications that those institutions have
for productivity across sectors; see Nunn and Trefler (2014) for a survey. As proxies for
institutional quality, we use a measure of contract enforcement and a measure of financial
development, thereby encompassing the sources of comparative advantage stressed in
Levchenko (2007) and Nunn (2007) as well as Beck (2002) and Manova (2008).17 Our con-
trols correspond to interaction terms between exporting country-level measures of insti-
tutional quality and sector-year dummies, which hence allows for any form of systematic
Ricardian comparative advantage based on contract enforcement or financial develop-
ment. The results from including this set of controls are reported in Table B.6. We see
only minor changes in the estimates of k as compared to our baseline estimates.
    To go beyond institutional sources of comparative advantage, we include as addi-
tional covariates a set of interactions between the exporter's per capita GDP and sector-
year dummies.18 This controls for any potential reason for relatively rich countries to be
differentially productive in certain sectors. Again, referring to Table B.6, including these
additional controls has no appreciable effect on our estimates or inference.
    Put together, these results imply that our 2SLS strategy utilizes variation in sector size
driven by factors that appear to be orthogonal both to sources of Ricardian compara-
tive advantage that have featured in prior work and to sources derived from differences
in overall productivity. As we shall see in Section 6.2, this remains true for the cases
of comparative advantage driven by Heckscher-Ohlin sources and differential prices of
intermediate inputs. This lends credence to the view that our estimates draw only on
demand-side variation in order to identify the supply-side scale economies k .

  17 Our   measure of contract enforcement is the "rule of law" variable (as measured in 1997-98) due to
Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2003), as used in Nunn (2007). And our measure of financial development
is the (log of the) ratio of private bank credit to GDP (as measured in 1997), as also used in Nunn (2007).
    18 We obtain data on per-capita GDP by dividing the real output variable, "RGDPO", in the Penn World
             t
Tables by Li .

                                                    24
5     The Gains from Industrial Policy

5.1   The Calibrated Economy
Throughout our quantitative exercise, we maintain the parametric restrictions imposed
in equations (6) and (7). Thus, scale elasticities are given by k , whereas trade elasticities
are given by k . To calibrate k , we use the 2SLS estimates reported in column (2) of Table
1 for all manufacturing sectors and set k = 0 for all non-manufacturing sectors. This
implies that there are welfare gains from reallocating resources from non-manufacturing
to manufacturing sectors which have k > 0, and so the overall gains from industrial
policy will be higher than if we had set k in non-manufacturing to some positive value.
We consider alternative cases in the sensitivity analysis of Section 5.3. To calibrate k , we
use the median values of the trade elasticities from recent studies reported in column (5)
of Table B.3 for each manufacturing sector, in line with the empirical analysis of Section
4, and we set k = 6.85 for all non-manufacturing sectors, which is the median elasticity
throughout manufacturing.
    Following the theoretical analysis of Section 2.3, we treat each country as a small open
economy and impose the normalization s j = t j = 0. By Proposition 1, optimal industrial
and trade policy are therefore given by

                               s j,k = k , for all k,                                       (11)
                                          1
                               tx
                                ji,k =        , for all k and i = j,                        (12)
                                       1 + k
                                m
                               tij ,k = 0, for all k and i,                                 (13)

where the second expression uses d ln c ji,k /d ln L ji,k = -(1 - d ln  ji,k /d ln cij,k )-1 , by
equation (4).
   To quantify the welfare gains from these policies, we also need to take a stand on
the upper-level utility function, Uj , that determines expenditures and the elasticity of
substitution across sectors. Like in Section 4, we assume that upper-level preferences are
CES with elasticity of substitution  across all sectors,

                                                              1          -1  
                       Uj (Uj,1 , .., Uj,K ) = [(exp( j,k ))  (Uj,k )      ] -1   .
                                              k

In our baseline exercise, we set  = 1.47, in line with the 2SLS estimate for manufacturing
sectors reported in column (2) of Table B.2. This implies the same elasticity of substi-
tution between manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors as within manufacturing

                                                  25
sectors. As we discuss further below, this leads to higher gains from industrial policy
than if we had assumed an elasticity of substitution between manufacturing and non-
manufacturing below one, as estimated in some recent studies, e.g., Comin, Lashkari and
Mestieri (2015) and Cravino and Sotelo (2019). Overall, our calibration choices are on the
more aggressive side, to give a chance for industrial policy to yield high gains--as we see
below, even with these choices, the gains are on the low side.
    Finally, as in Dekle, Eaton and Kortum (2008), we compute counterfactual equilib-
ria under optimal policies using exact hat algebra under the assumption that the initial
equilibrium observed in the data (corresponding to 2010, the final year in our dataset) fea-
tures neither taxes nor subsidies and that trade deficits Di correspond to transfers across
countries, with i Di = 0. The full non-linear system of equations that determines these
counterfactual changes can be found in Appendix A.7.


5.2    Baseline Results
Table 2 shows the gains from optimal trade and industrial policy for a subset of countries
as well as the average across countries, both unweighted and weighted by GDP. Results
for each of the 61 countries in our dataset can be found in Table B.8.
    Column (1) reports the gains from the fully optimal policy, i.e., export taxes equal to
1/(1 + k ) and production subsidies equal to k , whereas columns (2) and (3) report the
gains from using only one of these two policy instruments.19 We define the gains from
optimal trade policy as the gains from introducing export taxes 1/(1 + k ) conditional on
having optimal production subsidies k in place. These gains are equal to the difference
between columns (1) and (2), which is displayed in column (4). Analogously, we define
the gains from optimal industrial policy as the gains from introducing production subsi-
dies k conditional on the presence of optimal export taxes 1/(1 + k ), which correspond
to the difference between column (1) and (3) displayed in column (5).
    The policy in column (2) optimally addresses domestic distortions but on the whole
is suboptimal because it does not consider the terms-of-trade implications of industrial
policy. Similar considerations apply to the policy in column (3): it internalizes the terms-
of-trade externality, but ignores external economies of scale. In both cases, welfare losses
are possible, as policies that only target one of the two distortions may aggravate the
other.20 In contrast, the results in columns (4) and (5) are always positive because they

   19 That is, in column (2) export taxes are set to zero, whereas production subsidies are equal to  . And
                                                                                                     k
in column (3) production subsidies are set to zero, whereas export taxes are equal to 1/(1 + k ).
   20 As an extreme example, imagine an economy that: (i ) exports all of its output, so that production

subsidies and export taxes are perfect substitutes; and (ii ) features k k = 1 for all k. In this case the

                                                    26
Table 2: Gains from Optimal Policies, Selected Countries

                             Optimal      Ind. Policy         Trade Policy Gains from              Gains from
                              Policy         Only                Only      Trade Policy            Ind. Policy
Country                        (1)            (2)                 (3)          (4)                     (5)
United States                  0.55%          0.21%                  0.15%             0.34%          0.40%
China                          0.66%          0.36%                  0.15%             0.30%          0.51%
Germany                        0.91%         -0.13%                  0.18%             1.04%          0.73%
Ireland                        1.56%         -1.49%                  0.26%             3.05%          1.31%
Vietnam                        1.41%          0.44%                  0.62%             0.97%          0.79%
Avg., Unweighted               1.05%          0.10%                  0.36%             0.95%          0.69%
Avg., GDP-weighted             0.71%          0.14%                  0.20%             0.57%          0.51%
Notes: Each column reports the gains, expressed as a share of initial real national income, that could be
achieved by each type of policy. See the text for detailed descriptions of the exercises. Column (4) equals the
difference between columns (1) and (2); likewise, column (5) is defined as the difference between columns
(1) and (3).


bring the economy towards full efficiency. In particular, the optimal Pigouvian tax k can-
not decrease welfare because terms-of-trade externalities are already internalized through
the export taxes 1/ (1 + k ) , in the same way that such trade policy would prevent im-
miserizing growth.
    The results in Table 2 reveal that the gains from optimal policy (column 1) are on av-
erage 1.05%. The gains from optimal industrial policy (column 5) are smaller than those
from optimal trade policy (column 4): focusing on the unweighted average across coun-
tries, these gains are 0.69% and 0.95%, respectively. Going back to the textbook case for
industrial policy illustrated in Figure 1, these modest average gains from industrial policy
are broadly in line with those predicted by the areas of Harberger triangles. Expressed as
a fraction of total income, the sum of the Harberger triangles associated with production
subsidies sk across all manufacturing sectors is

                                      W  1                   Lk           s2
                                        =                             d
                                                                           k
                                                                               s
                                                                                   ,
                                      Y  2 k M               L        k   +    k


where k d and s are the inverse of the demand and supply elasticities in sector k, re-
                k
spectively. Following the logic in the Introduction, we can approximate the gains from
industry policy by the Harberger triangles associated with production subsidies sk = k

                                                         1
optimal policy is laissez-faire, because (1 + k )(1 -   1+  k )   = 1. Then both columns (2) and (3) would report
welfare losses.

                                                        27
across manufacturing sectors. As a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation, we set Lk / L
to 0.28, the average share of manufacturing in gross output, sk to 0.13, the average of scale
elasticities that we have estimated for manufacturing sectors, k        s to -0.13/ (1 + 0.13), in
                  -  / ( 1 + k )
line with pk  Qk k                     d to 1/1.47, in line with our estimate of  = 1.47.21 This
                                 , and k
implies that
                    W         1                       (0.13)2
                           = × (0.28) ×                                  0.42%,
                     Y        2              (1/1.47) - (0.13/1.13)
not too far from the 0.69% (unweighted world average) estimated taking into account gen-
eral equilibrium effects and trade. Intuitively, for gains from industrial policy to be large,
there must be either a large subsidy k --which increases the height of the triangle--or a
large quantity response of employment to the subsidy, due to either a high initial level
of employment or large demand and supply elasticities--which increases the base of the
triangle. Empirically, this is not what we observe.
    Our quantitative results exhibit substantial heterogeneity across countries. Smaller
countries, in particular, gain more from optimal trade and industrial policy than larger
ones. This is revealed by the fact that, for each of columns (1), (4), and (5), the simple
average is higher than the corresponding GDP-weighted average. As an example, Ireland
has gains from optimal policy that are almost three times higher than those of the United
States (1.56% vs 0.55%). The gap is particularly large for the gains from trade policy
(3.05% vs 0.34%), but the pattern also holds for the gains from industrial policy (1.31% vs
0.40%). The reason why smaller countries gain more from optimal trade policy is simple:
such a policy improves a country's terms-of-trade, and since small countries tend to trade
more, they benefit more from that improvement.22
    Being more open also explains why smaller countries gain more from optimal indus-
trial policy. This is illustrated in Figure 2, which shows a scatter plot of the gains from
industrial policy (vertical axis) against openness measured as exports plus imports over
gross output (horizontal axis). Intuitively, inelastic domestic demand exerts a weaker
restraint on labor reallocation in more open economies, and so there is more scope for
industrial policy to generate gains. One way to see this formally is to consider the util-
ity associated with domestic employment in an open economy. Compared to a closed

   21 The Harberger formula displayed above implicitly assumes quasi-linear preferences and autarky. Un-

der these assumptions, our empirical estimate of  = 1.47 corresponds to the (common) elasticity of de-
mand in each manufacturing sector.
   22 In our model, like in any standard gravity model, all countries face the same trade elasticity. Under our

small open economy assumption, this implies that all countries have the same ability to manipulate their
terms-of-trade. More generally, absent the small open economy assumption, larger countries would have
a greater ability to manipulate their terms-of-trade. However, within the class of standard gravity models,
Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2013) find that this channel is extremely weak even for the largest countries.

                                                      28
                                                                      1.4
                                                                                                                                                                                          LUX




                     Gains (as percent of GDP) from industrial policy
                                                                                                                                                           IRL




                                                 1       1.2
                                                                                                                                            SGP

                                                                                                               CHE              HUN
                                                                                                                  SVNEST MYS
                                                                                                                 THA
                                                                                                                  CZESAU  SVK
                                                                                                                        TUN
                                      .8


                                                                                                                   ISL VNM KHM
                                                                                                              LTU BGR TWN
                                                                                                       POL
                                                                                                     DEU BEL
                                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                            SWE              MLT
                                                                                                       NOR DNK
                                                                                                     CHL CRI
                                                                                                     ISR               CYP
                                                                                        ARG     ESPMEX   KOR
                                                                                                  HRV LVA
                                                                                          IDN GBRROU
                                                                                                 CANPRTFIN
                            .6




                                                                                                                               BRN
                                                                                        TURFRANZL
                                                                                              NLD PHL
                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                              RUS
                                                                                             ZAF                  HKG
                                                                                          IND     GRC
                                                                                   CHNCOL
                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                  JPN
                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                   USA
                                                  .4




                                                                                    20               40                        60                          80                       100
                                                                                                                        Openness


                 Figure 2: Gains from Optimal Industrial Policy and Openness


economy, this utility no longer corresponds to that derived from domestic factor services
alone, since some of those services can be exported and foreign factor services can be im-
ported. We therefore expect the demand for domestic factor services to be more elastic in
the open economy, a version of Le Châtelier's Principle.23 If so, the areas of Harberger
triangles should be bigger as well, leading to greater gains from industrial policy.24


5.3    Gains from Industrial Policy in the Presence of Trade Agreements
The previous quantitative results assume that countries are free to pursue their unilat-
erally optimal trade policies. In practice, explicit trade agreements or implicit threats of
  23 Formally,   one can express the utility associated with domestic employment in an open economy as
                                                                             open                                                              ~ ij,k }i,k )
                                                                            Vj      ({{ L j,k }k })               max                    Vj ({ L
                                                                                                        ~ ij,k }i,k ,{ L
                                                                                                       {L              ~ ji,k }i = j,k

                                                                                                                              ~ ij,k 
                                                                                                                        cij,k L                                 ~ ji,k ) L
                                                                                                                                                       c ji,k ( L        ~ ji,k ,
                                                                                                              i = j,k                        i = j,k

                                                                                                                 ji,k L
                                                                                                                      ~ ji,k  Ek ( L j,k ) L
                                                                                                                                           ~ j,k , for all k.
                                                                                                                  i

        open
Since Vj    is given by the upper-envelope, the associated indifference curves must be less convex than the
indifference curves associated with Vj .
    24 The Harberger formula above also suggests that countries with higher employment in sectors with

stronger scale economies should benefit more from industrial policy. Our quantitative results are also con-
sistent with this prediction: countries with a higher correlation between Lk / L and k do indeed have higher
gains from optimal industrial policy. However, compared to the variation in openness across countries, this
channel only explains a small fraction of the variation in the gains from industrial policy.

                                                                                                                        29
foreign retaliation may prevent countries from doing so. How would such considerations
affect the gains from industrial policy?
    We address this issue under two benchmark scenarios. In the first case, countries are
forced to set zero trade taxes, but still face incentives to manipulate their terms-of-trade
using industrial policy, as in Lashkaripour and Lugovskyy (2018). In the second, we
assume that, despite the availability of other policy instruments, trade agreements have
been designed to internalize terms-of-trade externalities and restore global efficiency, as
in Bagwell and Staiger (2001).
    Under the first scenario, we numerically find the production subsidies that maximize
utility in a given country conditional on zero trade taxes. As mentioned above, these
constrained-optimal production subsidies involve a compromise between the textbook
Pigouvian motive of internalizing production externalities and the goal of improving the
country's terms-of-trade.25 Column (2) of Table 3 reports the gains from industrial policy
under this first scenario.26 For convenience, column (1) reports again the gains from in-
dustrial policy when trade policy is unconstrained as well, i.e., column (5) of Table 2. On
average, the gains from this type of constrained industrial policy are a bit lower than those
from the optimal industrial policy reported in our baseline, with the unweighted world
average decreasing from 0.69% to 0.56%, but the basic message is the same: the gains are
smaller than those from optimal trade policy, and are higher for more open countries.
    Under the second scenario, we assume that production subsidies are chosen in a
Pareto-efficient manner, with lump-sum transfers between countries available if neces-
sary. Hence, only the Pigouvian motive remains and all countries set production subsi-
dies equal to the scale elasticities: si,k = k for all i, k. The gains from industrial policy
(gross of lump-sum transfers between countries, if any) in this case are reported in col-
umn (3) of Table 3. The GDP-weighted average of the gains associated with this policy is
0.22%, but with (gross of transfer) gains of 1.36% in Vietnam and losses of 1.81% in Ire-
land. Such welfare losses derive from adverse terms-of-trade effects: larger production
subsidies in sectors with high scale elasticities cause an expansion of these sectors and a
deterioration of the terms-of-trade of countries specializing in them.27

    25 As an example, consider again an economy that exported all its output, as in footnote 20, but now

without imposing k k = 1 for all k. In this case production subsidies would perfectly replicate the effect
of both the production subsidies and export taxes in the unconstrained policy case, with the subsidies
                            k
now equal to (1 + k ) 1+     k - 1. As long as there is some sector in which part of domestic production
is sold at home, however, the constrained-optimal production subsidies will deviate from those and the
corresponding gains will be strictly lower than those when policy is unconstrained.
    26 Results for all countries in our dataset can be found in Table B.9.
    27 The correlation between the gains from industrial policy in column (3) of Table 3 and the comparative

advantage of countries in high scale elasticity sectors (which we measure simply as the correlation, within

                                                    30
Table 3: Gains from Constrained and Globally Efficient Industrial Policies, Selected
Countries

                                            Baseline              Constrained     Globally Efficient
                                        Industrial Policy       Industrial Policy Industrial Policy
Country                                        (1)                     (2)               (3)
United States                                  0.40%                   0.31%                  0.42%
China                                          0.51%                   0.41%                  0.21%
Germany                                        0.73%                   0.36%                  -0.36%
Ireland                                        1.31%                   0.83%                  -1.81%
Vietnam                                        0.79%                   0.80%                  1.36%
Avg., Unweighted                               0.69%                  0.56%                   0.29%
Avg., GDP-Weighted                             0.51%                  0.38%                   0.22%
Notes: Each column reports the gains, expressed as a share of initial real national income, that could be
achieved by each type of policy. See the text for detailed descriptions of the exercises.


6     Sensitivity Analysis
We conclude by exploring the sensitivity of our findings regarding the magnitude of the
gains from industrial policy. In Section 6.1, we start by considering alternative values for
the main parameters used in our quantitative exercise: scale elasticities k , trade elastic-
ities k , and the elasticity of substitution between sectors . We then turn in Section 6.2
to a more significant departure from our baseline Ricardian framework that allows for
multiple factors of production and input-output linkages.


6.1    Alternative Elasticities
Scale Economies in Non-Manufacturing. We begin with the implications of the value
of scale economies in non-manufacturing sectors, a parameter that we denote  N M . Our
baseline assumption of  N M = 0--in which economies of scale are the province of the
manufacturing sectors alone--might correspond to the traditional view behind indus-
trial policy. But in the absence of strong evidence to suggest that industrial sectors have
superior economies of scale, it seems important to explore the quantitative implications
of this assumption.
    To shed light on this issue, Figure 3a plots the average of the estimated gains from
optimal industrial policy (across all countries in the world) as a function of  N M .28 Not

each country, between its sector-level net exports and sector scale elasticities), is equal to -0.4.
   28 We continue to calculate the gains from optimal policy as described in equations (11)-(13); that is, now



                                                     31
                                               1




                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                           Avg. gains (as percent of GDP) from policy
    Avg. gains (as percent of GDP) from policy




                                                                                                                                            .9
                                    .8




                                                                                                                                   .8
                          .6




                                                                                                                           .7
                .4




                                                                                                                 .6
     .2




                                                                                                                                   .5
                                                   0           .05                     .1            .15                                                 .5      1                   1.5                     2   2.5
                                                       Scale economies in non - manufacturing (NM)                                                            Elasticity of substitution across sectors ()

                                                                 Ind. Pol.     Trade Pol.                                                                               Ind. Pol.      Trade Pol.


   (a) Scale Elasticity Outside Manufacturing ( N M ) (b) Elasticity of Substitution between Sectors ()


  Figure 3: Gains from Industrial and Trade Policy, Alternative Values of  N M and 


surprisingly, as we start raising  N M from zero, the relative size of manufacturing and
non-manufacturing sectors in the competitive equilibrium gets closer to its optimal value
and the gains from industrial policy fall. Indeed, the gains are minimized when  N M
is equal to 0.12, or approximately equal to the average of the manufacturing sector k
values of 0.13. Our baseline finding that the gains from optimal industrial policy are
relatively modest therefore appears to hold across a wide range of reasonable values for
scale elasticities outside manufacturing. And it continues to be the case that, throughout
this range, the gains from trade policy remain substantially larger than the gains from
industrial policy.


Elasticity of Substitution Across Sectors. We next consider the role played by the elas-
ticity of substitution . In our baseline analysis, we have used our 2SLS estimate  = 1.47.
Table B.2 reports a 95% confidence interval of [0.55, 2.39]. In Figure 3b, we therefore plot
the average gains from optimal industrial policy throughout this range. As discussed
above, we expect that a higher  would lead to larger reallocations in response to opti-
mal industrial policy and, in turn, larger welfare gains. Qualitatively, this is confirmed in
Figure 3b. Quantitatively, however, we see that even for  = 2.39, the average gains from
industrial policy are only 0.93%, still below the gains from trade policy.


Trade Elasticities. Trade elasticities play a dual role in our analysis: first, they affect
the inverse factor demand system that we use to estimate scale elasticities k in equation

that  N M > 0 the optimal policy includes a production subsidy in non-manufacturing sectors.

                                                                                                       32
Table 4: Gains from Industrial Policy, Alternative Trade Elasticities (k )

                                                                                                 Truncated
                                Baseline      Shapiro        BSY           CP          GYY          CP
Country                           (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
United States                     0.40%        0.56%        0.38%        3.67%        1.33%         1.39%
China                             0.51%        0.80%        0.48%        4.24%        1.55%         2.20%
Germany                           0.73%        1.02%        0.68%        7.37%        1.92%         3.10%
Ireland                           1.31%        2.03%        1.11%        5.20%        3.06%         2.11%
Vietnam                           0.79%        1.24%        0.73%        7.99%        1.95%         2.38%
Avg., Unweighted                  0.69%        0.92%        0.68%        4.81%        1.84%         2.03%
Avg., GDP-Weighted                0.51%        0.73%        0.49%        4.26%        1.48%         1.84%
Corr. with Baseline                  -          0.77         0.90         0.28         0.77          0.32
Notes: Each column reports the gains from industrial policy for the corresponding trade elasticity estimates
reported in Table B.3. Column (1) replicates the baseline calculation, which uses the median trade elasticity
in each sector across the studies in columns (2)-(5). Columns (2)-(5) reports a similar calculation using
trade elasticity estimates from each of these studies (Shapiro, 2016; Bagwell et al., 2018; Caliendo and Parro,
2015; and Giri et al., 2018) individually. Column (6) recalculates column (4) but for trade elasticities that
are truncated at the second-lowest and second-highest values. The last row reports the correlation, across
countries, of the gains from industrial policy with those in column (1).


(10); and second, they shape the gains from optimal policy for any given value of k . Our
baseline estimates used k from prior estimates in the literature, taking the median esti-
mate of k , within each sector, across four recent studies in the literature. We now instead
estimate the gains from optimal policy when drawing trade elasticities from each of those
four studies in turn. In each case we repeat the entire two-step estimation procedure from
Section 4 for the new vector of k values under consideration.29
    The results of this exercise are shown in Table 4. Each column represents the esti-
mated gains from optimal industrial policy obtained from a given set of trade elasticity
estimates, and each row represents a country (or average over all countries). Although
there is a wide range of trade elasticity estimates across these four studies (as seen in Table
B.3), estimated gains from industrial policy remain fairly similar for three out of four of
these studies, ranging from 0.68% to 1.84% on average. The outlier is column (4), which
draws on estimates from Caliendo and Parro (2015) that contain a much broader range of
trade elasticities across sectors, from 0.4 to 64.9, than the other studies. Using these pa-
rameter estimates leads, in turn, to significantly larger gains from industrial policy, equal
   29 Ina small number of cases this procedure results in k k  1, which leads to multiplicity of equilibria,
as pointed out by Kucheryavyy et al. (2017). We therefore cap the value of k such that k k is never higher
than 0.975 (since the solution of the counterfactual equilibrium under optimal policy becomes numerically
unstable as k k approaches one from below).

                                                      33
to 4.81% on average. The same extreme variation in trade elasticities leads to gains from
trade policy that are also much larger, equal to 19.08% on average, almost four times the
gains from industrial policy.
    As a way to illustrate the importance of extreme values of trade elasticities, the last
column of Table 4 presents a case in which we truncate the values of k in Caliendo and
Parro (2015). Namely, we use values in the range between 1.45 and 16.52 only, which are
the second-lowest and second-highest values respectively, and bottom- and top-code the
values outside this range. This results in more modest gains from industrial policy, equal
to 2.03% on average, closer to those obtained using the other three studies. Similarly,
the average gains from trade policy amount to 3.83% in this case. Our baseline analysis,
which focuses on the median of trade elasticities across studies, is purposefully designed
to attenuate the potential effects of outliers.


6.2    Beyond Ricardian Economies
In our baseline analysis, we have focused on Ricardian economies with (equipped) labor
as the only factor of production. In our final robustness check, we relax this assumption
and introduce physical capital as well as input-output linkages, along the same lines as
in Caliendo and Parro (2015). The full model is described in Appendix A.8.1.
    Within this environment, the optimal production subsidies, s j,k , and trade taxes, t x
                                                                                          ji,k
      m
and tij,k , remain as described in Proposition 1, as demonstrated in Appendix A.8.2. The
non-parametric identification of external economies of scale can proceed following the
same steps as in Section 3 given knowledge of the factor demand system,  j,k , and the
sector-level production function f k that maps labor, physical capital, and intermediate
goods into a country-and-sector specific composite factor.30
    For our empirical and quantitative analysis, we maintain the same parametric restric-
tions as in Section 4--that is, ij,k and Ek satisfy equations (6) and (7), respectively--and
further assume that f k is Cobb-Douglas, with average shares consistent with the OECD's
ICIO tables. The description of our estimation procedure can be found in Appendix B.3.4,
whereas the counterpart of the exact hat algebra of Section 5 used to produce counterfac-
tual scenarios can be found in Appendix A.8.3.
    Figure 4 plots the scale elasticities, k , estimated in the model with physical capital
and input-output linkages against the scale elasticities estimated in our baseline Ricar-

  30 We maintain the assumption that sector-level production functions, f k , are constant across countries,
but allow for Hicks-neutral differences across countries and sectors. Hence, differences in factor endow-
ments may now also act as a source of comparative advantage. In our simulations, the assumption of a
common f k across countries rules out extreme patterns of international specialization across countries.

                                                    34
                                            .25
                                                                                                               CHM     RBP




                                                         .2
                          Scale elasticity (), IO linkages
                                               .15
                                                                                                  FBT

                                                                                                 OTE
                                                                                         MIN   MVH
                                                                                         FMT
                                                                                    MET

                                   .1
                                                                        OIL         PPP
                                                                                      MAE

                                                                              CAE
                                                                              ELM
                                                                                    WDP
                                                                                      TXT
                        .05                 0




                                                              0   .05         .1              .15         .2         .25
                                                                          Scale elasticity (), baseline



                   Figure 4: Scale Elasticities, Beyond Ricardian Economies


dian model. All observations are close to the 45-degree line (illustrated in red), with a
correlation between the scale elasticities estimated using the two models equal to 0.91.31
This is reassuring, as this suggests little omitted variable bias in our baseline estimation of
scale elasticities due to other, non-Ricardian sources of comparative advantage that had
not been controlled for in equation (10).
    Finally, Figure 5 focuses on the gains from industrial and trade policy. For both poli-
cies, we see that the gains in the model with physical capital and input-output linkages
are much larger: the average gains from industrial policy are now equal to 4.14%, whereas
the average gains from trade policy go all the way to 11.49%. This partly reflects the fact
that Harberger triangles are proportional to gross output. Thus, expressed as a share of
GDP, the gains from removing such triangles, whatever their origin, are mechanically
higher. In addition, the introduction of input-output linkages tends to make supply more
elastic, again increasing the size of Harberger triangles and the absolute levels of the gains
from policy.32
    The previous adjustment in absolute levels notwithstanding, the introduction of inter-
mediate goods has little effects on the rest of our conclusions. Across countries, Figure 5
shows that more open economies--such as Ireland, Luxembourg, or Singapore--tend to
benefit disproportionately more from both trade and industrial policies. Likewise, across

   31 All estimates of  remain statistically significant at the 5% level and the instruments remain strong by
                         k
conventional standards (with the lowest first-stage SW F-statistic equal to 203.6). Full estimates are reported
in Table B.7.
   32 Interestingly, the adjustment to the gains from combining the optimal industrial and trade policies is

only 3.93%, reflecting the fact that only using one of those two policies in isolation tends to generate welfare
losses on average.

                                                                                    35
                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                       LUX




                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                             LUX
    Gains (as percent of GDP), IO linkages




                                                                                                                         Gains (as percent of GDP), IO linkages
                                                                                                                                                      30
                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SGP     HUN
                                                                                                       IRL                                                                                   SWE    CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SVK    CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                          DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                            BGRMYS
                                                                                                                                                                                               EST




                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                         SGP
                                                                                  MYS                                                                                            NORFIN DNK         SAU
                                                                         TWN SAU
                                                                               THAHUN                                                                                               GBR        THA
                                                                                                                                                                                   CAN BEL
                                                                KOR  NOR                                                                                                                         TWN
                                                                  CHL  BEL
                                                                      SWE
                                                                       DEU TUN CZE                                                                                                       ISR
              5




                                                                                SVK                                                                                             FRA
                                                                      AUTBGR SVN   CHE                                                                                     GRC    PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                          POL
                                                         RUS FIN ISRDNK POL VNM EST
                                                                           ISL                                                                                            RUS
                                                                ESP                                                                                                          ITA ESP




                                                                                                                             10
                                                         PHL
                                                        ZAF    ARG
                                                                MEXCRI
                                                    CHNHKG
                                                         ITA
                                                          NLD
                                                          FRA
                                                         TUR CAN
                                                             GBR
                                                             ROU
                                                            IDN       MLTLTUKHM                                                                                                ROU
                                                                                                                                                                              CYP
                                                                                                                                                                               NLD
                                                     IND      HRV
                                                             PRT                                                                                                                     KOR TUN
                                                 JPN GRC
                                                    COL    BRN
                                                          NZL LVA                                                                                                                       LTU
                                              AUS BRA             CYP                                                                                                     HRV     MEX
                                             USA                                                                                                                           ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                            ARG
                                                                                                                                                                          PHL CHL     VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                LVA
                                                                                                                                                                     IND
                                                                                                                                                                   USATUR
                                                                                                                                                                      AUS
                                                                                                                                                                        IDN NZL HKG
                                                                                                                                                                   JPN
                                                                                                                                                                  COL          KHM MLT     ISL
                                                                                                                                                                  CHN
                                                                                                                                                                  BRA        BRN
                      0




                                                                                                                                           0
                                                  .5                                  1                            1.5                    0                                        1                       2             3
                                                                 Gains (as percent of GDP), baseline                                                                               Gains (as percent of GDP), Baseline


                                                  (a) Gains from Industrial Policy                                                                                      (b) Gains from Trade Policy


    Figure 5: Gains from Industrial and Trade Policy, Beyond Ricardian Economies


policies, Figure 5 shows that gains from industrial policy remain modest relative to the
gains from trade policy in the same environment.


7               Concluding Remarks
A major source of skepticism about industrial policy is that governments simply do not
know which sectors should be subsidized at the expense of others. In this paper, we
have focused on the textbook case for industrial policy, in which the rationale for such
policy arises from the existence of external economies of scale; we have shown how, in
this environment, one can use commonly available trade and production data to estimate
economies of scale at the sector-level; and, in turn, we have characterized the structure
and consequences of optimal industrial policy.
    Our baseline results are humbling. Empirically, we find that sector-level economies
of scale indeed exist and do differ substantially across sectors, ranging from an elasticity
of 0.07 to 0.25. Yet, even under our optimistic assumption that governments maximize
welfare and have full knowledge of the underlying economy, our baseline analysis points
towards gains from optimal industrial policy that are, on average across all countries,
equal to just 0.69% of GDP, and only amount to 1.36% for the country that gains the most.
These modest gains from industrial policy are slightly smaller than the average gains
from optimal trade policy alone, which are equal to 0.95% of GDP.
    Intuitively, for gains from industrial policy to be large, one would need production
processes that display external economies of scale--such that a nation's productivity in


                                                                                                                     36
a given sector is increasing in its scale in that sector--and scale economies that differ in
strength across sectors--such that any productivity-enhancing expansion of scale in one
sector does not just lead to an equal and opposite contraction of productivity in another
sector. These are the conditions that would give rise to a Harberger triangle with a large
height in Figure 1. In addition, one would need demand to be elastic or countries to pro-
duce highly substitutable and tradable goods--such that a country can simultaneously
expand scale in one sector and find useful domestic or foreign substitutes for the sector
that it chooses to shrink. These are the conditions that would give rise to a Harberger
triangle with a large base in Figure 1. In our baseline calibration, given the low elasticity
of demand, the non-trivial gap between social and marginal costs that we have inferred
remains too small to generate large gains from industrial policy, even for the most open
economies.
    While some of our sensitivity exercises, including the introduction of input-output
linkages, open the door for significantly larger gains from industrial policy, our analysis
consistently points towards gains from industrial policy that are surprisingly modest rel-
ative to the gains from trade policy. There may be transformative gains from industrial
policy to be realized in practice. Our results, however, offer little support for the notion
that these gains can arise from the textbook case based on external economies of scale.




                                             37
References
Ackerberg, D., L.C. Benkard, S. Berry, and A. Pakes, Econometric Tools for Analyzing Mar-
 ket Outcomes, Vol. 6 of Handbook of Econometrics, Elsevier, 2007.

Adao, Rodrigo, Arnaud Costinot, and Dave Donaldson, "Nonparametric counterfac-
 tual predictions in neoclassical models of international trade," The American Economic
 Review, 2017, 107 (3), 633­689.

Antweiler, Werner and Daniel Trefler, "Increasing Returns and All That: A View from
 Trade," American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (1), 93­119.

Arrow, K.J. and F.H. Hahn, General competitive analysis, San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1971.

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, "Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty, and In-
  ternational Economic Institutions," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (2), 519­
  562.

  , , and Ali Yurukoglu, "Quantitative Analysis of Multi-Party Tariff Negotiations,"
  2018.

Balistreri, E.J., R.H Hillberry, and T.F. Rutherford, "Structural Estimation and Solution
  of International Trade Models with Heterogeneous Firms," Journal of Intermational Eco-
  nomics, 2011, 83 (1), 95­108.

Basu, S. and J.G. Fernald, "Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and Implica-
  tions," Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105, 249­283.

Basu, Susanto, "Returns to Scale Measurement," New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
  2008.

Beck, Thorsten, "Financial development and international trade: is there a link?," Journal
  of International Economics, 2002, 57 (1), 107­131.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Richar K. Lyons, "External Effects in U.S. Procyclical Produc-
  tivity," Journal of Monetary Economics, 1992, 29 (209-225).

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
  NAFTA," Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (1), 1­44.

Chipman, John S., "External Economies of Scale and Competitive Equilibrium," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84 (3), 347­385.

                                             38
Comin, Diego, Danial Lashkari, and Marti Mestieri, "Structural Change with Long-Run
 Income and Price Effects," NBER Work. Pap. 21595, 2015.

Costinot, Arnaud and Andres Rodríguez-Clare, "Trade Theory with Numbers: Quan-
 tifying the Consequences of Globalization," in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and
 Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, New York: Elsevier,
 2013.

  , Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer, "What Goods Do Countries Trade? A Quan-
  titative Exploration of Ricardo's Ideas," Review of Economic Studies, 2012, 79 (2), 581­608.

  , , Margaret Kyle, and Heidi Williams, "The More We Die, The More We Sell? A
  Simple Test of the Home-Market Effect," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (2),
  843­894.

Cravino, Javier and Sebastian Sotelo, "Trade Induced Structural Change and the Skill
  Premium," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2019, 11 (3), 289­326.

Criscuolo, Chiara, Ralf Martin, Henry G. Overman, and John Van Reenen, "Some
  Causal Effects of an Industrial Policy," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (1), 48­85.

Davis, Donald R. and David Weinstein, "Market access, economic geography and com-
 parative advantage: an empirical test," Journal of Intermational Economics, 2003, 59, 1­23.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, "Global Rebalancing with Gravity:
 Measuring the Burden of Adjustment," IMF Staff Papers, 2008, 55 (3), 511­540.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, "Technology, Geography and Trade," Econometrica,
  2002, 70 (5), 1741­1779.

Ethier, Wilfred J., "Decreasing Costs in International Trade and Frank Graham's Argu-
  ment for Protection," Econometrica, 1982, 50 (5), 1243­1268.

Giri, Rahul, Kei-Mu Yi, and Hakan Yilmazkuday, "Gains from Trade: Does Sectoral
 Heterogeneity Matter?," 2018.

Graham, Frank D., "Some Aspects of Protection Further Considered," The Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics, 1923, 37 (2), 199­227.

Harrison, Ann E. and Andres Rodríguez-Clare, Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial
 Policy for Developing Countries, Vol. 5 of Handbook of Development Economics, Elsevier,
 2010.

                                             39
Head, Keith and John Ries, "Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation
 as an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade," American Economic Review,
 2001, 91 (4), 858­876.

   and Thierry Mayer, "Gravity Equations: Toolkit, Cookbook, Workhorse," in Gita
  Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Eco-
  nomics, Vol. 4, New York: Elsevier, 2013.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A., "Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium," Econo-
 metrica, 1992, 60 (5), 1127­1150.

Itskhoki, Oleg and Benjamin Moll, "Optimal Development Policies with Financial Fric-
   tions," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (1), 139­173.

Juhasz, Reka, "Temporary Protection and Technology Adoption: Evidence from the
  Napoleonic Blockade," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (11), 3339­3376.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi, "Governance Matters III: Gov-
 ernance Indicators for 1996­2002," 2003. World Bank Working Paper No. 3106.

Krugman, Paul, "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,"
  The American Economic Review, 1980, 70 (5), 950­959.

Kucheryavyy, Konstantin, Gary Lyn, and Andres Rodríguez-Clare, "Grounded by
 Gravity: A Well-Behaved Trade Model with Industry-Level Economies of Scale," mimeo
 UC Berkeley, 2017.

Lane, Nathan, "Manufacturing Revolutions: Industrial Policy and Networks in South
  Korea," mimeo IIES, 2017.

Lashkaripour, Ahmad and Vova Lugovskyy, "Scale Economies and the Structure of
  Trade and Industrial Policy," mimeo Indiana University, 2018.

Levchenko, Andrei A., "Institutional quality and international trade," Review of Economic
  Studies, 2007, 74 (3), 791­819.

   and Jing Zhang, "The Evolution of Comparative Advantage: Measurement and Wel-
  fare Implications," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2016, 78, 96­111.

Liu, Ernest, "Industrial Policies in Production Networks," mimeo Princeton University,
  2018.


                                           40
Manova, Kalina, "Credit constraints, equity market liberalizations and international
 trade," Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76 (1), 33­47.

Marshall, Alfred, Principles of Economics, An Introductory Volume, London: Mcmillan,
 eighth edition, 1920.

Melitz, Marc J., "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
 Industry Productivity," Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695­1725.

Newey, W.K. and J.L. Powell, "Instrumental Variable Estimation in Nonparametric Mod-
 els," Econometrica, 2003, 71 (5), 1565­1578.

Nunn, Nathan, "Relationship-specificity, incomplete contracts, and the pattern of trade,"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 569­600.

   and Daniel Trefler, "Domestic Institutions as a Source of Comparative Advantage,"
  in G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics,
  Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2014.

Pigou, A. C., The Economics of Welfare, Macmillan, 1920.

Sanderson, Eleanor and Frank Windmeijer, "A weak instrument F-test in linear IV mod-
  els with multiple endogenous variables," Journal of Econometrics, 2016, 190 (2), 212­221.

Shapiro, Joseph, "Trade Costs, CO2, and the Environment," American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 2016, 8 (4), 220­54.




                                            41
A       Online Theoretical Appendix
A.1       Firm-Level Economies of Scale
In Section 2.1, we have argued that our model, which assumes constant returns to scale at the
good level, is consistent with firm-level economies of scale. We now make this point formally.
    In any origin country i, suppose that there is a large pool of perfectly competitive firms. Like
in Section 2.1, firms can use labor to produce any good in any sector. Unlike in Section 2.1, firms
must pay a fixed entry cost, f ij,k ( ), to start producing in sector k for country j. Once this fixed
cost has been paid, firms get access to a production function,

                                                             A
                                                  q = Aij,k Ek ( L i ,k ) F ( l ,  ),

where l is the amount of labor used by the firm;  is a firm-specific productivity shock, randomly
drawn from a distribution, Gij,k (·| ); and F (l , ) determines the extent of internal economies of
scale. We assume that they are such that profits,

                                                                    A
                                  ij,k (l , ,  ) = pij,k ( ) Aij,k Ek ( L i ,k ) F ( l ,  ) - wi l ,

are single-peaked in l .
    In a competitive equilibrium with free entry: (i ) firms choose l in order to maximize profits
                                                                       x ) }, as given,
taking wages, {wi }, and after-tax prices, { pij,k ( )(1 + si,k )(1 - tij ,k

                                            x                                            x             A
ij,k (wi , Li,k , pij,k ( )(1 + si,k )(1 - tij ,k ),  ) = max pij,k (  )(1 + si,k )(1 - tij,k ) Aij,k Ek ( Li,k ) F ( l ,  ) - wi l ;
                                                              l


and (ii ) expected profits are nonpositive for all goods and zero for all goods with positive output,
          ^
                                                          x
              ij,k (wi , Li,k , pij,k ( )(1 + si,k )(1 - tij ,k ),  ) dGij,k (  |  )  wi f ij,k (  ), for all  ,
          ^
                                                          x
              ij,k (wi , Li,k , pij,k ( )(1 + si,k )(1 - tij ,k ),  ) dGij,k (  |  ) = wi f ij,k (  ), if qij,k (  ) > 0.


The two previous observations imply that after-tax producer prices must satisfy

                                                 x                   wi
                       pij,k ( )(1 + si,k )(1 - tij ,k )                   A(L )
                                                                                   , for all  ,
                                                           ij,k ( ) Aij,k Ek  i ,k
                                                 x                   wi
                       pij,k ( )(1 + si,k )(1 - tij ,k ) =                 A(L )
                                                                                   , if qij,k ( ) > 0,
                                                           ij,k ( ) Aij,k Ek  i ,k


where ij,k ( ) is a function of, and only of, f ij,k ( ), Gij,k (·| ), and F (l , ). The unit cost on the
right-hand side is constant and identical to the one that one would obtain starting from the con-
stant returns to scale good-level production function in Section 2.1.



                                                                  42
A.2           Competitive Equilibrium
Profit Maximization. For any origin country i, any destination country j, any sector k, and any
good  , profit maximization determines supply,

                                                                 x                                        wi
         qij,k ( )  argmaxq
                          ~ij,k ( ) [ pij,k (  )(1 + si,k )(1 - tij,k ) -                                                  ~ (  ),
                                                                                                                          ]q
                                                                                                                A ( L ) ij,k
                                                                                                                                                  (A.1)
                                                                                                ij,k ( ) Aij,k Ek    i ,k

                     x = 0 and sector size in country i and sector k given by
with the convention tii ,k

                                                                      ^
                                                                                    qij,k ( )
                                                   L i ,k =                                A(L )
                                                                           ij,k ( ) Aij,k Ek
                                                                                                      d .                                         (A.2)
                                                                  j                           i ,k


Utility Maximization. For any destination country j and any sector k, utility maximization
determines demand,

                                                                       B
       {qij,k ( )}i,  argmax{q
                             ~ij,k ( )}i, {U j,k ( {  ij,k (  ) Bij,k Ek ( Li,k ) q
                                                                                  ~ij,k ( )}i, )                       (A.3)
                                                                      ^
                                                                |  pij,k ( )(1 + tij        m
                                                                                                   ~ij,k ( )d = X j,k },
                                                                                              ,k ) q
                                                                                          i

                                   ~ j,k }k {U j (U j,1 , .., U j,K ) |  Pj,k U j,k = w j L j + Tj },
                  {Uj,k }k  argmax{U              ~           ~               ~                                                                   (A.4)
                                                                                      k

                          m = 0, and where total expenditure in country j and sector k is given
with the convention that tii ,k
by
                                                                          X j,k = Pj,k Uj,k ,                                                     (A.5)

and the price index in country j and sector k is given by
                                    ^
     Pj,k =        min        {                        m
                                        pij,k ( )(1 + tij ,k ) q
                                                                                                    B
                                                               ~ij,k ( )d |Uj,k ({  ij,k ( ) Bij,k Ek            ~ij,k ( )}i, ) = 1}.
                                                                                                      ( L i ,k ) q
              {q
               ~ij,k ( )}i,     i
                                                                                                                                                  (A.6)


Market Clearing. For any country i, labor demand equals labor supply, leading to
                                              ^
                                                                            x
                                                  pij,k ( )(1 + si,k )(1 - tij ,k ) qij,k (  ) d  = wi Li .                                       (A.7)
                                        j,k


Government Budget Balance. For any country i, the government's budget is balanced,

              ^                                               ^                                                            ^
Ti =              tm
                   ji,k p ji,k (  ) q ji,k (  ) d  +                   x
                                                                      tij ,k pij,k (  )(1 + si,k ) qij,k (  ) d  -             si,k pij,k ( )qij,k ( )d .
        j,k                                            j,k                                                           j,k
                                                                                                                                                  (A.8)



                                                                                 43
Definition. A competitive equilibrium with production subsidies, {s j,k }, import tariffs, {tij         m },
                                                                                                         ,k
                   x
export taxes, {tij,k }, and lump-sum transfers, { Tj }, corresponds to quantities, {qij,k ( )}, with sec-
tor sizes, { Li,k }, sector expenditures, { Xi,k }, good prices, { pij,k ( )}, sector price indices, { Pi,k },
and wages, {wi }, such that equations (A.1)-(A.8) hold.


A.3     Factor Demand
In Section 2.2, we have argued that trade shares in a perfectly competitive equilibrium satisfy
equation (2), with: (i ) ij,k homogeneous of degree zero, invertible, and a function of, and only
                                                                  A ( L ) E B ( L ). We now establish this
of, Uj,k , {ij,k ( )}, and {  ij,k ( )}; and (ii ) Ek ( Li,k ) = Ek    i ,k k    i ,k
formally.
    By condition (A.1), equilibrium prices and quantities must satisfy

                                                          wi
                       pij,k ( )                    x ) ( ) A E A ( L )
                                                                                  for all  ,                                           (A.9)
                                   (1 + si,k )(1 - tij ,k ij,k      ij,k k   i ,k
                                                          wi
                       pij,k ( ) =                  x                     A(L )
                                                                                  if qij,k ( ) > 0.                                   (A.10)
                                   (1 + si,k )(1 - tij,k )ij,k ( ) Aij,k Ek  i ,k


                                                                                B ( L ), enter utility mul-
By condition (A.3), since Uj,k is homothetic and taste shocks,  ij,k ( ) Bij,k Ek    i ,k
tiplicatively, optimal quantities consumed must satisfy

                               B
    qij,k ( )  ij,k ( ) Bij,k Ek ( Li,k ) = ij,k ({ pi j,k ( )(1 + timj,k )/(  i j,k ( ) Bi j,k Ek
                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                   ( Li ,k ))}i , | ) X j,k
                                                                                                                                      (A.11)
where ij,k (·| ) only depends on Uj,k and { pi j,k ( )(1 +                              timj,k )/(  i j,k Bi j,k Ek
                                                                                                                  B ( L )}
                                                                                                                       i ,k i ,   represents
the vector of quality-adjusted prices faced by the representative consumer in destination j and
sector k.
                                                           m ) p (  ) q (  ) / X , in destination
    Now consider the share of expenditure, xij,k =  (1 + tij ,k ij,k   ij,k     j,k
j on goods from sector k produced in country i. Equations (A.9) and (A.11) imply

                                                             m                           m
                                         xij,k = ij,k ((1 + t1 j,k ) c1 j,k , ..., (1 + t I j,k ) c I j,k ),


with
                                              ^
                                                      ~ij,k
                                                      c                               ~i j,s
                                                                                      c
                  ~1 j,k , ..., c
            ij,k (c             ~ I j,k ) =                        ij,k                                              | d ,
                                              ij,k ( )  ij,k ( )              i j,k (  )  i j,k (  )           i ,
                                                        ij,k wi
                                 cij,k   =                    x )E ( L ) ,
                                           (1 + si,k )(1 - tij  ,k  k   i ,k
                                                  1
                                 ij,k =                   ,
                                              Aij,k Bij,k
                                         A           B
                          Ek ( Li,k ) = Ek ( Li,k ) Ek ( L i ,k ).



                                                                        44
The fact that  j,k is homogeneous of degree zero derives from the fact that the Marshallian demand
for goods is homogeneous of degree zero in prices and income. The fact that  j,k is invertible
derives from the fact that demand for goods within a sector satisfies the connected substitutes
property and standard Inada conditions hold, as in Adao et al. (2017).


A.4       Optimal Policy in a Large Economy
In the case of a large economy, the equilibrium labor services demanded by country j from differ-
ent origins and sectors, { Lij,k }i,k , the equilibrium labor services exported by country j to different
destinations, { L ji,k }i = j,k , and the sector equilibrium sizes in country j, { L j,k }k , still solve

                                                         max                                 ~ ij,k }i,k )
                                                                                       Vj ({ L
                                         ~ ij,k }i,k ,{ L
                                        {L              ~ ji,k }i = j,k ,{ L
                                                                           ~ j,k } k


                                                             m ~
                                                 cij,k (1 + tij ,k ) Lij,k                             c ji,k (1 - t x      ~
                                                                                                                     ji,k ) L ji,k + Tj ,
                                       i = j,k                                               i = j,k

                                                             ji,k L
                                                                  ~ ji,k  (1 + s j,k ) Ej,k L
                                                                                            ~ j,k , for all k,
                                                               i

                                                                              L
                                                                              ~ j,k  L j ,
                                                                                k

whereas the problem of country j's government generalizes to

                                                               max                                 ~ ij,k }i,k )
                                                                                             Vj ({ L
                                               ~ ij,k }i,k ,{ L
                                              {L              ~ ji,k }i = j,k ,{ L
                                                                                 ~ j,k } k


                                  ~ ij,k }i = j,k , { L
                         cij,k ({ L                   ~ ji,k }i = j,k ) L
                                                                        ~ ij,k                                        ~ ij,k }i = j,k , { L
                                                                                                                                          ~ ji,k }i = j,k ) L
                                                                                                            c ji,k ({ L                                     ~ ji,k ,
               i = j,k                                                                            i = j,k

                                                                    ji,k L
                                                                         ~ ji,k  Ek ( L
                                                                                      ~ j,k ) L
                                                                                              ~ j,k , for all k,
                                                                     i

                                                                                       L
                                                                                       ~ j,k  L j .
                                                                                        k

                                              ~ ij,k }i = j,k , { L
where both import and export prices, cij,k ({ L                   ~ ji,k }i = j,k ) and c ji,k ({ L
                                                                                                  ~ ij,k }i = j,k , { L
                                                                                                                      ~ ji,k }i = j,k ),
are now a function of the entire vector of imports and exports. Although this complicates the char-
acterization of the optimal trade policy, it is irrelevant for the optimal industrial policy: comparing
the first-order conditions of the two problems, we still have

                                                                                                   d ln Ek
                                                 1 + s j,k = (1 + s j )(1 +                                   ), for all k.
                                                                                                   d ln L j,k

A.5       Nonparametric Identification
In Section 3, we have argued that if there exists a vector of instruments z that satisfies the exclusion
restriction, that E[ |z] = 0, as well as the completeness condition, that E[ g(l )|z] = 0 implies g = 0



                                                                                             45
for any g with finite expectation, then for any k, Ek is identified, up to a normalization. We now
establish this result formally.
    Fix i1 , i2 , k1 , k2 , and j. Starting from equation (5), the exclusion restriction implies


          i- 1
           1 j,k 1
                   ( x1 j,k1 , ..., x I j,k1 )          i- 1
                                                         1 j,k 2
                                                                 ( x1 j,k2 , ..., x I j,k2 )                  Ek1 ( Li2 ,k1 )     E (L )
   E[ln                                          - ln                                          |z] = - E[ln                   - ln k2 i2 ,k2 |z].
          i- 1
           2 j,k 1
                   ( x1 j,k1 , ..., x I j,k1 )          i- 1
                                                         2 j,s2
                                                                ( x1 j,s2 , ..., x I j,k2 )                   Ek1 ( Li1 ,k1 )     Ek2 ( Li1 ,k2 )

                                                                  ~ k ) that solve the previous equation.
                                                             ~k , E
Now suppose that there are two solutions ( Ek1 , Ek2 ) and ( E 1     2

Then we must have

                               Ek1 ( Li2 ,k1 )     E (L )                             ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                                                                      E                       ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                                                                                              E
                       E[ln                    - ln k2 i2 ,k2 - ln                       1     2 1
                                                                                                     + ln        2     2 2
                                                                                                                             |z] = 0
                               Ek1 ( Li1 ,k1 )     Ek2 ( Li1 ,k2 )                    ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                                                                      E                       ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                                                                                              E
                                                                                         1     1 1               2     1 2


By the completeness condition, we therefore have

                                   Ek1 ( Li2 ,k1 )     E (L )                            ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                                                                         E                      ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                                                                                                E
                             ln                    - ln k2 i2 ,k2 = ln                      1     2 1
                                                                                                        - ln       2     2 2
                                                                                                                               ,
                                   Ek1 ( Li1 ,k1 )     Ek2 ( Li1 ,k2 )                   ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                                                                         E                      ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                                                                                                E
                                                                                            1     1 1              2     1 2


which can be rearranged as

                                   ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                   E                   ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                                       E               E (L )          ~ (L )
                                                                                       E
                              ln      1     1 1
                                                   = ln 1 2 1 + ln k2 i2 ,k2 - ln k2 i2 ,k2 .
                                   Ek1 ( Li1 ,k1 )     Ek1 ( Li2 ,k1 ) Ek2 ( Li1 ,k2 ) ~ k ( L i ,k )
                                                                                       E  2     1 2


Since the right-hand side does not depend on Li1 ,k1 , the left-hand side cannot depend on Li1 ,k1
                              ~ k ( Li ,k )/ Ek ( Li ,k )) is a constant, i.e., that Ek is identified up to a
either. This implies that ln( E                   1      1   1        1     1   1                                           1

normalization. The same argument implies that Ek2 is identified up to a normalization as well.


A.6       Imperfect Competition
In the main text, we have discussed the case of an economy with an imperfectly competitive
retail sector that buys goods at marginal costs and sells them at a profit. In this alternative en-
vironment, we have argued that we can still express trade shares as a function of factor prices,
 j,k (c1 j,k , ..., c I j,k ). We now establish this result formally.
    From our analysis in Appendix A.3, we know that the price at which the retailer from sector k
in destination j can buy goods is given by

                                                                                          m )w
                                                                                    (1 + tij ,k i
                                                        pij,k ( ) =                       A(L )
                                                                                                         .
                                                                          ij,k ( ) Aij,k Ek  i ,k


Let pr
     ij,k (  ) denote the price at which the same retailer sells to consumers. From our analysis in
Appendix A.3, we also know that the demand of the consumer in destination j for goods from



                                                                                 46
sector k can be expressed as

                                          B
               qij,k ( )  ij,k ( ) Bij,k Ek ( Li,k ) = ij,k ({ pr                                  B
                                                                i j,k (  ) / (  i j,k (  ) Bi j,k Ek ( Li ,k )) }i , |  ) X j,k .


Accordingly, we can express the profit maximization problem of the retailer as

                                                   m )w                                ~r
                                                                               ij,k ({ p                                    B
                                             (1 + tij    i                               i j,k (  ) / (  i j,k (  ) Bi j,k Ek ( Li ,k )) }i , |  ) X j,k
             
                                                      ,k
    max               ~r
                      p ij,k (  ) -                     A(L )                                                               B(L )
 ~r
{p ij,k (  ) }  ,i                      ij,k ( ) Aij,k Ek  i ,k                                             ij,k ( ) Bij,k Ek  i ,k


or, in terms of quality-adjusted prices, pra          r                               B
                                          ij,k (  )  pij,k (  ) / (  ij,k (  ) Bij,k Ek ( Li,k )),

                                 ^                                    m ) w
                                                                (1 + tij ,k ij,k i
                     max
                     ra
                            
                 ~ ij,k ( )} i
                {p
                                          ~ ra
                                          p ij,k (  ) -
                                                          ij,k ( )  ij,k ( ) Ek ( Li,k )
                                                                                                              ~ ra
                                                                                                      ij,k ({ p i j,k (  ) } i , |  ) d  X j,k .



The solution to the previous problem must take the form

                                                           m )w
                                           1 j , k ( 1 + t 1                    I j,k (1 + t m                                 m ) w
                                                             j,k 1                           I j,k ) w I                 (1 + tij ,k ij,k i
               pra
                ij,k (  )   = µij,k                                  , ...,                                |                                         ,
                                                 Ek ( L1,k )                         Ek ( L I ,k )                  ij,k ( )  ij,k ( ) Ek ( Li,k )

with µij,k (·| ) the markup on good  as a function of the vector of cost shifters. Together with the
observation that,                                         ^
                                              xij,k =          pra                  ra
                                                                ij,k (  ) ij,k ( { pi j,k (  ) }i , |  ) d  ,

this implies that
                                                                  m                           m
                                              xij,k = ij,k ((1 + t1 j,k ) c1 j,k , ..., (1 + t I j,k ) c I j,k ),

with

                                                                                                                                           ~1 j,k , ..., c
                                                                                                                                     ij,k (c             ~ I j,k ) =
^
                                              ~ij,k
                                              c                                                                            ~i j,k
                                                                                                                           c
                         ~ I j,k |  )
           ~1 j,k , ..., c
    µij,k (c                                                                         ~1 j,k , ..., c
                                                                              µij,k (c             ~ I j,k |  )                                   | d ,
                                        ij,k ( )  ij,k ( ) ij,k                                                    i j,k (  )  i j,k (  )   i ,


as argued in the main text.


A.7          Counterfactuals
We first describe the system of non-linear equations that characterizes any competitive equilib-
rium. We then show how to go from this system to the one that characterizes the changes between
an observed initial equilibrium with no taxes or subsidies and a counterfactual equilibrium with
taxes and subsidies. We conclude by noting how the small open economy assumption simplifies
the previous computations.



                                                                                   47
Competitive Equilibrium with Taxes and Subsidies. Starting from equations (A.1)-(A.8),
we can describe a competitive equilibrium with production subsidies, {s j,k }, import tariffs, {tij   m },
                                                                                                       ,k
                x }, and lump-sum transfers, { T }, as a set of sector sizes, { L }, within-sector
export taxes, {tij ,k                              j                                  i , k
expenditure shares, { xij,k }, between-sector expenditure shares, { x j,k }, sector price indices, { Pj,k },
and wages, {w j }, such that

                                      wi L i ,k                                   xij,k
                                     1 + s i ,k
                                                =                  x
                                                              1 - tij ,k              m x j,k w j L j + Tj + D j ,
                                                                                1 + tij
                                                        j                               ,k



                    m x
                   tij ,k ij,k                                                                                  x ji,k
     Tj =    1 + tm              x j,k w j L j + Tj + D j +  t x
                                                               ji,k 1 + s j,k - s j,k
                                                                                                              1 + tm
                                                                                                                          xi,k (wi Li + Ti + Di ) ,
            i ,k          ij,k                                         i ,k                                          ji,k


                                                                          L i ,k = L i ,
                                                                          k

with
                                                                                m ) c )-k
                                                                         ((1 + tij ,k ij,k
                                                        xij,k =                                          ,
                                                                      i ((1 + timj,k )ci j,k )-k
                                                                                                       -1/k
                                               Pj,k =                        m
                                                                      ((1 + tij ,k ) cij,k )
                                                                                             -k
                                                                                                              ,
                                                                  i

                                                                             ij,k wi
                                                    cij,k =           x                             ,
                                                                (1 - tij,k )(1 + si,k ) Ek ( Li,k )
                                                                                                 1- 
                                                                         exp( j,k ) Pj,k
                                                        x j,k =                                    1- 
                                                                                                         ,
                                                                      k exp( j,k ) Pj,k
where D j denotes the trade deficit of country j, with  j D j = 0.


Counterfactual Changes. Suppose that the initial equilibrium has no taxes or subsidies. We
are interested in a counterfactual equilibrium with taxes and subsidies:

                                                 x        m
                                                tij ,k , tij,k , si,k , Tj = 0 for some i, j, k.


For any endogenous variable with value x in the initial equilibrium and x in the counterfactual
                    ^ = x / x denote the change in this variable. We assume that D j are fixed and
equilibrium, we let x
do not change as we move to the counterfactual equilibrium. After simplifications, counterfactual
changes in prices and quantities the initial and counterfactual equilibria are given by the solution
to
                                ^ i ,k
                              ^iL
                              w                                                 ^ij,k
                                                                                x                ^ j Yj + Tj + D j
                                                                                                 w
                                       Y =
                             1 + s i ,k i ,k                     x
                                                            1 - tij ,k              m x
                                                                              1 + tij
                                                                                         ^ j,k
                                                                                                       Yj + D j
                                                                                                                         Xij,k ,               (A.12)
                                                    j                                 ,k




                                                                                  48
                                 m x
                                tij ,k ^ ij,k x
                                              ^ j,k       ^ j Yj + Tj + D j
                                                          w
                   Tj =                     m                                           Xij,k
                         i ,k
                                       1 + tij ,k             Yj + D j
                                                                           x^ ji,k x
                                                                                   ^ i ,k      ^ i Yi + Ti + Di
                                                                                               w
                         +  tx
                             ji,k 1 + s j,k - s j,k                                                                       X ji,k ,   (A.13)
                                i ,k
                                                                           1 + tm   ji,k            Yi + Di


                                                              L
                                                              ^ i,k Yi,k = Yi ,                                                      (A.14)
                                                               k

with
                                                                                               -k
                                                                          m
                                                                     1 + tij    ^ij,k
                                                                             ,k c
                                            ^ij,k =
                                            x                                                  -k
                                                                                                                  ,                  (A.15)
                                                          i         1 + timj,k     ^i j,k
                                                                                   c                    x i j,k

                                                                          w^i
                                                    ^ij,k =
                                                    c                                        ,                                       (A.16)
                                                                    x                 ^ k
                                                              (1 - tij,k )(1 + si,k ) L i ,k

                                                                                  1- 
                                                                          ^j,k
                                                                          P
                                                      ^ j,k =
                                                      x                           1- 
                                                                                                    ,                                (A.17)
                                                                     ^j,k
                                                                   k P                      x j,k
                                                                                                            -1/k
                                                                                       -k
                                       ^j,k =
                                       P                           m
                                                              1 + tij ,k      ^ij,k
                                                                              c                xij,k                  ,              (A.18)
                                                      i

and where bilateral trade flows Xij,k , sectoral value added Yi,k =  j Xij,k , and total value added
Yi =  j,k Xij,k are all observed in the initial equilibrium. Once changes in the previous variables
have been computed using (A.12)-(A.18), welfare changes are given by

                        ^ j w j + Tj / L j + D j / L j
                        w                                    Pj           ^ j Yj + Tj + D j
                                                                          w                    1
                 ^j =
                 U                                                      =                           ,
                                     ^
                                   Pj Pj               w j + D  j / L j           ^
                                                                                  Pj        Yj + Dj

where
                                                                                      1/(1-)
                                                    ^j =
                                                    P          P
                                                               ^ 1-  x j,k
                                                                j,k                                     .
                                                                k

Under the assumption that country i0 is a small open economy and that only country i0 imposes
trade taxes and production subsidies, the system is as described above for country i0 ; that is,
equations (A.12)-(A.18) continue to hold if either i or j is equal to i0 . For all other countries, we set
w     ^i,k = L
 ^i = P      ^ i,k = 1 for all k and drop equations (A.12)-(A.18).




                                                                        49
A.8        Beyond Ricardian Economies
A.8.1       Environment with Physical Capital and Input-Output Linkages

To produce and deliver a good  from an origin country i to a destination country j in sector k, we
                                                  k (  ), such that
now assume that firms require a composite input, zij

                                         qij,k ( ) = Aij,k ( )zij,k ( ).

We assume that the composite input is produced using labor, lij,k ( ), physical capital, k ij,k ( ), and
                                             M (  ) } , according to
intermediate goods from different sectors, {qij ,sk  s


                                                                          M
                              zij,k ( ) = f i,k (lij,k ( ), k ij,k ( ), {qij ,sk (  ) }s ),


where f i,k is a constant returns-to-scale production function. Within each destination country j
and sector k, total gross output is produced by combining all goods from all origins,

                                     Q j,k = Uj,k ({ Bij,k ( )qij,k ( )}i, ).

Gross output can be used either for final consumption, Q F
                                                         j,k , or as intermediates for production,
{ Q jM
     ,ks }s ,

                                                 j,k +  Q j,ks = Q j,k .
                                                QF        M
                                                          s

Total demand for intermediate goods from sector k by firms from sector s in country j satisfies
                                                 ^
                                                       M
                                                     q ji                 M
                                                          ,ks (  ) d  = Q j,ks .
                                            i

As before, we allow productivity and quality to be a function of sector size, such that

                                                                  A
                                      Aij,k ( ) = ij,k ( ) Aij,k Ek ( Zi,k ),
                                                                   B
                                      Bij,k ( ) =  ij,k ( ) Bij,k Ek ( Zi,k ),

where sector size is now measured by the total amount of the composite input, Zi,k , used by coun-
try i in sector k. Finally, in line with our earlier analysis, we assume that upper-level preferences
are CES ,
                                                                           1         -1     

                                   j,1 , .., Q j,K ) = [  (exp(  j,k )) ( Q j,k )
                            Uj ( Q F           F                            F
                                                                                          ]  -1 ,
                                                          k

with  the elasticity of substitution between different sectors.
     In this environment, the counterpart of trade in labor services, Lij,k , between country i and j in




                                                              50
sector k is trade in input services, Zij,k , with price

                                                        ij,k ci,k (wi , ri , { Pi,s }s )
                                          cij,k                           x )E (Z ) ,
                                                     (1 + si,k )(1 - tij    ,k    k     i ,k


where  ji,k  1/( Aij,k Bij,k ) still captures systematic productivity and quality differences; wi , ri ,
and { Pi,s }s are the prices of labor, capital, and the sector-level composite goods in country i; and
                                                    M | f ( l , k, { q M } )  1} is the unit cost function for pro-
ci,k (w, r, { Ps }s )  minl ,k,qsM {wl + rk + s Ps qs    i ,k         s
ducing the composite input in country i and sector k. Like in Section 2.2, the share of expenditure
                                                                             m )c Z ]/(
in destination j on input services from country i in sector k, zij,k  [(1 + tij ,k ij,k ij,k i [(1 +
timj,k )ci j,k Zi j,k ]), can be expressed as

                                                       m                           m
                                   zij,k = ij,k ((1 + t1 j,k ) c1 j,k , ..., (1 + t I j,k ) c I j,k ),


where  j,k  (1 j,k , ...,  I j,k ) is again homogeneous of degree zero, invertible, and a function of,
and only of, Uj,k , {i,k ( )} and {  ij,k ( )}.


A.8.2     Optimal Policy

We follow the same steps as in Sections 2.2 and 2.3. For a given vector of input services, { Zij,k }i ,
used in a destination country j and sector k, let Q j,k ({ Zij,k }i ) denote the maximum amount of gross
output that can be produced,

                       Q j,k ({ Zij,k }i )  max{qij,k ( ),zij,k ( )}i, Uj,k ({  ij,k ( )qij,k ( )}i, ))
                                        qij,k ( )  ij,k ( )zij,k ( ) for all  andi,
                                        ^
                                             zij,k ( )d  Zij,k for all i.

In a competitive equilibrium, the input services demanded by country j from different origins
and sectors, { Zij,k }i,k , the input services exported by country j towards different destinations,
{ Zji,k }i = j,k , the sector-level amounts of employment and capital used in country j, { L j,k }k and
{K j,k }k , and the sector-level amounts of gross output used for consumption and production in




                                                                  51
country j, { Q F             M
               j,k } and { Q j,ks }k,s , must solve


                                                    max                                                      ~ F }k )
                                                                                                       Uj ({ Q                                                    (A.19a)
                                                                                                               j,k
               ~ ij,k }i,k ,{ Z
              {Z                                 ~ j,k , K
                              ~ ji,k }i = j,k ,{ L       ~ j,k , Z
                                                                 ~ j,k } k , { Q              ~ F }k
                                                                               ~ M } k ,s , { Q
                                                                                 j,ks           j,k


                                                                            m
                                                                cij,k (1 + tij      ~
                                                                               ,k ) Zij,k                           c ji,k (1 - t x      ~
                                                                                                                                  ji,k ) Z ji,k + Tj ,
                                                      i = j,k                                             i = j,k

                                                                             ji,k Z
                                                                                  ~ ji,k  (1 + s j,k ) Ej,k Z
                                                                                                            ~ j,k for all k,
                                                                               i
                                                                                      ~ j,k  f j,k ( L
                                                                                      Z              ~ j,k , K         ~ M }s ) for all k,
                                                                                                             ~ j,k , { Q                                          (A.19b)
                                                                                                                         j,sk
                                                                     ~F + Q
                                                                     Q     ~ M  Q j,s ( { Z
                                                                                          ~ lj,s }l ) for all s,
                                                                       j,s   j,sk
                                                                                     k

                                                                                              L
                                                                                              ~ j,k  L j ,                                                        (A.19c)
                                                                                                k

                                                                                              K
                                                                                              ~ j,k  K j .                                                        (A.19d)
                                                                                                k


    Let c ji,k ( Zji,k ) denote the equilibrium price of country j's input in sector k as a function of its
own exports, Zji,k . It is implicitly given by the solution to


                       m                          m
                                                                                                                         (1 + t m
                                                                                                                                ji,k ) c ji,k Z ji,k
           ji,k ((1 + t1 i,k ) c1i,k , ..., (1 + t Ii,k ) c Ii,k ) =                                                                                          ,
                                                                                              i = j (1 + timi,k )ci i,k Zi i,k + (1 + tm
                                                                                                                                       ji,k ) c ji,k Z ji,k


with the equilibrium costs of other exporters, {ci i,k }i = j , as well as their exports of input services,
{ Zi i,k }i = j , taken as given. The problem of country j's government is then given by

                                                    max                                                      ~ F }k )
                                                                                                       Uj ({ Q                                                    (A.20a)
                                                                                                               j,k
               ~ ij,k }i,k ,{ Z
              {Z                                 ~ j,k , K
                              ~ ji,k }i = j,k ,{ L       ~ j,k , Z
                                                                 ~ j,k } k , { Q              ~ F }k
                                                                               ~ M } k ,s , { Q
                                                                                 j,ks           j,k


                                                                                          ~ ij,k 
                                                                                    cij,k Z                                  ~ ji,k ) Z
                                                                                                                    c ji,k ( Z        ~ ji,k ,
                                                                          i = j,k                         i = j,k

                                                                             ji,k Z
                                                                                  ~ ji,k  Ek ( Z
                                                                                               ~ j,k ) Z
                                                                                                       ~ j,k for all k,
                                                                               i
                                                                                      ~ j,k  f j,k ( L
                                                                                      Z              ~ j,k , K         ~ M }s ) for all k,
                                                                                                             ~ j,k , { Q                                          (A.20b)
                                                                                                                         j,sk
                                                                     ~F + Q
                                                                     Q     ~ M  Q j,s ( { Z
                                                                                          ~ lj,s }l ), for all s,
                                                                       j,s   j,sk
                                                                                     k

                                                                                              L
                                                                                              ~ j,k  L j ,                                                        (A.20c)
                                                                                                k

                                                                                              K
                                                                                              ~ j,k  K j .                                                        (A.20d)
                                                                                                k




                                                                                                52
Comparing the first-order conditions associated with (A.19) and (A.20), we again obtain

                                                                d ln Ek
                                  1 + s j,k = (1 + s j )(1 +               ), for all k,
                                                               d ln Zj,k
                                                               d ln c ji,k
                                  1 - tx
                                       ji,k   = (1 + t j )(1 +             ), for all i and k,
                                                               d ln Zji,k
                                       m
                                  1 + tij ,k = 1 + t j , for all i and k.


A.8.3   Counterfactuals

We now describe how counterfactual changes can be computed in an environment with multiple
factors of production and input-output linkages. We assume that in each country i and sector k
the production functions f k are Cobb-Douglas,

                                                                                           bk
                                                        M
                                        f k ( l , k, { qs } s ) = l v k k 1- v k                (qsM )b          sk   ,                         (A.21)
                                                                                                    s

with bk + s bsk = 1 and vk  [0, 1].


Competitive Equilibrium with Taxes and Subsidies. The equilibrium system is given by
                                                                                       x
                                                                                  1 - tij
                                       w i L i , k = v k bk ( 1 + s i , k ) 
                                                                                          ,k
                                                                                       m                xij,k X j,k ,
                                                                           j
                                                                                  1 + tij ,k

                                                                                                 x
                                                                                            1 - tij
                                  r i K i , k = ( 1 - v k ) bk ( 1 + s i , k ) 
                                                                                                    ,k
                                                                                                 m           xij,k X j,k ,
                                                                                      j
                                                                                            1 + tij ,k

                                           m                               tx
                                          tij                               ji,k 1 + s j,k - s j,k
                         1 + tm                       xij,k X j,k + 
                                              ,k
                Tj =                                                                                                         x ji,k Xi,k ,
                         k         i           ij,k                  i
                                                                                            1 + tm
                                                                                                 ji,k

                                                               L i ,k = L i ,
                                                               k

                                                               Ki ,k = Ki ,
                                                              k

                                                                                                                  1 - tx
                                    w j L j + r j K j + Tj + D j +  bks 1 + s j,s
                           F                                                                                           ji,s
               X j,k =    xj ,k                                                                                                 x ji,s Xi,s ,
                                                                               i ,s
                                                                                                                  1 + tm
                                                                                                                       ji,s

                                                                                                -k
                                                                        m
                                                                   1 + tij ,k cij,k
                                              xij,k =                                                   -k
                                                                                                             ,
                                                          i         1 + timj,k            c i j,k

                                                                                                                          bk
                             ij,k v-
                                   k
                                     v k bk                        -bsk
                                            (1 - vk )-(1-vk )bk s bsk                                   wivk ri1-vk            s Pi,s
                                                                                                                                    skb

                cij,k =                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                           x
                                                          (1 + si,k ) 1 - tij     k
                                                                              ,k Zi,k


                                                                      53
                                                                                    bk
                                                                                          Qi,sk ,
                                                             1- v k
                                               Zi,k = Liv,k
                                                          k Ki ,k
                                                                                                     bsk

                                                                                          s

                                                                      bsk wi Li,k
                                                           Qi,sk =                ,
                                                                       k bk Pi,s
                                                                                              1- 
                                             F
                                                               exp( j,k ) Pj,k
                                            xj ,k =                                                  1- 
                                                                                                            ,
                                                           k exp( j,k ) Pj,k
                                                                                                           -1/k
                                                                                              -k
                                    Pj,k =                          m
                                                               1 + tij ,k       cij,k                                     .
                                                      i


Counterfactual Changes. The counterfactual changes associated with moving from zero taxes
                               x , import taxes tm , and production subsidies s , are
and subsidies to export taxes tij ,k             ij,k                          i ,k

                                                                                         x
                                                                                    1 - tij
                                 ^ i,k Yi,k = bk (1 + si,k ) 
                               ^iL
                               w
                                                                                            ,k
                                                                                                     ^ij,k xij,k X j,k ,
                                                                                                     x
                                                                                         m
                                                                                    1 + tij
                                                                            j               ,k

                                                                                     x
                                                                                1 - tij
                                  ^ i,k Yi,k = bk (1 + si,k ) 
                               ^i K
                               r
                                                                                        ,k
                                                                                                     ^ij,k xij,k X j,k ,
                                                                                                     x
                                                                                     m
                                                                                1 + tij
                                                                           j            ,k

                                 m x                                    tx
                                tij ,k ^ ij,k xij,k                      ji,k 1 + s j,k - s j,k
               Tj =                     m
                                   1 + tij
                                                      X j,k + 
                                                                                         1 + tm
                                                                                                                              ^ ji,k x ji,k Xi,k ,
                                                                                                                              x
                      k    i               ,k                     i                           ji,k

                                                          L
                                                          ^ i,k vk Yi,k = v
                                                                          ¯i Yi ,
                                                           k

                                          K
                                          ^ i,k (1 - vk ) Yi,k = (1 - v
                                                                      ¯i ) Yi ,
                                           k

                                                                                                                                 1 - tx
                                             ¯ j Yj + Tj + D j +  bks 1 + s j,s
                F F                                                                                                                   ji,s
              ^j
      X j,k = x           ^ jv
                 ,k x j,k w           ^j 1 - v
                             ¯ j Yj + r                                                                                                      ^ ji,s x ji,s Xi,k ,
                                                                                                                                             x
                                                                                              i ,s
                                                                                                                                 1 + tm
                                                                                                                                      ji,s

                                                                                                -k
                                                                      m
                                                                 1 + tij    ^ij,k
                                                                         ,k c
                                      ^ij,k =
                                      x                                                         -k
                                                                                                                      ,
                                                      i         1 + timj,k c
                                                                           ^i j,k                          x i j,k

                                                                                    bk
                                                                     ^i1-vk
                                                               ^ ivk r
                                                               w                           ^ bsk
                                                                                         s Pi ,s
                                           ^ij,k =
                                           c                                                                 ,
                                                                            x
                                                           (1 + si,k ) 1 - tij    ^ k
                                                                               ,k Zi,k

                                                                                                                bsk
                                                                       bk                 ^iL
                                                                                          w  ^ i ,k
                                               ^ vk K
                                      ^ i ,k = L
                                      Z              ^ 1- v k
                                                 i ,k i ,k                                 P^i,s
                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                s

                                                                                    1- 
                                                                      ^j,k
                                                                      P
                                                   F
                                                 ^j
                                                 x  ,k     =                        1- 
                                                                                                     ,
                                                                 ^j,k
                                                               k P                          F
                                                                                           xj ,k




                                                                      54
                                                                                   -1/k
                                                                      -k
                              ^j,k =
                              P                    m
                                              1 + tij ,k      ^ij,k
                                                              c            xij,k          .
                                        i

where the observed value added in sector k is now given by Yi,k = bk  j Xij,k , total value added is
Yi = k Yi,k , and country i's labor share is v¯i = k vk (Yi,k /Yi ). We solve this system of equations
using trade data as in the baseline analysis, augmented with data on factor and inputs shares from
the OECD ICIO and WIOD datasets, as described in Appendix B.3.4, for 2010.33
    Once changes in the previous variables have been computed, counterfactual welfare changes
are given by
                                ^ jv
                                w       ^j 1 - v
                                   ¯j + r      ¯ j + Tj + D j /Yj                      1
                         ^j =
                         U                                                                     ,
                                                    ^j
                                                    P                              1 + D j /Yj

with
                                                                      1/(1-)
                                       ^j =
                                       P       P
                                               ^ 1-  x F
                                                j,k    j,k                     .
                                                k

Under the assumption that country i0 is a small open economy and that only country i0 imposes
trade taxes and production subsidies, we follow the same procedure as in Appendix A.7 and
impose w^i = r    ^i,k = L
             ^i = P      ^ i ,k = K
                                  ^ i,k = 1 for all k and i = i0 .




  33 In practice, with factor and input shares set to their global levels, a small number of country-sectors
have implied domestic consumption that is negative. In such cases we increase domestic consumption
entries to zero and recalculate the resulting global factor and input shares.

                                                         55
B        Online Empirical Appendix
B.1      Elasticity of Substitution Between Sectors
Specification. The CES preferences in equation (8) imply the following sector-level expendi-
tures,
                                     ln x t                 t     t   t   t
                                          j,k = (1 -  ) ln Pj,k + j + k +  j,k ,                          (B.1)

where t
      j is a country-year fixed effect that controls for the upper-tier manufacturing price index.
Estimates of the price indices Pjt,k can be obtained from the estimated importer-sector-year fixed
effect jt,k in a relaxed version of our main estimating equation (10),

                                       1     t       t     t    t      t
                                         ln xij ,k = i,k + ij + j,k +  ij,k.                              (B.2)
                                       k

With such estimates in hand, which we denote by Pt         ^t
                                                 j,k = exp j,k , we estimate  in the demand
equation (B.1), for which an instrumental variables (IV) procedure is necessary to circumvent si-
multaneity bias.34
                                                                   t
     We construct instruments from the interaction of L j and a set of sector indicators. The first
stage of our 2SLS upper-tier demand elasticity estimation procedure is

                                                               t
                                   ln Pt
                                       j,k =    s 1s=k · ln L j + jt + k
                                                                       t
                                                                         + tj,k                           (B.3)
                                               s


where 1s=k denotes an indicator variable for the event that s = k, and jt and k
                                                                              t represent country-

year and sector-year fixed effects, respectively. The exclusion restriction requires that countries
with large populations do not have systematically greater demand, relative to smaller countries,
in some sectors than others.


Estimates. Table B.1 reports the first-stage coefficients  k from estimating equation (B.3). Esti-
mates of the parameter  itself are reported in Table B.2. The OLS estimate, in column (1), implies
that  = 3.35, whereas our preferred 2SLS estimate in column (2) reveals that  = 1.47.




    34 Equation   (B.2) recovers estimates of ln Pt
                                                  j,k up to a sector-year-specific and an importer-year-specific
scale factor only, but this has no bearing on our subsequent use of ln Pt
                                                                        j,k in equation (B.1) because of the
inclusion of t     t
             j and k .


                                                        56
Table B.1: First-Stage Estimates from Between-Sector Elasticity (1 - ) Estimation
 Sector                                   Coeff.            Sector                                   Coeff.
Food, Beverages and Tobacco               -0.05             Basic Metals                             -0.00
                                          (0.01)                                                     (0.01)
Textiles                                  -0.03             Fabricated Metals                        -0.01
                                          (0.01)                                                     (0.01)
Wood Products                             -0.01             Machinery and Equipment                  -0.01
                                          (0.01)                                                     (0.01)
Paper Products                            -0.01             Computers and Electronics                -0.00
                                          (0.01)                                                     (0.01)
Coke/Petroleum Products                   0.00              Electrical Machinery, NEC                -0.00
                                          (0.00)                                                     (0.01)
Chemicals                                 -0.02             Motor Vehicles                           -0.04
                                          (0.01)                                                     (0.01)
Rubber and Plastics                       -0.08             Other Transport Equipment                -0.02
                                          (0.01)                                                     (0.01)
Mineral Products                          -0.02
                                          (0.01)
Within R2                                                                0.16
Observations                                                             3,660
Notes: This table reports the first-stage coefficients corrresponding to the 2SLS estimate of the upper tier
elasticity of substitution (1 - ). These are obtained from an OLS regression of log prices on log population
interacted with sector dummies, while controlling for sector-time and country-time fixed effects. The Coke
and Petroleum sector is the omitted category. Standard errors clustered at the country-sector level.

Table B.2: Estimate of Elasticity of Substitution Between Sectors (1 - )

                                                             log (sectoral             log (sectoral
                                                          expenditure share)        expenditure share)
                                                                OLS                          2SLS
                                                                (1)                           (2)
log (sectoral price index)                                      -2.35                        -0.47
                                                                (0.21)                       (0.47)

Within R2                                                        0.13                         0.05
Observations                                                    3,660                        3,660
First-stage F-statistic                                                                      8.606
Notes: This table reports OLS and 2SLS estimates of the upper-tier elasticity of substitution (1 - ) from
equation (B.1). The instruments are the natural log of country population interacted with sector dummies.
All regressions include sector-time and country-time fixed effects. Table B.1 reports the corresonding first-
stage coefficients from the specification in column (2). Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the
country-sector level.


                                                     57
B.2      Trade Elasticities

Table B.3: Trade Elasticity (k ) Estimates from Prior Studies

                                                    Shapiro        BSY          CP         GYY        Median
Sector                                                (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)
Food, Beverages and Tobacco                            5.3         10.7          2.6        3.6         4.4
Textiles                                              18.6          7.3          8.1        4.4         7.7
Wood Products                                          5.9         12.0         11.5        4.2         8.7
Paper Products                                         5.8         9.9          16.5        3.0         7.8
Coke/Petroleum Products                                9.0         13.9         64.9        3.8         11.4
Chemicals                                              1.6          7.7          3.1        3.8          3.4
Rubber and Plastics                                    1.6          9.5          1.7        4.1          2.9
Mineral Products                                      12.9          8.6          2.4        5.1         6.8
Basic Metals                                          12.9          6.9          3.3        8.9         7.9
Fabricated Metals                                     12.9          5.8          7.0        5.1         6.4
Machinery and Equipment                               10.8          9.0          1.5        3.3         6.2
Computers and Electronics                             10.8          8.0         13.0        3.3         9.4
Electrical Machinery, NEC                             10.8          9.4         12.9        3.3         10.1
Motor Vehicles                                         6.9          7.5          1.8        4.5          5.7
Other Transport Equipment                              6.9          6.4          0.4        4.5          5.4
Notes: This table reports estimates of the trade elasticity k from prior studies, matched as closely as possible
to our sector classification. Column (1) refers to Table 4, column 2 in Shapiro (2016); column (2) to Table 2
in Bagwell et al. (2018); column (3) to Table 1, column 4 in Caliendo and Parro (2015); column (4) to Table 4
in Giri et al. (2018); and column 5 reports the median of columns (1)-(4).




                                                      58
B.3        Scale Elasticities
B.3.1      First-Stage

Table B.4: Summary of First-Stage Regressions, Sector-Level Scale Elasticities (k )

                                                Diagonal       Max. (Abs) Off-
                                                 Coeff.        Diagonal Coeff.         F-Stat       SW F-Stat
Sector                                             (1)               (2)                (3)           (4)
Food, Beverages and Tobacco                        1.05              -0.01             77.00           388.8
                                                  (0.04)            (0.01)
Textiles                                           1.09               0.01             71.60           352.5
                                                  (0.03)            (0.01)
Wood Products                                      0.94             -0.04              18.50           217.0
                                                  (0.07)            (0.02)
Paper Products                                     1.03             -0.04              72.60           689.4
                                                  (0.03)            (0.01)
Coke/Petroleum Products                            1.30             -0.07              14.40           299.9
                                                  (0.09)            (0.03)
Chemicals                                          1.10             -0.04              38.20           341.9
                                                  (0.06)            (0.01)
Rubber and Plastics                                1.09             -0.04              54.70           464.4
                                                  (0.04)            (0.01)
Mineral Products                                   1.02             -0.06              58.20           436.8
                                                  (0.04)            (0.01)
Basic Metals                                       1.00             -0.11              15.70           255.4
                                                  (0.07)            (0.03)
Fabricated Metals                                  1.04             -0.03              75.90           441.0
                                                  (0.04)            (0.01)
Machinery and Equipment                            1.08             -0.01              69.90           405.3
                                                  (0.04)            (0.01)
Computers and Electronics                          1.14              0.02              20.00           296.3
                                                  (0.07)            (0.02)
Electrical Machinery, NEC                          0.99             -0.03              50.30           423.2
                                                  (0.04)            (0.01)
Motor Vehicles                                     1.40             -0.01              40.00           391.1
                                                  (0.06)            (0.01)
Other Transport Equipment                          1.02             -0.07              23.20           375.6
                                                  (0.06)            (0.02)
Notes: This table summarizes the first-stage regressions corresponding to the 2SLS estimates of equation
(10) reported in Table 1. With 15 endogenous variables in equation (10) and 15 instruments, there are 15
first-stage regressions, each a regression of ln Lit on the 15 demand-shifter instruments (for sector k itself,
                                                    ,k
and also for the other 14 sectors). We refer to the coefficient on the demand shifter for sector k as the
"diagonal" coefficient, and to all others as the "off-diagonal" coefficients. Column (1) reports the diagonal
coefficient, and column (2) the maximum (in absolute value) among the 14 off-diagonal coefficients, for each
of the first-stage regressions. All regressions control for importer-sector-year fixed-effects and (asymmetric)
trading pair-year effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the exporter-sector level. Column
(3) reports the corresponding conventional F-statistic, and column (4) the Sanderson-Windmeijer F-statistic,
from each first-stage.



                                                      59
B.3.2      Single Cross-Section

Table B.5: Estimates of Sector-Level Scale Elasticities (k ), Single Cross-Sections
                                                         2SLS          2SLS           2SLS          2SLS
                                                         1995          2000           2005          2010
Sector                                                    (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)
Food, Beverages and Tobacco                               0.14          0.15          0.18           0.17
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Textiles                                                  0.11          0.11          0.13           0.11
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.01)
Wood Products                                             0.10          0.11          0.13           0.10
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Paper Products                                            0.10          0.10          0.13           0.11
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Coke/Petroleum Products                                   0.06          0.06          0.08           0.07
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.01)         (0.01)
Chemicals                                                 0.19          0.19          0.22           0.21
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Rubber and Plastics                                       0.26          0.24          0.28           0.24
                                                         (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.03)
Mineral Products                                          0.12          0.13          0.16           0.13
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Basic Metals                                              0.10          0.11          0.13           0.11
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.01)
Fabricated Metals                                         0.13          0.12          0.15           0.13
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Machinery and Equipment                                   0.12          0.11          0.14           0.13
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.01)
Computers and Electronics                                 0.08          0.08          0.11           0.09
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.01)
Electrical Machinery, NEC                                 0.08          0.08          0.10           0.09
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.01)
Motor Vehicles                                            0.15          0.14          0.16           0.15
                                                         (0.02)        (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)
Other Transport Equipment                                 0.14          0.15          0.17           0.16
                                                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Observations                                             50,291       51,785         52,541        52,925
Notes: Columns (1)-(4) report the IV estimates of equation (10) when the sample is restricted to a single
cross-section of countries and sectors from the indicated year. The instruments are the log of (country pop-
ulation × sectoral demand shifter), interacted with sector dummies. All regressions control for importer-
sector fixed-effects and (asymmetric) trading pair effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at
the exporter-sector level.




                                                    60
B.3.3    Ricardian Controls

Table B.6: Estimates of Sector-Level Scale Elasticities (k ) with Ricardian Controls
Sector                                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)
Food, Beverages and Tobacco                                            0.16          0.15           0.15
                                                                      (0.02)        (0.03)         (0.03)
Textiles                                                               0.12          0.10           0.09
                                                                      (0.01)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Wood Products                                                          0.11          0.09           0.08
                                                                      (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Paper Products                                                         0.11          0.10           0.10
                                                                      (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Coke/Petroleum Products                                                0.07          0.06           0.06
                                                                      (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)
Chemicals                                                              0.20          0.23           0.25
                                                                      (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Rubber and Plastics                                                    0.25          0.29           0.31
                                                                      (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.03)
Mineral Products                                                       0.13          0.14           0.15
                                                                      (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Basic Metals                                                           0.11          0.10           0.10
                                                                      (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)
Fabricated Metals                                                      0.13          0.13           0.13
                                                                      (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
Machinery and Equipment                                                0.12          0.12           0.12
                                                                      (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)
Computers and Electronics                                              0.09          0.07           0.07
                                                                      (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)
Electrical Machinery, NEC                                              0.09          0.07           0.07
                                                                      (0.01)        (0.02)         (0.01)
Motor Vehicles                                                         0.15          0.16           0.16
                                                                      (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)
Other Transport Equipment                                              0.16          0.16           0.17
                                                                      (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
(Contract enforcement)×(sector-year fixed-effects)
(Financial development)×(sector-year fixed-effects)
(GDP per capita)×(sector-year fixed-effects)
Notes: 2SLS estimates of equation (10). All regressions control for importer-sector-year fixed-effects and
(asymmetric) trading pair-year effects. Column (1) repeats column (2) from Table 1 for purposes of compar-
ison. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the exporter-sector level. The number of observations
for columns (2) and (3) is 169,483.




                                                    61
B.3.4    Beyond Ricardian Economies

Like in Appendix A.8.3, we assume that production functions are Cobb-Douglas, as de-
scribed in equation (A.21). Maintaining our other parametric restrictions, as described in
equations (6) and (7), this leads to the following generalization of our baseline estimating
equation
                       1      t            t     t    t           t     t
                         ln(zij ,k ) + ln ci,k = ij + j,k + k ln Zi,k + ij,k .         (B.4)
                      k
where the unit input cost bundle is given by

                                                          vt  t
                                                           k bk         (1- v t    t
                                                                              k ) bk
                                                                                       ( Pit,s )bsk ,
                                       t       t  t                                               t
                                      ci ,k =  k wi               rit
                                                                                        s

                       t t
        t  ( v t ) - v k bk 1 - v t     - (1- v t ) b t                 t
                                                t )-bsk . Further, the aggregate amount of traded
and k            k                k
                                       k k
                                           s (bsk
input services Zit,k satisfies Zit,k = Xit,k /ci t . With measures of ct and Z t at hand, our
                                                  ,k                        i ,k       i ,k
estimation of k in equation (B.4) proceeds via the same instrumental variable procedure
as in our baseline of equation (10).
      We draw on trade and national accounts data in order to measure ci              t . We take the
                                                                                       ,k
                                    t
intermediate goods shares bsk from the OECD's ICIO tables by using the relevant global
share in each year. Unfortunately, this dataset does not report capital and labor shares of
value added vt     k , so we obtain those from the World Input Output Database (after creating
an industry concordance with our dataset). We next compute wages and capital rental
rates by using the formulas wit = (k vt           t t       ¯t      t             t t t           ¯t
                                              k bk Xi,k ) / Li and ri = ( k (1 - vk ) bk Xi,k ) / Ki , with
¯ t and K
L          ¯ t as in the Penn World Tables 9.0 (the variables "POP" and "CK", respectively).
  i          i
Finally, the intermediate goods price indices Pit,k have already been estimated following
the procedure described in Section 4.2 and Appendix B.1.
      Two complications arise from this procedure. First, trade data reveal the price indices
Pit,k for traded sectors but not those for non-traded sectors. However, by using the known
cost functions for such non-traded sectors, which depend on wages, capital rental rates,
and the price indices of traded sectors, we can recover estimates of the non-traded sector
price indices up to a term composed of the productivities of non-traded sectors.35 This
   35 Formally, the price index for any non-traded sector (dropping country and time notation for simplicity)

is given by Pk = k k wvk bk r (1-vk )bk s ( Ps )bsk . Letting y  ln y for any variable y, P N denote the vector
 Pk         , P T the vector   Pk          , K the vector {k }k , E the vector {k }k , VB the vector {vk bk }k , (1 - V ) B
      k N                             kT
the vector {(1 - vk )bk }k ,   B NN   the matrix {bsk }s N ,k N , and B TN the matrix {bsk }sT,k N , we have

                                ( I - B NN ) P N = K + E + wVB + r (1 - V ) B + B TN P T .
We solve this equation for P N , up to a term that involves the unobserved productivity k , in every country
and year (the matrix I - B NN is always invertible in our data).

                                                                  62
changes the interpretation of the (supply-side) error term in equation (B.4) but does not
alter the validity of our demand-side instrument.
    Second, the auxiliary gravity regression described in Appendix B.1 only identifies
the sectoral price indices up to unobserved destination-time and industry-time shifters.
These terms then interact with the sector-time-specific factor shares used to construct the
intermediate goods price indices. We therefore augment our specification in equation
(B.4) to additionally control for an interaction between (1 - bkt ) and a full set of origin-

time indicators.
    OLS and 2SLS estimates of the scale elasticity parameters k from equation (B.4) are
reported in Table B.7.36




   36 In practice, we compute these estimates by using values of ci  t that are based on value-added shares
                                                                      ,k
bit,k and input use shares bit,sk that vary across countries (and hence we additionally include controls for
the interaction between each input share and a time indicator to account for the unobserved industry time
shifter in the price index estimation). This turns out to make very little difference to the resulting estimates
of k .

                                                      63
Table B.7: Estimates of Sector-Level Scale Elasticities (k ), Intermediates and Capital
                                                                                    First-stage        SW
                                                          OLS          2SLS            F-stat         F-stat
Sector                                                    (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)
Food, Beverages and Tobacco                              0.17           0.15           31.10          346.3
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)
Textiles                                                 0.06           0.06           50.60          292.7
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)
Wood Products                                            0.06           0.06           8.70           203.6
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)
Paper Products                                           0.10           0.09           31.20          338.9
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)
Coke/Petroleum Products                                  0.10           0.09           17.00          301.7
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)
Chemicals                                                0.24           0.23           24.00          261.6
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)
Rubber and Plastics                                      0.28           0.23           19.30          287.1
                                                        (0.02)         (0.03)
Mineral Products                                         0.12           0.12           27.30          325.9
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)
Basic Metals                                             0.09           0.10           7.90           204.5
                                                        (0.01)         (0.01)
Fabricated Metals                                        0.12           0.11           16.70          310.5
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)
Machinery and Equipment                                  0.11           0.09           23.70          311.6
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)
Computers and Electronics                                0.07           0.07           20.20          243.2
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)
Electrical Machinery, NEC                                0.07           0.07           28.50          359.0
                                                        (0.01)         (0.01)
Motor Vehicles                                           0.14           0.12           29.10          375.0
                                                        (0.01)         (0.01)
Other Transport Equipment                                0.14           0.13           20.60          312.8
                                                        (0.01)         (0.02)

Notes: Column (1) reports the OLS estimate, and column (2) the 2SLS estimate, of equation (B.5). The
instruments are the log of (country population × sectoral demand shifter), interacted with sector dum-
mies. All regressions control for importer-sector-year fixed-effects, (asymmetric) trading pair-year effects,
interactions between total intermediate shares and a full set of exporter-year fixed-effects, and interactions
between each intermediate input share and a set of (make)-sector-year fixed-effects. Column (3) reports the
conventional F-statistic, and column (4) the Sanderson-Windmeijer F-statistic, from the first-stage regres-
sion corresponding to each row. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the exporter-sector level.
The number of obserations is 207,542.



                                                     64
B.4   Gains from Optimal Policies, All Countries

Table B.8 (Part I): Gains from Optimal Policies, All Countries

                       Optimal   Ind. Policy     Trade Policy Gains from     Gains from
                        Policy      Only            Only      Trade Policy   Ind. Policy
Country                  (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)
Argentina               0.86%      0.22%            0.23%        0.64%         0.63%
Australia               0.75%      0.31%            0.33%        0.44%         0.42%
Austria                 0.97%      -0.12%           0.25%        1.09%         0.72%
Belgium                 1.06%      0.06%            0.34%        1.00%         0.73%
Brazil                  0.65%      0.35%            0.17%        0.30%         0.48%
Brunei                  1.78%      1.10%            1.18%        0.68%         0.59%
Bulgaria                1.10%      -0.05%           0.33%        1.15%         0.77%
Cambodia                1.55%      0.80%            0.76%        0.75%         0.79%
Canada                  0.80%      -0.08%           0.19%        0.88%         0.61%
Chile                   1.00%      0.29%            0.34%        0.71%         0.67%
China                   0.66%      0.36%            0.15%        0.30%         0.51%
Colombia                0.82%      0.50%            0.31%        0.32%         0.51%
Costa Rica              1.17%      0.41%            0.49%        0.76%         0.68%
Croatia                 1.14%      0.54%            0.52%        0.60%         0.62%
Cyprus                  1.49%      0.80%            0.82%        0.69%         0.67%
Czech Republic          0.99%      -0.48%           0.16%        1.47%         0.82%
Denmark                 1.06%      -0.06%           0.37%        1.12%         0.69%
Estonia                 1.29%      0.06%            0.44%        1.23%         0.85%
Finland                 0.78%      -0.13%           0.17%        0.91%         0.61%
France                  0.75%      -0.03%           0.17%        0.78%         0.58%
Germany                 0.91%      -0.17%           0.18%        1.08%         0.73%
Greece                  0.88%      0.27%            0.36%        0.61%         0.53%
Hong Kong               1.19%      0.43%            0.64%        0.76%         0.55%
Hungary                 1.09%      -0.94%           0.22%        2.03%         0.87%
Iceland                 0.98%      -0.13%           0.19%        1.11%         0.78%
India                   0.83%      0.41%            0.30%        0.42%         0.53%
Indonesia               0.94%      0.42%            0.34%        0.52%         0.60%
Ireland                 1.56%      -1.49%           0.26%        3.05%         1.31%
Israel                  0.91%      -0.14%           0.25%        1.05%         0.66%
Italy                   0.72%      0.04%            0.16%        0.68%         0.57%
Japan                   0.57%      0.21%            0.11%        0.36%         0.47%
Latvia                  0.90%      0.13%            0.27%        0.77%         0.62%




                                            65
Table B.8 (Continued): Gains from Optimal Policies, All Countries

                             Optimal      Ind. Policy      Trade Policy Gains from              Gains from
                              Policy         Only             Only      Trade Policy            Ind. Policy
Country                        (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)                     (5)
Lithuania                      1.15%          0.12%            0.39%             1.03%             0.76%
Luxembourg                     2.23%          0.58%            0.87%             1.65%             1.36%
Malaysia                       1.32%          0.08%            0.45%             1.24%             0.86%
Malta                          1.44%          0.44%            0.73%             1.00%             0.71%
Mexico                         0.90%          0.04%            0.26%             0.86%             0.64%
Netherlands                    0.85%          0.11%            0.27%             0.74%             0.58%
New Zealand                    0.86%          0.21%            0.28%             0.65%             0.58%
Norway                         1.33%          0.53%            0.63%             0.80%             0.70%
Philippines                    0.95%          0.36%            0.38%             0.59%             0.57%
Poland                         0.91%         -0.16%            0.18%             1.07%             0.74%
Portugal                       0.80%         -0.07%            0.19%             0.87%             0.61%
Republic of Korea              0.90%         -0.05%            0.26%             0.95%             0.64%
Romania                        0.79%          0.06%            0.18%             0.73%             0.61%
Russian Federation             0.98%          0.40%            0.42%             0.58%             0.57%
Saudi Arabia                   1.69%          0.20%            0.87%             1.49%             0.82%
Singapore                      1.56%          0.00%            0.60%             1.56%             0.96%
Slovakia                       0.94%         -0.61%            0.12%             1.55%             0.83%
Slovenia                       1.10%         -0.39%            0.24%             1.49%             0.86%
South Africa                   0.81%          0.18%            0.25%             0.63%             0.56%
Spain                          0.87%          0.06%            0.23%             0.81%             0.64%
Sweden                         0.96%         -0.21%            0.24%             1.17%             0.72%
Switzerland                    1.16%         -0.83%            0.28%             1.99%             0.88%
Taiwan                         1.14%         -0.19%            0.39%             1.33%             0.75%
Thailand                       1.10%         -0.14%            0.28%             1.24%             0.82%
Tunisia                        1.38%          0.33%            0.56%             1.05%             0.82%
Turkey                         0.81%          0.36%            0.24%             0.45%             0.57%
United Kingdom                 0.86%         -0.05%            0.26%             0.91%             0.61%
United States                  0.55%          0.21%            0.15%             0.34%             0.40%
Vietnam                        1.41%          0.44%            0.62%             0.97%             0.79%
Avg., Unweighted               1.05%          0.10%            0.36%             0.95%             0.69%
Avg., GDP-weighted             0.71%          0.14%            0.20%             0.57%             0.51%
Notes: Each column reports the gains, expressed as a share of initial real national income, that could be
achieved by each type of policy. See the text for detailed descriptions of the exercises. Column (4) equals the
difference between columns (1) and (2); likewise, column (5) is defined as the difference between columns
(1) and (3).




                                                      66
Table B.9 (Part I): Gains from Constrained and Globally Efficient Industrial Policies,
All Countries

                                     Baseline          Constrained     Globally Efficient
                                 Industrial Policy   Industrial Policy Industrial Policy
Country                                 (1)                 (2)               (3)
Argentina                             0.63%               0.45%               0.12%
Australia                             0.42%               0.47%               0.52%
Austria                               0.72%               0.42%              -0.05%
Belgium                               0.73%               0.47%              -0.06%
Brazil                                0.48%               0.40%               0.40%
Brunei                                0.59%               1.37%               0.79%
Bulgaria                              0.77%               0.50%               0.51%
Cambodia                              0.79%               1.01%               1.19%
Canada                                0.61%               0.37%               0.47%
Chile                                 0.67%               0.53%               0.11%
China                                 0.51%               0.41%               0.21%
Colombia                              0.51%               0.54%               0.89%
Costa Rica                            0.68%               0.67%               1.02%
Croatia                               0.62%               0.71%               0.92%
Cyprus                                0.67%               1.03%               1.98%
Czech Republic                        0.82%               0.35%              -0.22%
Denmark                               0.69%               0.52%              -0.14%
Estonia                               0.85%               0.64%               0.51%
Finland                               0.61%               0.32%              -0.20%
France                                0.58%               0.33%               0.33%
Germany                               0.73%               0.36%              -0.36%
Greece                                0.53%               0.49%               1.01%
Hong Kong                             0.55%               0.80%               0.71%
Hungary                               0.87%               0.38%              -0.37%
Iceland                               0.78%               0.47%              -0.44%
India                                 0.53%               0.47%               0.49%
Indonesia                             0.60%               0.56%               0.49%
Ireland                               1.31%               0.83%              -1.81%
Israel                                0.66%               0.44%               0.04%
Italy                                 0.57%               0.32%               0.19%
Japan                                 0.47%               0.34%               0.05%
Latvia                                0.62%               0.44%               0.80%




                                          67
Table B.9 (Continued): Gains from Constrained and Globally Efficient Industrial
Policies, All Countries

                                           Baseline            Constrained     Globally Efficient
                                       Industrial Policy     Industrial Policy Industrial Policy
Country                                       (1)                   (2)               (3)
Lithuania                                    0.76%                 0.57%                   0.49%
Luxembourg                                   1.36%                 1.40%                   0.50%
Malaysia                                     0.86%                 0.54%                  -0.33%
Malta                                        0.71%                 0.84%                   0.86%
Mexico                                       0.64%                 0.48%                   0.75%
Netherlands                                  0.58%                 0.39%                  -0.25%
New Zealand                                  0.58%                 0.44%                   0.18%
Norway                                       0.70%                 0.82%                   0.49%
Philippines                                  0.57%                 0.49%                   0.35%
Poland                                       0.74%                 0.38%                   0.32%
Portugal                                     0.61%                 0.37%                   0.66%
Republic of Korea                            0.64%                 0.39%                  -0.36%
Romania                                      0.61%                 0.38%                  0.62%
Russian Federation                           0.57%                 0.66%                  0.39%
Saudi Arabia                                 0.82%                 1.27%                  0.62%
Singapore                                    0.96%                 0.78%                  -1.06%
Slovakia                                     0.83%                 0.27%                  -0.06%
Slovenia                                     0.86%                 0.46%                  0.08%
South Africa                                 0.56%                 0.45%                  0.45%
Spain                                        0.64%                 0.41%                  0.35%
Sweden                                       0.72%                 0.40%                  -0.30%
Switzerland                                  0.88%                 0.58%                  -0.31%
Taiwan                                       0.75%                 0.46%                  -0.28%
Thailand                                     0.82%                 0.46%                  -0.39%
Tunisia                                      0.82%                 0.75%                  1.07%
Turkey                                       0.57%                 0.47%                  0.72%
United Kingdom                               0.61%                 0.42%                  0.51%
United States                                0.40%                 0.31%                  0.42%
Vietnam                                      0.79%                 0.80%                  1.36%
Avg., Unweighted                             0.69%                 0.56%                  0.29%
Avg., GDP-Weighted                           0.51%                 0.38%                  0.22%
Notes: Each column reports the gains, expressed as a share of initial real national income, that could be
achieved by each type of policy. See the text for detailed descriptions of the exercises.




                                                   68
