                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FOOLED BY THE CYCLE:
     PERMANENT VERSUS CYCLICAL IMPROVEMENTS IN SOCIAL INDICATORS

                                     José Andrée Camarena
                                        Luciana Galeano
                                          Luis Morano
                                           Jorge Puig
                                     Daniel Riera-Crichton
                                          Carlos Vegh
                                         Lucila Venturi
                                       Guillermo Vuletin

                                      Working Paper 26199
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26199


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




The authors are grateful to Jorge Araujo, Practice Manager of Macroeconomics, Trade, and
Investment at the World Bank and his team of country economists, and Oscar Calvo, Carolina
Diaz-Bonilla, and María Ana Lugo, from the Poverty and Equity Global Practice at the World
Bank, for data support and very helpful comments and suggestions. Profuse thanks as well to
Guillermo Beylis, Jessica Bracco, Guillermo Falcone, Maria Marta Ferreyra, Diego Friedheim,
Leonardo Gasparini, Elena Ianchovichina, Mariana Marchioni, Joaquín Serrano, Joana Silva,
Leopoldo Tornarolli, and seminar participants at the Universidad de La Plata (Argentina) and
World Bank for insightful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by José Andrée Camarena, Luciana Galeano, Luis Morano, Jorge Puig, Daniel Riera-
Crichton, Carlos Vegh, Lucila Venturi, and Guillermo Vuletin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fooled by the Cycle: Permanent versus Cyclical Improvements in Social Indicators
José Andrée Camarena, Luciana Galeano, Luis Morano, Jorge Puig, Daniel Riera-Crichton,
Carlos Vegh, Lucila Venturi, and Guillermo Vuletin
NBER Working Paper No. 26199
August 2019
JEL No. E32,I32,O54

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies the time-series behavior of a set of widely-used social indicators and uncovers
two important stylized facts. First, not all social indicators are created equal in terms of the
importance of cyclical fluctuations. While some social indicators such as the unemployment rate
and monetary poverty show large cyclical fluctuations, other social measures such as the Human
Development Index are, by construction, dominated by long-run trends. Second, a large fraction
of the cyclical fluctuations in social indicators can be explained by the cyclical changes in income
(proxied by real GDP per capita). Since cyclical income volatility is much larger in the
developing world, these two critical facts raise fundamental issues regarding how permanent are
improvements in social indicators (like the ones observed in many developing countries during
the last commodity super-cycle). Finally, and relying on a global sample of industrial and
developing countries, we dig deeper into the importance of cyclical versus permanent
components by extending the seminal contribution of Datt and Ravallion (1992). In particular,
we show that more than 40 percent of the fall in monetary poverty observed in Latin America and
the Caribbean during the so-called Golden Decade can be attributed to cyclical changes in
income.

José Andrée Camarena                            Daniel Riera-Crichton
The World Bank                                  The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW                               1818 H St NW
Washington, DC 20433                            Washington, DC 20433
jcamarenafonseca@worldbank.org                  drieracr@bates.edu

Luciana Galeano                                 Carlos Vegh
The World Bank                                  School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS)
1818 H Street, NW                               Johns Hopkins University
Washington, DC 20433                            1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
lgaleano@worldbank.org                          Washington, DC 20036
                                                and NBER
Luis Morano                                     cvegh1@jhu.edu
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW                               Lucila Venturi
Washington, DC 20433                            The World Bank
lmoranogermani@worldbank.org                    1818 H Street, NW
                                                Washington, DC 20433
Jorge Puig                                      lventurigrosso@worldbank.org
FCE-Universidad Nacional de La Plata
Calle 6 #777                                    Guillermo Vuletin
La Plata, 1900                                  The World Bank
Argentina                                       1818 H Street NW
jorgeppuig@gmail.com                            Washington, DC 20433
                                                gvuletin@worldbank.org
    1. Introduction

As academics and policymakers celebrate the substantial improvements in poverty rates and social
indicators across developing economies, especially since the early 2000s, it is crucial to keep in mind
that a large part of these social gains took place during a period of booming commodity prices and
economic bonanzas for many developing countries.1 After "parties" of this magnitude are over, one
would expect periods of recessions to reverse part of the gains in the reduction of poverty that were
achieved in good times. While obvious, this fact seems to have been often overlooked by the poverty
literature, which has mostly focused on measuring the importance of income growth on poverty
without distinguishing between trend and cyclical arguments.2 This "degree of temporariness" is
critical to properly assess whether some of these social gains are here to stay or may most likely (at
least partially) fade away. Particularly during good times, when everything seems on track, one would
like to account for the importance of cyclical effects on poverty before viewing those gains as
permanent.

To illustrate this point, Figure 1 traces the evolution of three widely-used social indicators
(unemployment rate, monetary poverty, and the Human Development Index) as well as the cyclical
component of real GDP per capita from 1991 to 2017 for a sample of 15 Latin America and the
Caribbean (LAC) countries. Note that, in order to make comparisons with social indicators easier to
the naked eye, the cyclical component of real GDP per capita is inverted along the y-right-axis of
Figure 1. The Human Development Index (HDI), developed by the United Nations Development
Programme, is an index that averages achievement in three key dimensions of human development: a
long and healthy life, education, and a decent standard of living.3 Monetary poverty represents the
population with an income below 5.50 dollars per person a day in 2011 purchasing power parity (PPP).
Finally, the unemployment rate measures the number of people unemployed divided by the total labor
force. In terms of the relationship between each social indicator and the cyclical component of real
GDP per capita, the measures of unemployment rate and HDI stand at opposite extremes.4 The


1 Extreme poverty (commonly measured as the population with an income below 1.9 dollars per person a day in 2011
purchasing power parity) stood at 10 percent of the world's population in 2015, down from 36 percent in 1990. As the
incidence of extreme poverty has reached such low levels in many middle-income countries around the world, a more
informative threshold commonly used in these economies is 5.50 dollars per person a day in 2011 purchasing power parity,
hereafter referred to simply as monetary poverty. Even under this less restrictive definition, monetary poverty in lower
and upper middle-income countries has fallen from 78.6 percent circa 1995 to 41.2 percent circa 2015.
2 See, among many others, Bourguignon (2003), Gasparini et al. (2007), Ferreira et al. (2013), and Alvaredo and Gasparini

(2015).
3The health dimension is assessed by life expectancy at birth, the education dimension by years of schooling for adults
aged 25 and over and the expected years of schooling for children of school-entering age, and the standard of living
dimension by the national income per capita.
4 Throughout    the paper we will refer to this relationship as "cyclicality." Typically used in macroeconomics to describe
the effects of the business cycle on fiscal or monetary policy (see, for example, Frankel et al., 2013; Vegh and Vuletin, 2013;
and Vegh and Vuletin, 2015), we borrow this terminology to describe the cyclical movements in social conditions
associated with fluctuations in the business cycle.

                                                                                                                             2 
unemployment rate displays large cyclical fluctuations, following closely the business cycle. On the
other hand, the HDI, which is built from more structural factors, appears uncorrelated with the
business cycle and dominated by the trend component.5 Monetary poverty falls somewhere in
between, exhibiting both trend and cyclical components. Assigning a value of 100 to all four measures
for the year 2003, we can easily compare the improvement of social conditions until 2014. This period
is typically referred to as the Golden Decade due to the long-lasting boom in commodity prices faced
by the region.6

Depending on which social indicator is used, a very different picture emerges. Both the
unemployment rate and monetary poverty responded strongly to the economic tailwinds and declined
markedly in this period (40.3 and 44.5 percent, respectively, for the region as a whole). The inverse
of the HDI indicator (a normalization to facilitate comparison) also fell during the Golden Decade,
indicating social gains. Interestingly ­ and consistent with the more structural nature of this social
indicator ­ the rate of decline of the inverse of the HDI during the Golden Decade (7.3 percent) is
not very different from the one preceding it.

For a casual observer standing in the year 2014, taking the large cyclically-driven gains in the
unemployment rate and monetary poverty at face value would lead to an over-optimistic (and, in fact,
misleading) evaluation of the permanent improvements in social conditions in the region. This myopic
view of reality becomes evident once the economic cycle begins to take a turn for the worse in 2013
and a large part of these social gains quickly start to dissipate. In Brazil (with about one third of LAC's
population), for example, the poverty rate increased by about 3 percentage points between 2014 and
2017 (when real GDP per capita fell by 8.2 percentage points). Had she been more careful, our casual
observer could have prevented such over-optimism (or conveying a misleading picture) by either
controlling for the cyclical component of the unemployment rate and monetary poverty or simply
basing her analysis on more structural measures (i.e., less correlated with the business cycle) such as
the HDI indicator.

This paper shows the importance of the cyclical and trend components in the evolution of relevant
(yet quite different) social indicators such as the unemployment rate, monetary poverty, or the HDI.
Using a worldwide sample of countries, we find that not all indicators are created equal in terms of
the importance of cyclical fluctuations. While the cyclical component explains 72.1 percent and 32.1
percent of the variance of the unemployment rate and monetary poverty, respectively, it only explains
3.3 percent of the variance of the HDI. Moreover, while the unemployment rate and monetary
poverty display varying degrees of temporariness in their movements over time across countries, the
                                                            
5 For sure, there are, among others, two social indicators that are typically associated with structural factors: the

Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) and the Human Capital Index (HCI), the latter recently developed as part of the
2019 World Bank Human Capital Project. Unfortunately, the MPI series are not comparable over time, which is obviously
crucial for our analysis, and a sufficiently large dataset is not yet available for the HCI. Nonetheless, these measures will
be a highly relevant resource for future research on social gains.
6 While, in a slight abuse of language, the Golden Decade is typically defined as the period 2003-2013 (given that

commodity prices, and oil in particular, started a sharp decline in 2014), we will be using the period 2003-2014 to take into
account that monetary poverty in LAC reached its lowest point in 2014.

                                                                                                                           3 
 
predominance of long-lasting changes in the HDI is remarkably common across all the economies in
our sample. Not surprisingly, we find that this heterogeneity is in large part due to the strong
relationship between the cyclical components of the social indicators and the cyclical component of
income (i.e., the business cycle). These stylized facts strongly suggest that more structural indicators
of social conditions such as the HDI would clearly provide a better picture of permanent gains of
social well-being because, by construction, they would not depend on the vagaries of the business
cycle and other cyclical changes. In other words, relying on inherently cyclically-driven social
indicators, especially over relatively short periods of time, could yield a misleading reading of the social
situation because part of the improvement during economic booms could be (at least partially)
reversed when the inevitable recession comes along.7 In fact, for a world sample of developing and
industrial countries, we conclude that fluctuations in cyclical income explain 47.4 and 23.3 percent of
the variance in unemployment rate and monetary poverty driven by income, respectively. The
equivalent figure for the HDI is only 1.7 percent.

We then dig deeper into the importance of cyclical versus permanent income components by
extending the seminal contribution of Datt and Ravallion (1992). In particular, we show that for LAC
as a whole, 41.2 percent of the fall in monetary poverty during the Golden Decade was due to cyclical
income factors, 23.8 percent was due to permanent income growth, and 35 percent was due to
redistribution. Put differently, almost two thirds of the fall in monetary poverty associated with
income gains is explained by cyclical income. One should thus be careful about how to assess
permanent social gains, particularly in economies where output is highly volatile which, as we show,
increases the cyclical effects on social indicators.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 resorts to a univariate time series approach to compute the
relative weight of the cyclical and trend components in the variance of each social indicator. Section
3 links the cyclical component of social indicators to the business cycle and shows that, everything
else equal, cyclical income volatility plays a crucial role in driving the cyclicality of social indicators.
Using household survey data for a set of LAC countries, Section 4 decomposes the fall in monetary
poverty during the Golden Decade into permanent income growth, cyclical income, and
redistribution. Section 5 concludes.



       2.       How Cyclical are Social Indicators?

When examining the evolution of social indicators over recent decades, we should always keep in
mind that any change in the underlying indicator can be decomposed into a cyclical component,
typically driven by short-term factors, and a trend component that responds to structural
considerations. Taking this distinction into account is critical for policymakers since policies and
programs implemented to deal with cyclical fluctuations of social indicators are intrinsically different

                                                            
7 An alternative, naturally, would be to construct cyclically-adjusted monetary poverty measures. However, as discussed
in Riera-Crichton et al. (2016) in the context of fiscal policy, cyclically-adjusted measures have also serious shortcomings.

                                                                                                                           4 
 
from those designed to improve structural factors. Moreover, measuring the lasting success in the
fight against poverty using social indicators with large cyclical fluctuations could be misleading since
the analysis would be highly sensitive to the time span under consideration. In other words, given the
significant influence that business cycles have on the cyclical component of some social indicators like
the poverty rate, a policymaker would draw very different conclusions if the response of poverty were
evaluated during a boom or a complete (boom-bust) business cycle. In fact, the importance of the
cyclical component in social indicators is magnified for the case of emerging markets subject to large
external shocks, such as changes in the terms of trade, global liquidity, and world economic activity.8
All these shocks are cyclical in nature and thus will tend to amplify emerging markets' business cycles
and, in turn, the cyclical components of social indicators.

To formalize the intuition discussed above, we need to compute the relative importance of the cyclical
and trend components in each social indicator. We do so with a simple variance decomposition
analysis. First, we decompose each time series into a cyclical (C) and trend (T) components:

                                                                      .                                      (1)

We proxy the trend component with a simple linear trend.9 Then, taking the variance of (1), we can
compute the portion of the variance corresponding to each component:10

                                                               ,               ,                   1,         (2)

where     and       represent the share of the total variance explained by the cyclical and trend
components, respectively.

Figure 2 summarizes this simple variance decomposition exercise. The height of the bars in Figure 2
denotes      ; that is, the relative importance of the cyclical component in the total variance of each
indicator for a worldwide sample.11 As we can easily observe, the share of the total variance explained
by the cyclical component is much higher for the unemployment rate and monetary poverty than for
more structural measures of social welfare such as the HDI. Specifically, we find that the cyclical
                                                            
8   See, for example, Vegh et al. (2018).
9 Our definition of trend-driven change calls for truly long-term factors driving the trend component in our set of social
indicators. As social indicators data are not available for time spans longer than three decades, the identification of this
type of low frequency signals is more difficult. Thus, applying any sort of band-pass filter runs the risk of attaching to the
trend component some relatively low frequency cyclical fluctuations. Our decomposition (for the social indicators and
real GDP per capita) is thus based on the following regression:
                                                                      , 
where is the linear trend, is the regression coefficient, and is a white noise error. The trend component is obtained
from           and the cyclical component is extracted from the residual:              . 

10   Since we use a linear trend, the cyclical and trend components are uncorrelated by construction.
11   See Appendix A for a complete list of countries used in the analysis.

                                                                                                                            5 
 
component explains 72.1 percent of the variance of the unemployment rate. At the other extreme,
the cyclical component explains only 3.3 percent of the variance of the HDI indicator (and hence 96.7
percent is explained by the trend component). Monetary poverty falls in between, with 32.1 percent
of its variability due to cyclical movements (and hence 67.9 percent to the trend component).12

These results are a clear indication that, in terms of the relevance of cyclical fluctuations, not all social
indicators are created equal. Going back to our casual observer, the importance of the cyclical
movements in the total variance of each social indicator shows that using the unemployment rate or
monetary poverty to measure long-lasting improvements in social conditions will probably lead to a
biased conclusion. Moreover, the bracketed lines on top of each column in Figure 2 representing the
standard errors across countries show significant differences in how homogeneous these results are in
our worldwide sample. While the importance of cyclical fluctuations of the HDI is small and quite
homogenous, the shares for the monetary poverty are highly heterogenous across economies. As a
result, when analyzing long-term gains in social welfare, our casual observer may be misled not only
by focusing on largely cyclical-driven indicators like the unemployment rate but also by concentrating
on countries where monetary poverty is of a cyclical nature. To showcase the potential biases
introduced by these important stylized facts, we now resort to a simple two-country example.

              2.1.           The Perils of Random Sampling: An Illustration using Argentina and Chile

Thus far, we have shown that not all social indicators are created equal, especially when it comes to
the importance of cyclical fluctuations. This stylized fact leads to a powerful policy warning: given
the prevalence of cyclical gains, a policymaker focusing on an indicator over a relatively short time
span could be highly misled in her efforts to evaluate long-lasting improvements in social conditions
in her country.

To illustrate this warning, consider a simple example with two countries and our three main social
indicators: the unemployment rate that will be quite cyclical in nature, monetary poverty that could
be driven by either cyclical fluctuations or trend-driven movements, and the HDI, with almost no
cyclical component. Furthermore, to factor in the heterogeneity regarding the importance of cyclical
fluctuations across countries, we purposefully picked two well-known emerging markets with vastly
different shares of cyclical fluctuations in monetary poverty: Argentina and Chile.

Suppose now that our policymaker is trying to evaluate the long-run improvement of social conditions
but is restricted for the sake of argument to one decade of data. Figure 3, Panels A, C, and E show
the 10-year difference in the unemployment rate, monetary poverty, and the inverse of the HDI,
respectively. These figures provide us a clear sense of the potential biases in perception across
different samples. Firstly, if the policymaker is following the series of the unemployment rate, no
matter the country, she will be at risk of reaching wildly different conclusions depending on the sample
period she chooses to study. While someone studying the case of Chile could boast from a very decent

                                                            
12Using a quadratic trend would yield 48.6 percent for the unemployment rate, 23.6 percent for monetary poverty, and
1.3 percent for the HDI indicator.

                                                                                                                  6 
 
3.4-percentage-point decrease in the unemployment rate in 2012, the same policymaker would have
to explain an increase of 3.0 percentage points in 2003. To a much greater degree, the same story
unfolds for Argentina with a whopping 15.3-percentage-point increase in 2002 and 15.3-percentage-
point decrease in 2012. It is worth noting that while the importance of cyclical fluctuations of the
unemployment rate hinders the ability to diagnose trend-driven gains in both countries, this problem
is much more severe in Argentina. In fact, and following the previous univariate-based variance
decomposition analysis to complete this picture, the cyclical component explains 62.3 and 95.2 percent
of the variance of the unemployment rate in Chile and Argentina, respectively. We will explore the
root of these differences in the next section.

For the case of monetary poverty, like for the unemployment rate, a policymaker evaluating social
welfare gains in Argentina in 2002 would reach the opposite conclusions than one evaluating the
situation in 2012. These large differences make it almost impossible to understand the long-term
evolution of social conditions in this country. On the other hand, a policymaker using the same
indicator in Chile would be much less exposed to sample-dependent variation in her conclusions. In
other words, since the monetary poverty indicator in Chile is dominated by its trend component, we
can approximate the long-run gains in the underlying indicator with relative short-time samples. In
fact, and following the previous univariate-based variance decomposition analysis to complete this
picture, while the cyclical component explains 84.8 percent of the variance of monetary poverty in
Argentina (this figure is larger than the world-sample average associated with the unemployment rate),
it only explains 2.3 percent in Chile (a figure very close to the world-sample average associated with
the HDI).

Notably, a policymaker using the HDI indicator would be protected from sample-dependent
conclusions regardless of the country under study. Indeed, the cyclical component explains 0.5 and
2.7 percent of the variance of the HDI rate in Chile and Argentina, respectively.

Finally, Figure 3, Panels B, D, and F translate the previous results (i.e., Panels A, C, and E) into density
plots for the 10-year differences in the unemployment rate, monetary poverty, and the inverse of the
HDI, respectively.  The relatively high dispersion in the distributions of the 10-year differences in the
unemployment rate displayed in Figure 3, Panel B shows that both Argentina and Chile are highly
exposed to myopic views of the long-term improvements in the unemployment rate. While the case
of Argentina is more extreme, both countries display relatively high standard deviations for the 10-
year difference observations. For monetary poverty, Figure 3, Panel D, tells us that, again, a
policymaker from Argentina is quite exposed to large errors assessing long-term improvements. In
this case though, given the dominance of the trend component of monetary poverty in Chile, the
Chilean policymaker would be correct in her assessment of long-term gains no matter the year she
starts the study or the length of available data. Finally, using the HDI, the latter situation would apply
to both countries. The HDI not only lowers the chances of sample-dependent errors but also
eliminates the differences across countries, as shown in Figure 3, Panel F. 

        2.2.    Are Structural Indicators such as the HDI Structural Enough?


                                                                                                          7 
 
The above sections emphasized the potential bias implicit in social indicators largely driven by cyclical
fluctuations when trying to evaluate long-lasting improvements in social conditions. A simple solution
would be to extract the trend component of each indicator and use it in the evaluation of long-run
gains in poverty reduction. A practical problem with this approach is the risk of sample-dependent
bias explained above due to, precisely, the short-sample nature of available data.13 An alternative
solution comes from the type of indicator used. Throughout the paper, we have seen that social
indicators based on structural factors such as the HDI are much less influenced by cyclical fluctuations.
The large trend component of this type of indicators means that we can better proxy long-run
improvements in social conditions with relatively short periods of available data.

Having said that, indicators such as the HDI are also subject, to some extent, to the same type of
conceptual critique. Why? Because the HDI is an index that includes as well a criterion based upon
income. Figure 2 shows the relative importance of the cyclical component in the total variance of
each underlying indicator of the HDI. While this share is relatively low for all components, this simple
exercise clearly shows that while structural components such as education and life expectancy have a
cyclical share that explains little of their total variance, the measure of income included in the HDI is,
as expected, much more important in terms of cyclical fluctuations. Again, including such cyclical-
driven components in the construction of structural measures like the HDI would affect some
countries more than others depending on the underlying volatility of the business cycle.



       3. What Drives the Cyclical Fluctuations of Social Indicators?

Whereas the large differences in the time series behavior of different social indicators uncovered in
our previous section may be striking at first sight, they should hardly come as a surprise given the
importance of business cycle fluctuations in some of these social indicators.

While the drivers of the trend component of social indicators may be diverse ­ and to some degree
independent from long-term income growth (for example they could be related to long-term trends
in income redistribution and technological diffusion) ­ the cyclical components of the social indicators
used in this study should be, in principle, tightly related to business cycle fluctuations. This is
particularly the case of social indicators that are prone to be driven by cyclical fluctuations (like the
unemployment rate and monetary poverty). The reason lies in the fundamental link between these
social indicators and income. For example, in the case of the unemployment rate, any Keynesian
model with price or wage rigidities would predict a strong correlation between the unemployment rate
and the business cycle. Specifically, negative real or monetary shocks would lead to short-term rises
in the unemployment rate. Changes in monetary poverty should also depend, at least partially, on the
evolution of income per capita. Regarding the influence of business cycle fluctuations on the HDI, it




                                                            
13   Section 4 will discuss how to overcome (when necessary) some of this micro-based survey data limitations.

                                                                                                                 8 
 
should be, by construction, more unaffected (especially the non-income components such as
education and life expectancy).14

To visualize the strong relationship between the business cycle and the fluctuations of our social
indicators, Figure 4 further explores the same simple two-country example used in our previous
section. Note that, as in Figure 1, and in order to make comparisons with social indicators easier to
the naked eye, the cyclical component of real GDP per capita is inverted in the y-right-axis of Figure
4. In Figure 4, Panel A, we compare the evolution of the unemployment rate, the monetary poverty,
and the HDI versus real GDP per capita. In terms of monetary poverty, two very different pictures
emerge. In Argentina, the monetary poverty is clearly dominated by the business cycle while, on the
other hand, monetary poverty in Chile is mainly determined by long-term income (as opposed to
cyclical considerations). This matches perfectly the behavior of real GDP per capita dominated by a
very volatile business cycle in Argentina and a clear behavior led by the trend in Chile. On the other
hand, the HDI evolves at a constant rate in both countries, independently of the cyclical behavior of
output.  

Finally, the unemployment rate displays a very cyclical behavior in both countries although the
amplitude of the cycle is clearly larger in the Argentine case. This, as shown in Figure 4, Panel B, fully
coincides with the behavior of the business cycle (measured by the cyclical component of real GDP
per capita), which displays a much larger amplitude in Argentina than in Chile.

The above simple two-country example gives us an illustration of the strong correlation between the
business cycle and the cyclical component of our social indicators. Extending this analysis to our
worldwide sample, Figure 5 depicts the relationship between the volatility of the cyclical component
of real GDP per capita (along the x-axis) and the volatility of the cyclical component of each of our
six social indicators (along the y-axis) using a simple set of scatter plots. As expected, in all cases, the
effect of the volatility of the cyclical component of real GDP per capita, measured by the slope of the
fitted line, is positive and highly significant (except for life expectancy). Moreover, this simple bivariate
relationship explains relatively well differences in the volatility of cyclical components across countries.

To capture the full extent of the role of the business cycle in driving movements in social indicators
(i.e. not only on their cyclical component as we just showed), we use a similar variance decomposition
approach as in Section 2. For this multivariate version, we first run the following regression:

                                                               S    Y    Y   .                                            (3)

As before, we proxy the trend component of output with a simple linear trend. Then, taking the
variance of (3), and given that, by construction, Y and Y are uncorrelated, we can calculate the
portion of the variance allotted to each component:

                                                            
14 Naturally, in the final analysis, the extent to which business cycle fluctuations end up affecting different social indicators

could also depend on the existence of policy buffers such as unemployment insurance benefits and/or other country-
specific characteristics affecting the transmission mechanism between cyclical income changes and social indicators
responses. We discuss the relevance of redistribution arguments in more detail in Section 4. 

                                                                                                                                9 
 
                                            ,                                ,                   1, (4)

where        represents the share of the variance of the social indicator driven by income, which is
explained by the business cycle. On the other hand,         , depicts the share of the variance of the
social indicator driven by income which is explained by the trend component of output.

The height of the bars in Figure 6 denotes       ; in other words, the average share of the variance of
the social indicator driven by income which is explained by the business cycle for a worldwide sample.
This share is much higher for the unemployment rate and monetary poverty than for more structural
measures of social welfare such as the HDI. We find that, by itself, the business cycle component
explains 47.4, 23.3, and 1.7 percent of the variance of the social indicator driven by income for the
unemployment rate, monetary poverty, and HDI, respectively. This clearly shows how some
indicators such us the unemployment rate or monetary poverty are heavily exposed to sampling bias
due to common and well understood ups and downs in economic activity. Moreover, like in the case
of Argentina above, given that         is a function of Var Y , the potential bias of interpreting trend-
driven gains in social conditions for such indicators would mechanically grow with the volatility of the
business cycle (see equation (4)). The next section zooms on the role of the business cycle driving
movements in cyclical social indicators such as monetary poverty using microdata for a set of LAC
countries.



    4. A Microdata Approach on the Importance of Business Cycle Fluctuations on Monetary
       Poverty: An Application to LAC

The previous section showed that while some social indicators (such as the unemployment rate) are
cyclical in nature, fluctuating considerably in the short run along with the business cycle, others (such
as the HDI, especially its non-income components) follow long-term trends and bear very little
relation to the business cycle. Interestingly, monetary poverty lies somewhere in between the two
extremes with large heterogeneity across countries. In particular, whether monetary poverty behaves
more like the unemployment rate (i.e., affected by cyclical considerations) or the HDI (i.e., determined
essentially by the long-run trend) crucially depends on the volatility of the business cycle. In high-
volatility countries (such as Argentina), changes in monetary poverty are much more closely related to
the business cycle than in low-volatility countries (such as Chile).

In light of this insight, and based on our motivating example of Figure 1, a natural question arises:
how much of the fall in the monetary poverty during the Golden Decade in LAC was permanent and
how much was cyclical? As shown in Figure 1, emerging regions such as LAC made tremendous
progress in terms of reducing monetary poverty during this period, with the headcount ratio for the
5.50-dollar poverty line falling by almost 20 percentage points (from 42.1 percent in 2003 to 23.4
percent in 2014). Needless to say, the relative importance of permanent versus cyclical reductions in


                                                                                                      10 
 
poverty has critical implications for (i) assessing the long-lasting magnitude of the fall in poverty, and
(ii) the public policies that may be put in place to deal with permanent versus cyclical falls in poverty.

To decompose the fall in monetary poverty between permanent and cyclical components, we follow
a very influential methodology proposed in a seminal paper by Datt and Ravallion (1992). Using
microdata from household surveys, Datt and Ravallion (1992) decompose the change in poverty
between two points in time into (i) a "growth component" and (ii) a "redistribution component." The
growth component is identified as the change in monetary poverty between two years that would have
occurred if the income of each household member had changed in the same proportion as the national
mean income, keeping constant the shape of the income distribution (measured by the Lorenz curve).
The redistribution component reflects the change in monetary poverty that would have occurred if
the income distribution had changed as it did, but with no changes in mean income.15 16

Applying Datt and Ravallion's (1992) methodology to the period 1995-2010, Ferreira et al. (2013) show
that monetary poverty ­ using a poverty line of 4 dollars a day (2005 PPP) ­ fell about 17 percentage
points, of which 66 percent was due to the growth component and the remaining 34 percent to the
redistribution component. In other words, the substantial increase in mean income in LAC was the
main driving force behind the dramatic progress in poverty reduction, even though redistribution
arguments still played an important role.17 We obtain virtually identical figures after expanding the
sample until 2017 and using the 5.50-dollar (2011 PPP) poverty line: a growth component of 67
percent and a redistribution component of 33 percent. This redistribution component is largely
explained by the increase in social expenditure in most countries in the region, and the implementation
or expansion of existent non-contributory social protection systems, such as the conditional cash
transfer programs (López Calva and Lustig, 2010; Gasparini and Cruces, 2010). The resources
allocated to these programs increased as a percentage of GDP in the 2000s, as did the number of
countries implementing them and the share of the population covered (Stampini and Tornarolli, 2012;
Cecchini and Madariaga, 2011). These programs have a higher redistributive impact than social
spending in general because they are targeted specifically to the most needed. Further, the fact that
transfers are in cash implies that the programs have a direct impact on income inequality, the most
common measure of inequality (Gasparini et al., 2016).

                                                            
15 We use a slightly different methodology from the one proposed by Datt and Ravallion (1992). Following Gasparini et
al. (2013) and Inchauste et al. (2014), we get rid of the problems of (i) whether to use the initial or end year as the reference
period and (ii) how to interpret the residual change in poverty that is not accounted for, by computing the decomposition
twice, alternating the reference period, and taking the average growth and redistribution effects.
16One important limitation of this decomposition is that since growth, inequality, and poverty are jointly determined in
general equilibrium, this approach cannot explain the fundamental factors behind poverty changes. However, it is very
useful to illustrate the way incomes have changed and affected poverty. See Ferreira (2012) for further discussion.
17 In fact, the relative importance of the redistribution effect is much lower in other regions. Alvaredo and Gasparini
(2015) carry out this decomposition for developing countries by region, using the 2-dollar (2005 PPP) poverty line and
find that, during the period 1999-2010, characterized by poverty alleviation in all regions in the world, the shares of growth
and redistribution effects were, respectively, 99 and 1 percent for East Asia and Pacific, 91 and 9 percent for Europe and
Central Asia, 67 and 33 for LAC, 79 and 21 for Middle East and North Africa, 91 and 9 for South Asia, and 100 and 0 for
Sub-Saharan Africa.

                                                                                                                              11 
 
              4.1            Beyond Datt and Ravallion: Decomposition for the Golden Decade

To further split the "growth component" into what we call a "cyclical income component" and
"permanent income component," we need to know the growth rate of the mean income trend during
the period under analysis.18 If one had a long time series of mean income, one would compute its
permanent component by using any trend-cycle filter. Unfortunately, for most countries in LAC, data
are not available for very long periods (say, for more than 25 years). For this reason, and as is common
practice in this literature (Ahluwalia et al., 1979; Bhalla, 2002; Bourguignon and Morrison, 2002; Sala-
i-Martin, 2006), we proxy the average trend growth in mean income by the average trend growth in
real GDP per capita.19

The "permanent income component" is identified as the poverty change between two subsequent
years that would have occurred if the income of each household member had changed at a rate equal
to the average annual growth rate of the trend of real GDP per capita, keeping constant the shape of
the income distribution. The "cyclical income component" is computed as a residual between the
"growth component" identified before using Datt and Ravallion's decomposition and the "permanent
income component."

Figure 7 shows our findings. The cyclical income component is the most important factor behind the
fall in monetary poverty observed in LAC during the Golden Decade. Out of the 18.8-percentage-
point fall in monetary poverty, 7.7 percentage points are explained by the cyclical income component,
6.6 percentage points by the redistribution component, and only 4.5 percentage points by permanent
income gains.20 In other words, more than 40 percent of the fall in monetary poverty was due to
cyclical income factors and about 24 percent to permanent income gains. In terms of population, this
would imply that around 45 million people got out of poverty in LAC during the Golden Decade due
to cyclical income gains. Therefore, one could argue that this group might be at risk of falling into
poverty again, as the temporary gains achieved during the expansionary phase of the business cycle
continue to dissipate.
Figure 8 illustrates the same idea over time. The solid line shows the actual evolution of poverty
during the period 1996-2017. The dashed line shows the time path of poverty if one excluded the
cyclical income component. This line clearly indicates that the fall in poverty during the period 1996-
2017 would have been 15.2 percentage points (as opposed to 21.4 percentage points). Why? Because,
                                                            
18Naturally, one could also envisage a permanent and a cyclical component for the redistribution effect. This issue,
however, has not yet been addressed in the literature and falls outside the scope of our analysis.
19Two points are worth noting. First, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that, for the LAC region, the correlation of the
mean income and real GDP per capita (0.78) is statistically significant at the one percent level. Second, for LAC countries
for which we have more than 25 years of data (like Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, and Honduras) we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that the average growth in the trend of the mean income is not different, statistically speaking, from the average
growth in real GDP per capita trend.
20 For a long and large enough cyclical shock, the increase in the permanent income may be enough to lead to some

permanent gain in terms of poverty reduction. In other words, cyclical gains in poverty could have a permanent effect if
shock absorbers are well designed. As discussed in Galeano et al. (2019) this is not the case in LAC because few countries
have, for example, unemployment insurance mechanisms and, for those who have it, coverage is very low.

                                                                                                                          12 
 
by and large, most of the income gains in this period were cyclical (especially during the Golden
Decade) as opposed to being related to permanent changes. The dotted line shows the evolution of
poverty if one also excluded the redistribution component.
Naturally, and in line with previous discussions pointing to the effect of different output fluctuation
profiles like in Argentina and Chile, Figures 7 and 8 hide important country-specific differences.
Following our comparisons of Argentina and Chile, Figure 9 is equivalent to Figure 7 but focusing
exclusively on these two countries. During the Golden Decade, the importance of "redistribution" is
significant in both countries, even more in Argentina. Notably, while virtually all monetary poverty
gains observed during the Golden Decade in Chile associated with the "growth component" have
been driven by its "permanent income component," in Argentina such argument represents very little
(most of the "growth component" has been driven by its "cyclical income component").
Correspondingly, Figure 10 is equivalent to Figure 8 but solely focusing on these two countries
Figure 11 is equivalent to Figure 10, yet instead of focusing on the Golden Decade, it goes all the way
back to 1991. This more "historical" picture shows in a very vivid manner all the points discussed
throughout the paper regarding the crucial effect of cyclical income fluctuations on monetary poverty
and the long-lasting nature of those gains. In countries like Argentina, monetary poverty changes
prove to be a very poor indicator of long-lasting social gains. Notice, for example, that the monetary
poverty rate observed during the last 5 years or so is not that different from the one observed during
the early 1990s (with values around 15 percent). Since Argentina has a relatively low permanent
increase in income (of about 0.75 percent per year), most of its monetary poverty fluctuation is driven
by large up- and down-swings in income. On the other hand, in countries like Chile monetary poverty
gains are more permanent in nature.



    5. What Have We Learned?

In this paper, we uncovered a set of important stylized facts regarding the trend versus cyclical nature
of social indicators. First, not all social indicators are created equal. Indicators such as the
unemployment rate or monetary poverty are driven by relatively large cyclical fluctuations. Meanwhile,
more structural indicators such as the HDI are mainly driven by the trend changes. Furthermore,
while the trend dominance among structural measures such as the HDI is quite common across
countries, the dominance of the cyclical component in monetary poverty and the unemployment rate
is highly heterogenous. These stylized facts call for care when estimating the long-term advances in
social conditions using cyclical indicators such as the unemployment rate or monetary poverty and
relatively short time series. The risk of myopic bias seems to decrease substantially if we were to use
structural indicators such as the HDI.

We also find that the degree of temporariness of the gains/losses in social indicators is strongly
associated to differences in the amplitude of business cycles across countries. As a corollary, we would
expect that macroeconomic policies devoted to moderate business cycles would decrease the volatility
of cyclical changes in social conditions.

                                                                                                     13 
 
Finally, using microdata for LAC countries to study the behavior of monetary poverty during the
Golden Decade confirms the importance of business cycles in explaining the changes in social
indicators. Out of the 18.8-percentage-point decrease in monetary poverty between 2003 and 2014,
7.7 percentage points or 41.2 percent can be attributed to the widespread business cycle booms in the
region. This means that a large share of the improvements in social conditions could be at risk of
disappearing once these cycles turn recessionary.




                                                                                                  14 
 
References
Ahluwalia, M., N. Carter, and H. Chenery (1979). "Growth and Poverty in Developing Countries,"
Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 299-341.
Alvaredo, F., and L. Gasparini (2015). "Recent Trends in Inequality and Poverty in Developing
Countries," in A. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon, eds., Handbook of Income Distribution, pp. 697-805.
Atamanov, A., J.P. Azevedo, R.A. Castañeda, S. Chen, P.A. Corral Rodas, R. Dewina, C. Diaz-Bonilla,
D.M. Jolliffe, C. Lakner, K. Lee, D.G. Mahler, J. Montes, R. Mungai, M.C. Nguyen, E.B. Prydz, P.
Sangraula, K. Scott, A.E. Wambile, J. Yang, and Q. Zhao (2018). April 2018 PovcalNet Update: What's
New (Washington, DC: World Bank).
Bhalla, S. (2002). Imagine There's No Country: Poverty, Inequality and Growth in the Era of Globalization
(Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics).
Bourguignon, F., and C. Morrison (2002). "Inequality among World Citizens: 1820-1992," American
Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 4, pp. 727-744.
Bourguignon, F. (2003). "The Growth Elasticity of Poverty Reduction: Explaining Heterogeneity
across Countries and Time Periods," in T. Eicher and S. Turnovski, eds., Growth and Inequality (Boston:
MIT Press), pp. 3-26.
Cecchini, S., and A. Madariaga (2011). Conditional Cash Transfer Programmes: The Recent Experience in Latin
America and the Caribbean (Santiago de Chile: Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean).
Datt, G., and M. Ravallion (1992). "Growth and Redistribution Components of Changes in Poverty
Measures," Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 275-295.
Ferreira, F. (2012). "Distributions in Motion: Economic Growth, Inequality, and Poverty Dynamics,"
in P. Jefferson, ed., The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Poverty (New York: Oxford University Press),
pp. 427-462.
Ferreira, F., J. Messina, J. Rigolini, L. López-Calva, M.A. Lugo, and R. Vakis (2013). Economic Mobility
and the Rise of the Latin American Middle Class (Washington, DC: World Bank).
Frankel, J., C. Vegh, and G. Vuletin (2013). "On Graduation from Procyclicality," Journal of Development
Economics, Vol. 100, pp. 32-47.
Galeano, L., A. Izquierdo, J. Puig, C. Vegh, and G. Vuletin (2019). "Automatic Destabilizers,"
Unpublished manuscript (Washington, DC: World Bank).
Gasparini, L., F. Gutiérrez, and L. Tornarolli (2007). "Growth And Income Poverty In Latin America
And The Caribbean: Evidence From Household Surveys," Review of Income and Wealth, International
Association for Research in Income and Wealth, Vol. 53, No 2, pp. 209-245.
Gasparini, L., and G. Cruces (2010). "A Distribution in Motion: The Case of Argentina," in L. López-
Calva and N. Lustig, eds., Declining Inequality in Latin America: A Decade of Progress? (Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution Press and UNDP), pp. 100-133.

                                                                                                        15 
 
Gasparini, L., M. Cicowiez., and W. Sosa Escudero (2013). Pobreza y Desigualdad en América Latina:
Conceptos, Herramientas y Aplicaciones (Buenos Aires: Editorial Temas).
Gasparini, L., G. Cruces, and L. Tornarolli (2016). "Chronicle of a Deceleration Foretold: Income
Inequality in Latin America in the 2010s," CEDLAS Working Paper 198 (Universidad Nacional de La
Plata).
Inchauste, G., J.P. Azevedo, B. Essama-Nssah, S. Olivieri, T. Van Nguyen, J. Saavedra-Chanduvi, and
H. Winkler (2014). Understanding Changes in Poverty (Directions in Development - Poverty, World
Bank).
López-Calva, L., and N. Lustig (2010). Declining Inequality in Latin America: A Decade of Progress?
(Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press).
Riera-Crichton, D., C. Vegh, and G. Vuletin (2016). "Tax Multipliers: Pitfalls in Measurement and
Identification," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 79, pp. 30-48.
Sala-i-Martin, X. (2006). "The World Distribution of Income: Falling Poverty and... Convergence,
Period," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 121, No. 2, pp. 351-397.
Stampini, M., and L. Tornarolli (2012). "The Growth of Conditional Cash Transfers in Latin America
and the Caribbean: Did They Go Too Far?" IZA Policy Paper 49 (Institute of Labor Economics).
Vegh, C., and G. Vuletin (2013). "Overcoming the Fear of Free Falling: Monetary Policy Graduation
in Emerging Markets," in D. Evanoff, C. Holthausen, G. Kaufman, and M. Kremer, eds., The Role of
Central Banks in Financial Stability: How Has It Changed?, (Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and
European Central Bank), pp. 105-131.
Vegh, C., and G. Vuletin (2015). "How is Tax Policy Conducted over the Business Cycle?," American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol 7, pp. 327-370.
Vegh, C., G. Vuletin, D. Riera-Crichton, J. P. Medina, D. Friedheim, L. Morano, and L. Venturi (2018).
From Known Unknowns to Black Swans: How to Manage Risk in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC
Semiannual Report, World Bank). 




                                                                                                   16 
 
                                                                                   Figure 1
                                                          Evolution of Unemployment Rate, Monetary Poverty, HDI, and
                                                             the Cyclical Component of Real GDP per Capita in LAC
                        120                                                                                                                                                                                                 -165


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -145
                        110
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -125


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -105
                        100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Index (2003=100, inverted axis)
                        90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -65
     Index (2003=100)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -45
                        80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -25

                        70                                                                                                                                                                                                  -5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                        60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35


                        50                                                                                                                                                                                                  55


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            75

                        40
                              1991

                                     1992

                                            1993

                                                   1994

                                                          1995

                                                                 1996

                                                                        1997

                                                                               1998

                                                                                       1999

                                                                                              2000

                                                                                                     2001

                                                                                                            2002

                                                                                                                   2003

                                                                                                                          2004

                                                                                                                                 2005

                                                                                                                                        2006

                                                                                                                                               2007

                                                                                                                                                      2008

                                                                                                                                                             2009

                                                                                                                                                                    2010

                                                                                                                                                                           2011

                                                                                                                                                                                  2012

                                                                                                                                                                                         2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                2014

                                                                                                                                                                                                       2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                              2016

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2017
                                            Unemployment Rate                         Monetary Poverty                      1/HDI                      Real GDP per Capita - Cyclical Component (right axis)

    Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). Averages for LAC are weighted by population. LAC aggregate
    based on 15 countries for which microdata are available: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican
    Republic, El Salvador, Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay. In each year and for all indicators, the
    sample is restricted to the countries for which data on monetary poverty is available. The cyclical component of Real GDP per capita
    is defined as the cycle over trend.
    Source: Authors' estimations based on SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank), Human Development Report Office (United
    Nations), and WEO (October 2018).
 

 

                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17 
 
                                                                                                                   Figure 2
                                                                               Contribution of the Cyclical Component of each Social Indicator to its Total Variance,
                                                                                                                 World Sample
                                                                          80
                                                                                                                                             Components of the HDI
      Share of the Cyclical Component to Total Variance (as percentage)




                                                                          70



                                                                          60



                                                                          50



                                                                          40



                                                                          30



                                                                          20



                                                                          10



                                                                          0
                                                                               Unemployment Rate   Monetary Poverty   HDI           Income          Education        Life Expectancy


    Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). The figures reported correspond to the median value across
    countries. Black lines denote two standard errors intervals (weighted by real GDP). Estimations of the contribution of the cyclical
    component based on a univariate model.
    Source: Authors' estimations based on PovcalNet (March 2019), SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank), Human Development
    Report Office (United Nations), and WEO (October 2018).
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                                                                                                                                                       18 
 
                                                                                                  Figure 3
                                                                        Argentina versus Chile: 10-year Difference in Social Indicators
                                                     Panel A. Changes in Unemployment Rate                               Panel B. Distribution for Unemployment Rate
                                               20                                                                 0.45

                                               15                                                                 0.40
    Absolute Change in Unemployment Rate




                                               10                                                                 0.35

                                                                                                                  0.30
              (percentage points)




                                                5
                                                                                                                  0.25
                                                0




                                                                                                        Density
                                                                                                                  0.20
                                                -5
                                                                                                                  0.15
                                               -10
                                                                                                                  0.10

                                               -15                                                                0.05

                                               -20                                                                0.00




                                                                                                                         -6.0
                                                                                                                         -5.5
                                                                                                                         -4.9
                                                                                                                         -4.4
                                                                                                                         -3.9
                                                                                                                         -3.4
                                                                                                                         -2.8
                                                                                                                         -2.3
                                                                                                                         -1.8
                                                                                                                         -1.2
                                                                                                                         -0.7
                                                                                                                         -0.2
                                                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                                                          0.9
                                                                                                                          1.4
                                                                                                                          1.9
                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                          3.0
                                                                                                                          3.5
                                                                                                                          4.0
                                                                                                                          4.6
                                                                                                                          5.1
                                                                                                                          5.6
                                                                                                                          6.1
                                                                                                                          6.7
                                                                                                                                Standarized 10-year Difference in Unemployment Rate
                                                            Argentina                 Chile
                                                                                                                                   Argentina                           Chile

                                                      Panel C. Changes in Monetary Poverty                                 Panel D. Distribution for Monetary Poverty
                                               40                                                                 0.45

                                               30                                                                 0.40
    Absolute Change in Monetary Poverty Rate




                                               20                                                                 0.35

                                                                                                                  0.30
               (percentage points)




                                               10
                                                                                                                  0.25
                                                                                                        Density




                                                0
                                                                                                                  0.20
                                               -10
                                                                                                                  0.15
                                               -20                                                                0.10

                                               -30                                                                0.05

                                               -40                                                                0.00




                                                                                                                          10.6
                                                                                                                          12.1
                                                                                                                          13.6
                                                                                                                          15.2
                                                                                                                          16.7
                                                                                                                          -9.5
                                                                                                                          -7.9
                                                                                                                          -6.4
                                                                                                                          -4.8
                                                                                                                          -3.3
                                                                                                                          -1.8
                                                                                                                          -0.2
                                                                                                                           1.3
                                                                                                                           2.9
                                                                                                                           4.4
                                                                                                                           5.9
                                                                                                                           7.5
                                                                                                                           9.0
                                                                                                                         -18.7
                                                                                                                         -17.2
                                                                                                                         -15.6
                                                                                                                         -14.1
                                                                                                                         -12.5
                                                                                                                         -11.0




                                                                                                                                Standarized 10-year Difference in Monetary Poverty
                                                            Argentina                 Chile
                                                                                                                                    Argentina                          Chile

                                                           Panel E. Changes in 1/HDI                                           Panel F. Distribution for 1/HDI
                                       0.5                                                                        0.45

                                       0.4                                                                        0.40
                                       0.3                                                                        0.35
        Absolute Change in 1/HDI




                                       0.2
                                                                                                                  0.30
                                       0.1
                                                                                                                  0.25
                                                                                                        Density




                                               0
                                                                                                                  0.20
                                   -0.1
                                                                                                                  0.15
                                   -0.2
                                                                                                                  0.10
                                   -0.3
                                                                                                                  0.05
                                   -0.4

                                   -0.5                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                          -9.3
                                                                                                                          -8.5
                                                                                                                          -7.7
                                                                                                                          -7.0
                                                                                                                          -6.2
                                                                                                                          -5.5
                                                                                                                          -4.7
                                                                                                                          -3.9
                                                                                                                          -3.2
                                                                                                                          -2.4
                                                                                                                          -1.6
                                                                                                                          -0.9
                                                                                                                          -0.1
                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                           1.4
                                                                                                                           2.2
                                                                                                                           2.9
                                                                                                                           3.7
                                                                                                                           4.5
                                                                                                                           5.2
                                                                                                                           6.0
                                                                                                                           6.7
                                                                                                                           7.5
                                                                                                                           8.3
                                                                                                                           9.0
                                                                                                                           9.8
                                                                                                                         -10.0




                                                                                                                                    Standarized 10-year Difference in 1/HDI
                                                            Argentina                Chile                                          Argentina                          Chile
    Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). For panels B, D, and F we fitted a standard normal distribution
    taking the first two moments (mean and standard deviation) of the 10-year differences in each social indicator.
    Source: Authors' estimations based on SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank), Human Development Report Office (United
    Nations), and WEO (October 2018).


                                                                                                                                                                                      19 
 
                                                                                                              Figure 4
                                                                                       Argentina versus Chile
                                                              Panel A. Real GDP per Capita and Social Indicators
                                          Panel A.1. Argentina                                                                                                                                        Panel A.2. Chile
                120                                                                          80                                                                   200                                                                               40


                100                                                                          100                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                  160




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Index (2002=100, inverted axis)
                                                                                                    Index (2002=100, inverted axis)
                       80                                                                    120                                                                                                                                                    80
    Index (2002=100)




                                                                                                                                                    Index (2002=100)
                                                                                                                                                                  120

                       60                                                                    140                                                                                                                                                    100

                                                                                                                                                                       80
                       40                                                                    160                                                                                                                                                    120

                                                                                                                                                                       40
                       20                                                                    180                                                                                                                                                    140


                       0                                                                     200                                                                           0                                                                        160


                            Unemployment Rate                    Monetary Poverty                                                                                                  Unemployment Rate                   Monetary Poverty
                            1/HDI                                Real GDP per capita (right axis)                                                                                  1/HDI                               Real GDP per capita (right axis)

                                        Panel B. Cyclical Component of the Real GDP per Capita and Social Indicators
                                          Panel B.1. Argentina                                                                                                                                        Panel B.2. Chile 
                   120                                                                        -140                                                                         200                                                                       -300


                   100                                                                        -100
                                                                                                                                                                           160                                                                       -220




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Index (2002=-100, inverted axis)
                                                                                                                 Index (2002=-100, inverted axis)




                       80                                                                     -60
    Index (2002=100)




                                                                                                                                                        Index (2002=100)




                                                                                                                                                                           120                                                                       -140
                       60                                                                     -20

                                                                                                                                                                           80                                                                        -60
                       40                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                           40                                                                        20
                       20                                                                     60


                        0                                                                     100                                                                              0                                                                     100


                                    Unemployment Rate                                                                                                                                      Unemployment Rate
                                    Monetary Poverty                                                                                                                                       Monetary Poverty
                                    1/HDI                                                                                                                                                  1/HDI
                                    Real GDP per capita - Cyclical Component (right axis)                                                                                                  Real GDP per capita - Cyclical Component (right axis)
    Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). The cyclical component of the Real GDP per capita is defined as
    the cycle over trend.
    Sources: Authors' estimations based on SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank), Human Development Report Office (United
    Nations), and WEO (October 2018).
 

 

 

 

 

 


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20 
 
                                                                Figure 5
                  Volatility of the Cyclical Components of Social Indicators and Real GDP per Capita,
                                                    World Sample
                   Panel A. Unemployment Rate                                 Panel B. HDI - Income




                       Panel C. Monetary Poverty                                           Panel D. HDI - Education




                              Panel E. HDI                                            Panel F. HDI ­ Life Expectancy




    Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). Volatility is defined as the standard deviation of the cyclical
    component of each variable. The cyclical component for all social indicators is defined as the cycle and for the Real GDP per capita
    as the cycle over trend.
    Source: Authors' estimations based on PovcalNet (March 2019), SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank), Human Development
    Report Office (United Nations), and WEO (October 2018).


                                                                                                                                      21 
 
                                                                                                                Figure 6
                               Contribution of the Business Cycle to the Variance Driven by Income of Each Indicator, World Sample

                                                                  60

                                                                                                                                    Components of the HDI


                                                                  50
    Share of the Variance of Social Indicators Driven by Income
          Explained by the Business Cycle (as percentage)




                                                                  40




                                                                  30




                                                                  20




                                                                  10




                                                                  0
                                                                       Unemployment Rate   Monetary Poverty   HDI          Income          Education        Life Expectancy



                       Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). The figures reported correspond to the median value across
                       countries. Black lines denote two standard errors intervals (weighted by Real GDP). Estimations of the contribution of the
                       cyclical component based on a bivariate model.
                       Source: Authors' estimations based on PovcalNet (March 2019), SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank), Human Development
                       Report Office (United Nations), and WEO (October 2018).
 

 

 

 

 

                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                              22 
 
                                                              Figure 7

             Decomposition of the Fall in Monetary Poverty Rate in LAC during the Golden Decade




    Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). LAC aggregate based on 15 countries in the region, weighted
    by population, for which microdata are available at the national level: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
    Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay. See Appendix B for
    details.
    Sources: Authors' estimations based on SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank) and WEO (October 2018).




 

 

 

 

                                           
                                                                           Figure 8
                                              Monetary Poverty in LAC: Total, Permanent Income, and Redistribution
                      50.0




                      45.0




                      40.0
    Headcount Ratio




                      35.0




                      30.0




                      25.0




                      20.0
                             1996


                                    1997


                                           1998


                                                  1999


                                                         2000


                                                                 2001


                                                                            2002


                                                                                       2003


                                                                                               2004


                                                                                                       2005


                                                                                                                2006


                                                                                                                       2007


                                                                                                                              2008


                                                                                                                                      2009


                                                                                                                                              2010


                                                                                                                                                      2011


                                                                                                                                                              2012


                                                                                                                                                                       2013


                                                                                                                                                                              2014


                                                                                                                                                                                     2015


                                                                                                                                                                                            2016


                                                                                                                                                                                                   2017
                                                           Poverty                 Poverty (Permanent Income)          Poverty (Permanent Income and Redistribution)




    Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). LAC aggregate based on 15 countries in the region, weighted by
    population, for which microdata are available at the national level: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the
    Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay. See Appendix B for details.
    Sources: Authors' estimations based on SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank) and WEO (October 2018). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                                         




                                                                                                                                                                                                          24 
 
                                                       Figure 9

    Decomposition of the Fall in Monetary Poverty Rate in Argentina and Chile during the Golden Decade

                                                 Panel A. Argentina




                                                    Panel B. Chile




    Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). See Appendix B for details.
    Sources: Authors' estimations based on SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank) and WEO (October 2018).



                                                                                                         2 
 
                                                                                        Figure 10

                               Monetary Poverty in Argentina and Chile: Total, Permanent Income, and Redistribution

                                                                                    Panel A. Argentina
                          40



                          35



                          30



                          25
        Headcount Ratio




                          20



                          15



                          10



                          5



                          0
                               2003



                                      2004



                                             2005



                                                     2006



                                                              2007



                                                                             2008



                                                                                        2009



                                                                                                  2010



                                                                                                               2011



                                                                                                                           2012



                                                                                                                                       2013



                                                                                                                                                   2014



                                                                                                                                                          2015



                                                                                                                                                                 2016



                                                                                                                                                                        2017
                                                    Poverty          Poverty (Permanent Income)          Poverty (Permanent Income and Redistribution)



                                                                                      Panel B. Chile
                          30




                          25




                          20
        Headcount Ratio




                          15




                          10




                          5




                          0
                               2003



                                      2004



                                             2005



                                                     2006



                                                              2007



                                                                             2008



                                                                                        2009



                                                                                                  2010



                                                                                                               2011



                                                                                                                           2012



                                                                                                                                       2013



                                                                                                                                                   2014



                                                                                                                                                          2015



                                                                                                                                                                 2016



                                                                                                                                                                        2017




                                                    Poverty          Poverty (Permanent Income)          Poverty (Permanent Income and Redistribution)

    Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). See Appendix B for details.
    Sources: Authors' estimations based on SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank) and WEO (October 2018). 



                                                                                                                                                                               26 
 
                                                                        Figure 11
                                    Monetary Poverty in Argentina and Chile: Total, Permanent Income, and Redistribution

                                                                                                            Panel A. Argentina
                       50


                       45


                       40


                       35


                       30
     Headcount Ratio




                       25


                       20


                       15


                       10


                       5


                       0
                            1991

                                   1992

                                          1993

                                                 1994

                                                        1995

                                                               1996

                                                                        1997

                                                                                1998

                                                                                       1999

                                                                                              2000

                                                                                                     2001

                                                                                                            2002

                                                                                                                    2003

                                                                                                                           2004

                                                                                                                                   2005

                                                                                                                                          2006

                                                                                                                                                 2007

                                                                                                                                                        2008

                                                                                                                                                               2009

                                                                                                                                                                      2010

                                                                                                                                                                             2011

                                                                                                                                                                                    2012

                                                                                                                                                                                           2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                  2014

                                                                                                                                                                                                         2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                                2016

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2017
                                                                      Poverty             Poverty (Permanent Income)              Poverty (Permanent Income and Redistribution)



                                                                                                            Panel B. Chile
                       50


                       45


                       40


                       35


                       30
     Headcount Ratio




                       25


                       20


                       15


                       10


                        5


                        0
                            1991

                                   1992

                                          1993

                                                 1994

                                                        1995

                                                               1996

                                                                        1997

                                                                                1998

                                                                                       1999

                                                                                              2000

                                                                                                     2001

                                                                                                             2002

                                                                                                                    2003

                                                                                                                           2004

                                                                                                                                   2005

                                                                                                                                          2006

                                                                                                                                                 2007

                                                                                                                                                        2008

                                                                                                                                                               2009

                                                                                                                                                                      2010

                                                                                                                                                                             2011

                                                                                                                                                                                    2012

                                                                                                                                                                                           2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                  2014

                                                                                                                                                                                                         2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                                2016

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2017




                                                                      Poverty            Poverty (Permanent Income)               Poverty (Permanent Income and Redistribution)

    Notes: Poverty line of 5.50 dollars per person a day (2011 PPP). See Appendix B for details.
    Sources: Authors' estimations based on SEDLAC (CEDLAS and World Bank) and WEO (October 2018). 




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       27 
 
Appendix A: Sample of Countries
Due to data availability, the sample of countries differs by social indicator. The largest sample is given
by the HDI indicator and includes Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Dem. Rep., Congo, Rep., Costa
Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Arab Rep., El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, The, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hong Kong SAR, China, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Islamic Rep., Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Korea, Rep., Kuwait, Kyrgyz Republic, Lao PDR, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Macedonia, FYR, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia, Fed. Sts., Moldova, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, São Tomé and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom,
United States, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Rep., Zambia, and
Zimbabwe.



Appendix B: Poverty Data
Most of the data for monetary poverty comes from PovcalNet, an interactive computational tool that
allows users to replicate the calculations made by World Bank researchers when estimating the extent
of absolute poverty in the world.
The PovcalNet data for LAC are taken from the Socio-Economic Database for Latin America and
the Caribbean (SEDLAC). SEDLAC was developed by the Center for Distributional, Labor, and
Social Studies (CEDLAS) of the Universidad Nacional de La Plata (Argentina), in partnership with
the Latin America team of the World Bank's Poverty and Equity Group. Methodological and technical
revisions to the SEDLAC project began in 2015 to better align its data with the household surveys




                                                                                                       28 
 
harmonized by the World Bank for other regions. These revisions of the welfare aggregate constitute
the move of the SEDLAC project from version 02 to version 03.21
As the revision of this project is still in process, data reported in PovcalNet are based on SEDLAC-
03 for most recent years and on SEDLAC-02 for previous years, with the cut-off period being
generally the year 2000 (except for Argentina, for which data using SEDLAC-03 begins in 2003, and
Chile, which uses SEDLAC-02 throughout the whole period). Given this problem of comparability,
we recalculate headcount ratios for some countries so that the SEDLAC version used in each country
is the same for the whole period under analysis.22 Because of this, poverty rates for some countries
and years may differ from the figures reported in PovcalNet.
Table B.1 summarizes the data used for each country.

                                                                      Table B.1

                                                         Data Summary for Poverty Calculations

                                                                                             SEDLAC
                                   Country                                      Period
                                                                                              version
                                   Argentina                                  1991-2017          02
                                   Bolivia                                    1997-2017          02
                                   Brazil                                     1992-2017          03
                                   Chile                                      1990-2015          02
                                   Colombia                                   2001-2017          03
                                   Costa Rica                                 1990-2017          03
                                   Dominican Republic                         2000-2016          03
                                   Ecuador                                    2003-2017          03
                                   El Salvador                                1995-2017          02
                                   Honduras                                   1991-2017          02
                                   Mexico                                     1992-2014          03
                                   Panama                                     1995-2017          03
                                   Paraguay                                   1995-2017          02
                                   Peru                                       1997-2017          03
                                   Uruguay                                    1995-2017          03




                                                            
21 For details on the main methodological changes in SEDLAC-03 that directly affect welfare measurement, see Atamanov

et al. (2018).
22 Notice that even though the SEDLAC project may remain the same, the frequent changes in survey methodologies over

time introduce comparability issues with previous surveys that are difficult to deal with. In addition, there are comparability
issues across countries since national agencies often use different survey standards. However, we can still draw general
conclusions from the available data.

                                                                                                                            29 
 
