                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  STRICT VOTER IDENTIFICATION LAWS, TURNOUT, AND ELECTION OUTCOMES

                                       Mark Hoekstra
                                       Vijetha Koppa

                                     Working Paper 26206
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26206


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




We thank the Private Enterprise Research Center at Texas A&M University for financial
assistance. We thank Zachary Kalmbach and Roger "Kirk" Reese Jr. for their able research
assistance. We thank seminar participants at the 2018 Southern Economic Association conference
for their valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Mark Hoekstra and Vijetha Koppa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Strict Voter Identification Laws, Turnout, and Election Outcomes
Mark Hoekstra and Vijetha Koppa
NBER Working Paper No. 26206
August 2019
JEL No. J15,J16,K42

                                           ABSTRACT

Since 2000, ten states have enacted strict voter identification laws, which require that voters show
identification in order for their votes to count. While proponents argue these laws prevent voter
fraud and protect the integrity of elections, opponents argue they disenfranchise low-income and
minority voters. In this paper, we document the extent to which these laws can affect voter
turnout and election outcomes. We do so using historical data on more than 2,000 races in Florida
and Michigan, which both allow and track ballots cast without identification. Results indicate that
at most only 0.10% and 0.31% of total votes cast in each state were cast without IDs. Thus, even
under the extreme assumption that all voters without IDs were either fraudulent or would be
disenfranchised by a strict law, the enactment of such a law would have only a very small effect
on turnout. Similarly, we also show under a range of conservative assumptions that very few
election results could have been flipped due to a strict law. Collectively, our findings indicate that
even if the worst fears of proponents or critics were true, strict identification laws are unlikely to
have a meaningful impact on turnout or election outcomes.


Mark Hoekstra
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
3087 Allen Building
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
markhoekstra@tamu.edu

Vijetha Koppa
Institute of Management Technology
Dubai International Academic City
Dubai
United Arab Emirates
vijetha.koppa@gmail.com
1. Introduction

    From 2000 to 2018, 20 states enacted voter identification requirements, bringing the total to
34. The most pronounced shift has been toward strict voter identification; Figure 1 shows that
while zero states had such laws in 2000, ten states had enacted (and sustained) such laws as of
2018. Under strict requirements, votes are counted only if the voter produces a photo ID (seven
states) or non-photo ID (three states) within a specified period of time (NCLS, 2019). These laws
are the most controversial and have come under immense public and legal scrutiny.1 Proponents
argue these laws are necessary for protecting the election process from fraud and note that
identification is required for other normal life activities. Critics argue that voter impersonation
fraud is rare and that the laws are designed to disenfranchise low-income and minority voters.
They also note that as many as 11 percent of American adults lack a valid photo ID required to
vote, and argue there are significant costs and impediments associated with acquiring a valid ID
(Brennan Center of Justice, 2006). The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the potential effects of
these strict voter identification laws on voter turnout and election outcomes.
    Assessing the causal impact of these laws is difficult for multiple reasons. First, the
combination of infrequent elections and the recent enactment of these laws means there are few
post-law observations with which to assess the effects. Similarly, the infrequency of elections
makes it difficult to assess the parallel trends assumption of the commonly-used differences-in-
differences approach. Evaluation is made further difficult by the fact that the vast majority of
prospective voters have IDs. This means that any effect is averaged across either all voters or
certain subgroups of voters, many or most of whom could not have been affected by the law. In
addition, it is difficult to know whether the idiosyncrasies of different elections lead to differential
effects across groups more and less affected by these laws. Finally, numerous legal challenges
have made it difficult for prospective voters to know whether a strict ID law was in place for a
given election. For example, Texas's strict voter law was enacted in May of 2011, struck down by
a federal court in August of 2012, reinstated in June of 2013, struck down again in October of
2014, reinstated five days later, and ultimately struck down by the U.S. 5th Circuit of the Court of
Appeals in July of 2016 (The Texas Tribune 2016). Eventually, Texas passed a non-strict version



1
 Indeed, absent legal challenges resulting in the overturning of strict laws in Pennsylvania and Missouri and a
softening to non-strict laws in Texas and Arkansas, these requirements would be even more common.

                                                          1

of the law in 2017, where a voter without ID could cast a provisional ballot and have it be counted
by signing an affidavit, bringing an end to the seven-year-long litigation (The Texas Tribune
2018). While Texas is perhaps an extreme example, the general legal ambiguity of these laws
raises questions as to whether voters correctly perceived whether the law was in effect and what
the law required.
   To overcome these challenges, we take a novel approach to addressing these laws' impact on
turnout and election outcomes. Rather than attempt to identify effects using a typical policy
evaluation methodology, we carefully document how many people vote without IDs in states that
do not (yet) have a strict voter identification law. Specifically, we use administrative voting records
from Michigan and Florida to identify the size of the voting population that potentially could be
either fraudulent (if you believe the law's proponents) or disenfranchised (if you believe the
critics). Both Michigan and Florida have non-strict voter identification laws, which means they
ask for an ID from voters but have provisions through which votes may be cast and counted without
the voter actually producing an ID. Michigan counts votes cast by voters without IDs after they
sign a legal affidavit at the poll as to their identity. Florida allows voters without an ID to cast
provisional ballots and then counts the ballots if the signature at the poll matches that on the voter
registration form. Importantly for this study, because of these provisions, both states track the
number of ballots cast by individuals who did not have an ID.
   Using these data, we are able to record the number of votes cast by individuals without IDs. In
doing so, we identify the maximum number of votes cast that might not be cast and counted if a
strict voter ID law were passed in these states. This enables us to show, under a variety of
conservative assumptions, the maximum extent to which a strict voter ID law would reduce turnout
or affect election outcomes. The strength of this approach is it enables us to estimate the impact of
a strict voter identification requirement without relying on assumptions regarding the
counterfactual. In contrast, we identify clear upper bounds as to the effect of the law on both
turnout and election outcomes. We view this as the central contribution of our study. The
limitations of this approach are twofold. While we can clearly identify effects for potential laws if
passed in these two (large) states, it is an open question whether the results would extend to other
states. In particular, our results are most relevant for the more than 20 states that already have some
voter identification law in place; we would expect our results to be less relevant for the minority
of states that have no voter identification requirements. In addition, while we expect our approach

                                                  2

to overestimate effects given that some people without ID will acquire an ID if a law were passed,
we do not account for effects on voters who already have the necessary ID. For example, we will
not capture effects on those who falsely perceive the law affects their ability to vote, or those who
are more likely to vote because they perceive an improvement in election integrity.
   Results indicate there is little scope for strict voter identification laws to affect voter turnout.
This finding stems directly from the extremely small number of votes cast by individuals without
IDs, even in settings where such votes are explicitly allowed and counted. Specifically, we show
that a voter identification law would reduce turnout by no more than 0.06 percent in Florida, and
0.2 percent in Michigan. This suggests that at least in these two states, very few civilians without
IDs choose to vote, even when they can.
   Unsurprisingly, the small effects on turnout imply there are very few races in our sample that
could have been affected by a strict voter ID law. Even under the most extreme assumption ­ that
all votes cast without an ID for the winner (and none for the runner-up) would be excluded under
a strict law ­ we estimate that a strict law could have changed the election outcome in fewer than
0.35 and 0.09 percent of local and state/national elections in Florida, respectively. Similarly, we
show that fewer than 0.55 percent of state and national elections in Michigan could have been
affected. Estimates under more reasonable assumptions result in even smaller (and likely more
accurate) potential electoral impacts. In short, the evidence presented here indicates that even if
the worst fears of critics or proponents were true ­ that all those who would have voted without
IDs are fraudulent, or all would be disenfranchised ­ it would have at most a tiny effect on election
turnout or outcomes.
       To our knowledge, this is the first paper to use administrative data to carefully document
the number of civilians who voted without ID, and the number of elections that could potentially
be affected by strict voter identification laws. In doing so, it complements two other strands of
literature on voter identification laws. The first has focused on estimating the number of people in
the general population who lack the identification necessary to satisfy strict voter identification
laws. Estimates are generally nontrivial, giving rise to concern about these laws' potential effects.
A national survey sponsored by the Brennan Center for Justice (2006) reports that nearly 7% of
United States citizens did not have ready access to documents providing proof of citizenship and
as many as 11% of citizens lacked government-issued photo identification. Studies have also
documented that the lack of identification is concentrated among those who were low-income,

                                                  3

female (often due to name change after marriage), elderly, African-American, or Hispanic
(Brennan Center for Justice 2006; Barreto, Nuno, and Sanchez, 2009). Similarly, the American
National Elections Survey indicates that 7% of citizens lack a government-issued photo ID (Perez
2015). The estimates in this paper do not necessarily imply those estimates are overstated. Rather,
it is possible that the vast majority of individuals without identification do not vote even in the
absence of a strict ID requirement. This could be because they have little interest in voting, or
because they mistakenly believe that their vote will not be counted if they do not have an ID,
despite efforts by the states to make it clear the votes can count.2 Regardless, our results indicate
that a change from a non-strict voter ID law to a strict law--which is the margin over which the
most serious legal challenges have been raised--is unlikely to have a meaningful effect on voter
turnout or election outcomes.
         In addition, our paper also contributes to the literature that uses policy evaluation
methodologies such as difference-in-differences to identify the effect of these laws. Results from
those studies are mixed. Milyo (2007) compares changes across counties in Indiana and finds
surprising evidence of increased turnout among counties with higher proportions of democrats.
Hopkins, Meredith, Morse, Smith, and Yoder (2017) compare changes across Virginia precincts
with different proportions of civilians over 85 or without a driver's license. They report increases
in turnout for the most affected precincts following Virginia's change to a strict photo
identification law. Esposito, Focanti, and Hastings (2019) and Bestenbostel (2019) use data from
Rhode Island and Texas, respectively, to assess the impact of strict voter identification laws. Both
use difference-in-differences approaches, and cleverly use administrative data on residents that did
and did not have drivers' licenses to define treatment and control groups. Both papers find
significant declines in voter turnout; Esposito, Focanti, and Hastings (2019) estimate that turnout
in Rhode Island was reduced by 2.7 percentage points among those without drivers' licenses and
0.42 percentage points overall, and Bestenbostel (2019) estimates turnout in Texas was reduced
by 7.6 percentage points among those without drivers' licenses and 1.8 percentage points overall.3
The advantage of our approach relative to these studies is we can assess the prospective effects of

2
  Both Florida and Michigan clearly state that votes can be counted even if the voter does not have an ID. See
http://dos.myflorida.com/elections/for-voters/voting/election-day-voting/ and
https://www.michigan.gov/sos/0,4670,7-127-29836-202520--F,00.html.
3
  There is also a large and growing literature in political science, with mixed results. For example, Hajnal, Lajevardi,
and Nielson (2017) report that voter identification laws suppress minority votes, a result that was disputed by
Grimmer et al. (2018), and supported by Hajnal, Kuk, and Lajevardi (2018, 2019). See Highton (2017) for a review.

                                                           4

the laws without making assumptions about the counterfactual. In doing so, our study is most
similar to Henninger, Meredith, and Morse (2018), who study a random sample of affidavits cast
in Michigan in 2016 and find that those without IDs make up 0.6 percent of voters, and that
nonwhites are 2.5 to 6 times as likely to not have ID compared to whites.
       Our results suggest the practical importance of strict voter identification laws is likely
overstated. Specifically, our findings indicate that unless civilians without identification in other
states vote at much higher rates than their counterparts in Michigan and Florida, or unless the laws
affect the voting of citizens who have IDs, the passage of these laws is unlikely to affect voting
behavior and election outcomes.


2. Background and Data

   In order to assess the impact of strict voter identification laws, we carefully document the
extent to which citizens vote without IDs in states that have not yet enacted strict laws. In doing
so, our objective is to estimate the upper bound for the effect these laws could have on turnout and
election outcomes.
   As alluded to earlier, we use this approach rather than a more conventional policy evaluation
approach for several reasons. First, because these laws have been enacted recently, and because
elections occur infrequently, there are relatively few post-law observations with which to identify
effects using an approach such as difference-in-differences. In addition, because most of the strict
laws enacted faced legal challenges, there was significant uncertainty facing citizens as to whether
the law would be in effect at the time of the election. Finally, policy evaluation methods necessarily
require assumptions about counterfactual behavior. For example, a difference-in-differences
approach assumes that those believed to be less likely to have a satisfactory ID would have changed
their voting behavior over time similar to those with IDs. While there are various informal tests
that can speak to the likelihood that these assumptions hold--such as parallel pre-trends--there is,
of course, no way to know with certainty whether the assumptions hold. In addition, turnout in
elections can be driven by idiosyncratic factors, of which there have been many. For example,
recent presidential contests have been characterized by a number of firsts, including the first black
candidate, the first black incumbent president, the first female candidate, and Donald Trump. This
increases the likelihood of idiosyncratic shocks that affect one group differentially compared to
another. As a result, we instead focus on providing a careful descriptive analysis of the prevalence

                                                  5

of voting without identification.
           Specifically, we use data from Michigan and Florida, two states with non-strict voter
identification laws. In both states, a picture id is required for a person to cast a normal ballot. In
the absence of an accepted form of identification, the person will be required to cast a provisional
ballot. In Florida, the voter is required to sign the provisional ballot, which is then counted if it
matches the voter's signature in the registration record. In Michigan, voters without the proper
identification are required to cast affidavit ballots confirming their identity and their lack of
possession of an acceptable form of identification. The affidavit is shown in Appendix Figure A1.4
These ballots will then be counted along with all the other ballots. In Michigan, the number of
affidavit ballots corresponds exactly to the number of votes cast without an ID. In Florida,
provisional ballots can be cast for other reasons as well. These include a voter not bringing a
previously requested absentee ballot when attempting to vote at the polls, a voter's name not found
in the register, and an inability to establish voter eligibility. As a result, for Florida, we use more
detailed data collected from individual counties to conservatively estimate the fraction of
provisional ballots cast due to the lack of identification.
       One potential concern with using these data is that voters may not know that they can vote
without the requested identification. While it is difficult for us to assess voters' perceptions of the
requirement, both states make it clear that votes can be cast and counted without identification.
The Florida Division of Elections website states "If you do not bring proper ID, you can still vote
a provisional ballot. As long as you are eligible and voted in the proper precinct, your provisional
ballot will count provided the signature on your provisional ballot matches the signature in your
registration record" (Florida Division of Elections, 2019). Similarly, the Michigan Secretary of
State Office website states "Michigan does have a voter identification requirement at the polls.
Voters are asked to present an acceptable photo ID such as a Michigan driver's license or
identification card. Please note that voters who do not have an acceptable form of ID or failed to
bring it with them to the polls still can vote. They simply sign a brief affidavit stating that they're
not in possession of a photo ID. Their ballots are included with all others and counted on Election
Day" (Michigan Secretary of State, 2019).
       We use two datasets from Florida. The first covers local races (i.e., county and below), was
obtained from county websites and contains granular election results including information on the

4
    Filing a false affidavit is punishable by a fine up to $1,000, imprisonment for up to five years, or both.

                                                              6

different types of votes cast (regular, absentee, early, provisional, etc.) for each candidate in a race.
We were able to extract these detailed data for 858 general and primary races in nine counties
between 2008 and 2012. Details of the counties and election years for which we observe these data
are shown in Appendix Table A1.
    The second dataset we use is also from Florida and is used to assess turnout for state and
national elections. We obtained county-level election results including the number of ballots cast
for each candidate in every race (Florida Division of Elections 2017a) and county-level data on
the number of provisional ballots cast (Florida Division of Elections 2017b) for all general
elections from 2004 to 2016 from the Florida Division of Elections website. For each state and
national level race in the data, we calculate the number of provisional ballots by summing the
number of provisional ballots cast in all counties within the jurisdiction of the race. We also
aggregate vote counts across counties by candidate to determine the winner and runner-up.
    Our third dataset is from Michigan. We obtained election results at the precinct level for all
general elections from 2004 to 2016 (Michigan Secretary of State 2017a) and county-level data on
the number of affidavit ballots cast in general elections from 2012 to 2016 (Michigan Secretary of
State 2017b) from the website of Michigan's Secretary of State. We note that while the vote tallies
for each candidate are at the precinct level, the number of affidavits cast is only known at the
county level. As a result, we assume the rate of usage of affidavits among voters is uniform across
all precincts in a county in an election year. We then calculate the number of affidavit votes cast
in a precinct by multiplying the county affidavit rate by the total number of ballots cast in the
precinct. Since the data on affidavit ballots are only available from 2012, the county affidavit
voting rates for general elections from 2004 to 2010 are assumed to be the same as that in 2012.
In addition, we also report results separately for 2004 ­ 2016 and 2012 ­ 2016. Finally, we
calculate the number of affidavit ballots cast in a race by adding the number of affidavit ballots in
all precincts that fall in the jurisdiction of the race. For instance, affidavit ballots cast in a race for
mayor would be the sum of calculated affidavit ballots cast only in the precincts within the
particular city.


3. Voter Turnout

    Table 1 presents our main findings on voter turnout. It shows descriptive statistics at the race
level for all three of our data sets. Column 1 shows statistics for 858 local races in Florida where

                                                    7

we use candidate-level provisional ballot data. Column 2 shows statistics for 1,132 state- and
national-level races in Florida where we use county-level provisional ballot data. For Michigan,
we show data for the 1,084 races for election years from 2004 to 2016 in column 3. In column 4
we restrict to the 445 races from 2012 to 2016, which corresponds to the Michigan sample for
which we observe affidavit ballots. The average margin of win as a percentage of total votes ranges
from 23 to 35 percent.
   As noted earlier, in Florida only a fraction of provisional ballots are cast due to the lack of an
appropriate ID. As a result, we collected data from five of the six largest counties in Florida from
general elections spanning 2008 to 2018 in order to construct a conservative estimate for the
proportion of provisional ballots cast due to lack of identification. These figures are shown in
Appendix Table A2, and they range from 3.5% to 37%. The average (weighted by vote total)
ranges from 4.8% to 18.7% across election years. We use the overall weighted average of 10.3%
as our best estimate of the proportion of provisional ballots cast without an ID. However, for our
upper bound estimate, we assume this proportion to be 40%, which is greater than that observed
in any election year for any of those five counties.
   We present figures from these two assumptions--our best guess, and an upper bound--in
columns 1 and 2 of Table 1. Since all affidavit ballots in Michigan are cast by voters without the
necessary identification, our best and upper bound estimates of the average number of votes cast
without ID in columns 3 and 4 are equal to the average number of affidavit ballots cast in a race.
   Results in column 1 from Florida indicate that our best guess as to the fraction of ballots cast
without identification in local elections in Florida is only 0.03%. Our upper bound estimate is that
0.10% of ballots cast are without ID. Similarly, column 2 shows that in state and national elections
in Florida, our best estimate and upper bound of the fraction of votes cast without identification
are only 0.016% and 0.064%, respectively. The rate of voting without ID is somewhat higher in
Michigan, where we estimate that 0.3% (from 2004 ­ 2016) and 0.31% (2012 ­ 2016) were cast
without IDs.
   These findings highlight the central finding of our paper: very few votes are cast without IDs,
even in states that do not impose strict voter identification requirements. Overall, we estimate the
rate of voting without ID to range from 0.016% to 0.31%. This is small in absolute magnitude, and
tiny in comparison to the average margin of victory, which ranges from 23 to 35 percent. Thus,
while we turn to formally estimating the potential electoral impact in the next section, these

                                                 8

findings suggest strict laws are unlikely to have a meaningful impact on election outcomes.


4. Strict Voter Identification and Potential Effects on Election Outcomes

   We now directly examine the potential impact of strict voter identification requirements on
election outcomes. These effects could, in theory, arise for two different reasons. The first is if
fraudulent votes are being cast due to voter impersonation, then preventing those votes could
potentially change the election outcome depending on the split of fraudulent votes cast for the
winner relative to the runner-up. Second, to the extent that legitimate, registered voters are
disallowed from the voting process due to the lack of identification, and to the extent those votes
are cast disproportionately for the winner, the election outcome could be affected.


3.1. Effect of strict voter identification laws on local races

   Using candidate-level data from Florida on the number of provisional votes cast, we ask how
many of the races could have a different outcome in the presence of a stricter voter ID law. Since
we do not observe which of the provisional ballots were cast because of the lack of ID, we first
need to make an informed assumption about the proportion of such provisional ballots. As
discussed in the previous section, the best estimate of the proportion of provisional ballots cast
without ID is 10.3%. However, in the interest of being conservative in this analysis, we assume
that 40% of all provisional ballots are cast without ID. We choose 40% as it is greater than the
largest proportion of provisional ballots cast without ID in any election in any of the five counties
for which we observe these data, as shown in Appendix Table A2.
   Second, we need to make an assumption about the proportion of ballots cast without the
appropriate ID that would be invalidated in the presence of a strict law. We present results under
varying assumptions, the most extreme of which is that 100% of these votes would be deterred or
invalidated in the presence of a strict law. We note that this is implausible, as it does not allow for
voters casting provisional ballots due to having temporarily misplaced their ID or forgotten to
bring it to the polls. It also does not allow for anyone without ID to acquire one after the passage
of a strict law. For each race, we then subtract the number of provisional ballots that would be
eliminated from the winner's vote count (and in some cases we also subtract some from the runner-
up's vote count) and ask whether the outcome of the election would be different.

                                                  9

    The results from this analysis for local races are shown in Table 2. Panel 1 shows results using
the most conservative assumptions, while Panels 2, 3, and 4 progressively make more reasonable
assumptions. In each panel, we first show the number and proportion of votes that would get
eliminated on average followed by the number and percentage of races whose outcomes could get
affected.
    In Panel 1 we assume that 100% of all votes cast without ID for the winner would be eliminated
under a strict law. We also conservatively assume that 40% of provisional ballots cast in Florida
are due to the lack of an ID, which is significantly higher than the average of 10% observed for
the five counties for which we have these data. Intuitively, in Panel 1 we are assuming that among
the votes cast without ID, only those cast for the winner are fraudulent (or disenfranchised), and
all of them would be eliminated. Since this is the most extreme assumption we can make, the
results in Panel A represent the absolute upper bound of the effect of stricter voter identification
laws. Under these assumptions, on average 32 votes or 0.06% of total votes would be eliminated
in a race. This could potentially overturn only three local races, which represents 0.35% of all races
in our data.
    We progressively relax the assumptions in Panels 2 and 3, where we assume that 50% and 25%
of votes cast without ID for the winner would be eliminated. Under these assumptions, we find
that two local races (0.23% of all races) could have different outcomes. Finally, in Panel 4, we
show our least conservative case where we assume that 25% of votes cast without an ID for both
the winner and the runner-up are eliminated. This is less conservative than the other cases because
we allow for some of the votes cast without ID for the runner-up to also be potentially fraudulent.
In this case, on average 13 votes or 0.024% of total votes would be eliminated in a race and this
could overturn two local races, which represents 0.23% of all races in our data.5


3.2. Effect of strict voter identification laws on state and national races

    Next, we ask whether state or national races could potentially be affected by the enactment of
a strict voter ID law. We do so using county-level data on the number of provisional ballots or


5
  The two races whose outcomes would have changed are for Town Mayor and a Community Development District
(CDD) seat. In both cases, the top two candidates received the same number of votes, and one of them received 1
provisional ballot. So, under all of our assumptions in Table 2, the outcome would change from a tie to having a
clear winner.

                                                       10

affidavit ballots cast in Florida and Michigan elections, respectively.
    To bound the effect of a stricter voter identification law on election outcomes, we need to make
a set of assumptions. First, we need to determine the number of ballots cast without ID in every
race. For the races in Michigan from 2012 to 2016, the number of affidavit ballots provides us the
exact number ballots cast without ID. For election years 2004 to 2010 in Michigan, we assume
that the proportion of total ballots cast in a county using affidavits was the same as it was in 2012.
For the Florida races, using the information in the provisional ballot reports, as before we
conservatively assume that 40% of the provisional ballots were cast because the voter failed to
present the necessary identification.
    Second, since we do not observe the number of provisional or affidavit ballots cast for each
candidate in the county-level data in Florida and the precinct-level data in Michigan, we are
required to make assumptions about the number/proportion of votes cast without ID for the winner
and, in some cases, the runner-up. Based on candidate-level data in Florida, the winners on average
received 57.9% of the total votes and 58.1% of the provisional votes. Runner-ups on average
received 34.4% of the total votes and 36.3% of the provisional votes. Using these benchmarks, we
conservatively assume that winners received 60% of the provisional and affidavit ballots in Florida
and Michigan respectively. For the sake of simplicity, where necessary, we assume the runner-ups
received 40% of the provisional and affidavit ballots.
    Third, we need to make an assumption about the proportion of voters who cast ballots without
the necessary ID that would be deterred or discouraged from voting under such a law. As discussed
in the previous section, assuming that 100% of such voters would be deterred is likely to be
extreme. Consequently, we make a range of assumptions about the share of the ballots cast without
ID that would be eliminated and then compute how many election outcomes would be changed as
a result.
    The results are presented in Table 3. Results from Florida are in column 1. Results from
Michigan for election years 2004 to 2016 are in column 2 and for election years 2012 to 2016 are
in column 3. Similar to Table 2, Panel 1 shows results using the most extreme assumption. In
particular, we assume that 60% of the votes cast without ID are for the winner, and all of them (but
none of the votes for the runner-up) would be eliminated under a strict voter ID law. We relax this
assumption in panels 2 and 3 where we assume 50% and 25% of the votes cast without ID for the
winner would be eliminated. Finally, in panel 4, we show results for the least conservative--and

                                                 11

arguably most plausible--set of assumptions, where we assume that 25% of votes cast without ID
for both the winner and runner-up would be eliminated. In every panel, for every column, we report
the mean number and proportion of votes that would be eliminated and the corresponding number
and proportion of election outcomes that would be altered as a result.
   Panel 1 of Table 3 shows that even under our most extreme assumption, only 0.04% of the
votes would be eliminated on average in a race in Florida, and only 0.19% in Michigan. This is
extremely small relative to the average win margin in these races of around 30 percent.
Consequently, only 0.09% of races in Florida and 0.55 ­ 0.90% of races in Michigan would have
a different outcome. In panels 2 and 3 with somewhat less conservative assumptions, none of the
state or national races in Florida would have a different outcome. In Michigan, if 50% of the votes
cast without ID for the winner are eliminated, only around 0.4% of races would be affected. With
25% elimination in Panel 3, only one race would be affected. Finally, under the least stringent
assumption where 25% of votes cast without ID for both the winner and runner-up are eliminated,
none of the races in Florida or Michigan would have a different outcome.


3.3. Effect of strict voter identification laws on presidential races

   Lastly, we turn to the question of whether voter identification laws could have affected
presidential races. We note this analysis is necessarily limited by the small sample of recent
presidential elections. In addition, presidential races are determined in large part by states for
which we do not have data. We note that even aside from the costs of collecting similar data from
other states, it is not possible to collect data on votes cast without an ID in many states. This is
partly because no identification is required to vote in some states (e.g., California, Illinois), which
means that there is no way to know which voters in past elections did not have the identification
required under a prospective strict law. In addition, other states (e.g., Kansas) have strict laws
under which it is not possible for votes to be counted without an ID, which also makes our approach
impossible. Finally, as discussed earlier, not all states that do allow voting without IDs track which
votes come from that process. For these reasons, we view our analysis of presidential elections as
significantly more limited than our analysis of state and local elections.
   With those caveats in mind, we are able to perform a basic extension of our analysis to
historical presidential races. To do so, we first make an assumption about the proportion of votes
cast by voters without identification. We focus on Michigan as Table 3 indicates a higher
                                                  12

proportion of ballots are cast by voters without ID in Michigan than in Florida. Specifically, we
use the fact that 0.39% of total votes in the 2016 presidential race in Michigan were cast by
affidavit--that is, without appropriate identification. Under the assumption that 60% of the
affidavit ballots were cast for the winner and that all of them would be eliminated (and none for
the runner-up), this implies that 0.234% (0.39*0.6) of votes could be hypothetically eliminated.
Recall that this is the most extreme assumption we make in our analysis. We then ask how the
historical winning margins for states in the electoral college compare to this 0.234%, which
implicitly assumes a similar proportion of voters without ID in other states.
    Results are summarized in Table 4. Panel a of Table 4 shows every state in a presidential
election from 1996 to 2016 that could have flipped under the extreme assumptions above. For
example, Donald Trump won Michigan by 0.223% in 2016, which is (barely) less than the 0.234%
figure computed above. This indicates that it is hypothetically possible--albeit still very
unlikely--for Michigan to have flipped from Trump to Clinton in 2016 had Michigan imposed a
strict law prior to the election. As shown in Panel a of Table 4, there are four other states that could
have flipped, including Missouri in 2008, and Florida, New Mexico, and Wisconsin in 2000.
    Panel b of Table 4 shows the results of these hypothetical flips on the overall outcome of the
presidential race. It shows that while Michigan could have flipped in 2016, it would not have been
enough to swing the election in Hillary Clinton's favor. The only presidential election outcome
that could have flipped (out of six total) was the 2000 Bush v. Gore election. This is unsurprising
given the famously close outcome in Florida, where hanging chads and any number of other things
could have changed the outcome.


5. Conclusion

    In this paper, we examine the likely impact of strict voter identification laws on turnout and
election outcomes. Rather than use a conventional research design that requires assumptions about
counterfactual voting outcomes, we take an approach similar to papers that document the number
of voting-age adults who lack identification. However, rather than assessing the number of voting-
age adults without IDs, we document the number of voters that previously voted without
identification. We do so in two states--Michigan and Florida--that have (different) processes in
place to allow and count such votes. In this way, we generate an upper bound as to the number of
voters whose votes could possibly be eliminated due to fraud or disenfranchisement. This estimate

                                                  13

is an upper bound for several reasons. First, many of those who vote without identification likely
do have identification and merely forgot to bring it to the polls or misplaced it. Second, we would
expect some of those without the required identification to acquire it if a strict law were passed.
Third, we make a series of conservative and even implausible assumptions to generate an upper
bound; more reasonable assumptions will lead to smaller estimates.
   The results are striking. We find that no more than 0.1% of votes cast in Florida and no more
than 0.3% of votes cast in Michigan were due to the lack of appropriate identification. This implies
that even if the worst fears of critics of these laws were true--that all those who vote without IDs
would be wrongfully disenfranchised--there would be little effect on turnout. Similarly, if the
worst fears of these laws' proponents were realized--that all those currently voting without proper
identification were fraudulent, and could be prevented--our results suggest it would be of little
practical importance.
   These results contrast with much of the existing literature. As discussed earlier, much of this
literature has estimated that large fractions of the population lack the necessary IDs to vote under
a strict law. This presents a puzzle. One potential explanation is that citizens of Michigan and
Florida are much less likely to lack IDs than citizens elsewhere. We think this is unlikely. We
believe a more plausible explanation is that either previous estimates are overstated, or more likely,
that those without IDs choose not to vote even when they can.
   Our results also contrast with many of the quasi-experimental studies that estimate reductions
in turnout due to strict identification laws. For example, Esposito, Focanti, and Hastings (2019)
and Bestenbostel (2019) estimate effects implying reductions in overall turnout of 0.4 and 2
percentage points, respectively, both of which are larger than the upper bounds shown in this study.
While it is again possible that this difference is due to heterogeneity in the frequency of voting
without IDs across states, there are other explanations. For example, it is possible that
subpopulations judged to be at risk of not having proper identification (i.e., the treatment group)
vote less in response to the law even if they have proper identification. In addition, it is hard to
rule out the possibility that idiosyncratic election shocks differentially affect the turnout of one
type of voters versus another.
   Our results also raise another interesting puzzle: if these laws affect at most a trivial part of the
electorate, why is there so much controversy surrounding them? We speculate part of the answer
may be ignorance about the size of the affected population that votes. In addition, we hypothesize

                                                  14

that the controversy around these laws may be motivated in part by a desire of each party to
motivate their base by trying to make the other side look as bad as possible. Indeed, our results
suggest that for these laws to matter, they need to affect the turnout of those unaffected by the
law's requirements. This is consistent with evidence from a field experiment in Virginia conducted
by Endres and Panagopoulos (2018), who found that informational mailers stating that
identification requirements disproportionately affect women and minorities resulted in increased
turnout by Democrats.
   Finally, we note it is difficult to know whether our results extend to other settings. In particular,
we believe our findings are most relevant for assessing the prospective impacts of strict voter
identification laws in states that already have some identification requirements. Thus, our results
are likely less relevant for states like California, which have no identification requirement. Still,
we argue that the states most likely to pass strict voter identification laws are those that have
already enacted some form of identification requirement. As a result, we believe focusing on the
states in our sample--states that have weak identification requirements already--generates results
that are most relevant for public policy.




                                                  15

References
Barreto, Matt A., Stephen A. Nuno, and Gabriel R. Sanchez. 2009. "The Disproportionate
    Impact of Voter-ID Requirements on the Electorate ­ New Evidence from Indiana,"
    Political Science and Politics 42(1): 111-116.
Brennan Center for Justice. 2006. Citizens Without Proof - A Survey of Americans' Posession of
    Documentary Proof of Citizenship and Photo Identification.
Endres, Kyle, and Costas Panagopoulos. 2018. "Information and Identification: A Field
       Experiment on Virginia's Photo Identification Requirements." Working Paper.
Florida Division of Elections. 2019. Retrieved July 24, 2019
    (http://dos.myflorida.com/elections/for-voters/voting/election-day-voting/).
Florida Division of Elections. 2017a. "Florida Department of State's Election Reporting
    System." Retrieved February 15, 2017a (https://results.elections.myflorida.com/).
Florida Division of Elections. 2017b. "General Election Summaries - Division of Elections -
    Florida Department of State." Retrieved February 15, 2017b
    (https://dos.myflorida.com/elections/data-statistics/elections-data/general-election-
    summaries/).
Grimmer, Justin, Eitan Hersh, Marc Meredith, Jonathan Mummolo, and Clayton Nall. 2018.
    Obstacles to Estimating Voter ID Laws' Effect on Turnout." Journal of Politics, 80(3):
    1045-1051.
Hajnal, Zoltan, John Kuk, and Nazita Lajevardi. 2018. "We All Agree: Strict Voter ID Laws
    Disproportionately Burden Minorities." Journal of Politics, 80(3): 1052-1059.
Hajnal, Zoltan, John Kuk, and Nazita Lajevardi. 2019. "A Disproportionate Burden: Strict Voter
    Identification Laws and Minority Turnout." Working Paper.
Hajnal, Zoltan, Nazita Lajevardi, and Lindsay Nielson. 2017. "Voter Identification Laws and the
    Suppression of Minority Votes." Journal of Politics, 79(2): 363-379.
Henninger, Phoebe, Marc Meredith, and Michael Morse. 2018. "Who Votes Without
    Identification? Using Affidavits from Michigan to Learn about the Potential Impact of Strict
    Voter Identification Laws." Working Paper.
Highton, Benjamin. 2017. "Voter Identification Laws and Turnout in the United States." Annual
    Review of Political Science, 20:149-167.



                                               16

Hopkins, Daniel J., Marc Meredith, Michael Morse, Sarah Smith, and Jesse Yoder. 2017.
    "Voting But for the Law: Evidence from Virginia on Photo Identification Requirements,"
    Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 14(1): 79-128.
Michigan Secretary of State. 2019. "Do I Need to Show Identification in order to Vote?"
    Retrieved on July 24, 2019 (https://www.michigan.gov/sos/0,4670,7-127-
    5647_12539_29836-202520--,00.html
Michigan Secretary of State. 2017a. "Michigan Election Precinct Results." Retrieved February
    15, 2017a (https://miboecfr.nictusa.com/cgi-bin/cfr/precinct_srch.cgi).
Michigan Secretary of State. 2017b. "SOS - Previous Election Information." Retrieved February
    15, 2017b (https://www.michigan.gov/sos/0,4670,7-127-1633_8722---,00.html).
Milyo, Jeffrey. 2007. "The Effects of Photographic Identification on Turnout in Indiana: A
    County-Level Analysis." Working Paper.
National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL). 2019. "Voter Identification Requirements |
    Voter ID Laws." Retrieved June 20, 2019 (http://www.ncsl.org/research/elections-and-
    campaigns/voter-id.aspx).
National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL). 2017. "History of Voter ID". Retrieved June
       20, 2018 (http://www.ncsl.org/research/elections-and-campaigns/voter-id-
       history.aspx#Chart).
Perez, Vanessa M. 2015. AMERICANS WITH PHOTO ID: A Breakdown of Demographic
    Characteristics.
Opinion Research Corporation. 2006. Last accessed on June 20, 2018 at
       http://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/legacy/d/download_file_39242.pdf.
The Texas Tribune. 2016. "Texas Voter ID Law Violates Voting Rights Act, Court Rules."
    Retrieved June 20, 2019 (https://www.texastribune.org/2016/07/20/appeals-court-rules-
    texas-voter-id/).
The Texas Tribune. 2018. "Plaintiffs Say Texas Voter ID Fight Is Over." Retrieved June 20,
    2019 (https://www.texastribune.org/2018/08/08/plaintiffs-say-texas-voter-id-fight-over/).




                                               17

   Figure 1: Implementation of state voter identification laws from 2002 to 2018


                                  VoterIdlawsinstatesovertime
                    35
                    30
                    25
   NumberofStates




                    20
                                                                                      None
                    15
                                                                                      Non-strict
                    10
                                                                                      Strict
                     5
                     0
                         2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
                                         Electionyears
   Source: History of Voter ID Laws as compiled by the National Conference of State Legislatures
   (NCSL)
   Notes: The above graph has been generated by the authors based on the historical changes in
   voter ID laws across states according to the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL).
   A strict voter ID law is one which allows voters without a valid ID to cast provisional ballots,
   but such a ballot produce if the voters produce the necessary ID within a specific period of time.
   A non-strict voter ID law is one which allows voters without a valid ID to cast provisional
   ballots and allows such ballots to be counted under provisions other than requiring the voter to
   produce an ID, such as signing a sworn affidavit of identity.




                                                  18

              Table 1: Race-level statistics on votes cast with and without identification
                                                               (1)                  (2)            (3)           (4)
                                                         Local Elections                State/National Elections
State                                                       Florida               Florida      Michigan       Michigan

Years                                                       2008-2012           2004-2016      2004-2016     2012-2016

Number of races                                                858                 1,132          1,084          445

Number of votes cast per race                                 55,342              707,621       406,923        422,962

Win margin (as a percent of votes cast)                        23%                  35%           30%           29%

Best estimate of votes cast w/o ID                              15                  132            964          1,025
(assumes 10.3% of Florida provisional ballots were             (45)                (348)         (2,953)       (3,157)
due to a lack of ID)a

Best estimate of percent votes cast w/o ID                    0.03%               0.016%         0.30%          0.31%
(assumes 10.3% of Florida provisional ballots were
due to a lack of ID)a

Estimated upper bound for votes cast w/o ID                     57                  513            964          1,025
(conservatively assumes 40% Florida provisional                (176)              (1350.4)       (2,953)       (3,157)
ballots were w/o ID)b

Estimated upper bound for percent votes cast w/o ID           0.10%               0.064%         0.30%          0.31%
(conservatively assumes 40% Florida provisional
ballots were w/o ID)b

Notes: Local election data from Florida are from Duval, Hillsborough, Pinellas, Marion, Orange, Putnam, Miami
Dade, St. Johns, and Suwannee counties and include primary and general elections (See Appendix Table A1 for
details). State and national election data include only general elections. All votes cast without an ID in Michigan are
cast via affidavit and are the only votes cast by affidavit. We only observe the number of affidavits in Michigan for
the 2012-2016 elections; for previous Michigan elections, we assume the proportion of votes by affidavit was the same
as in 2012. Votes cast without an ID in Florida are provisional ballots, the signature on which is matched to the
signature at registration for the ballot to be counted.
a
  We obtained provisional ballot reports from five of the six largest counties in Florida across general elections from
2008 to 2018 that list reasons for casting provisional ballots (See Appendix Table A2 for details). According to these
reports, 10.3% (weighted average across elections and counties) of the provisional ballots were cast due to the lack of
an ID. Consequently, we use 10.3% as our best estimate of the proportion of provisional votes cast without ID in
Florida.
b
  The maximum share of provisional ballots cast without ID in a county in an election was 37%. Thus, for calculating
upper bounds, we conservatively assume that 40% of provisional votes cast in Florida were due to the lack of an ID.




                                                         19

   Table 2: Effect of strict voter ID laws on turnout and election outcomes in local races
                                                                   Local Elections
              State                                                   Florida
              Election Years                                         2008-2012
              Number of races                                            858
              Number of votes cast per race                            55,342

              Panel 1 (extremely conservative) - Assume 100% of votes cast without
              an ID for the winner are eliminated
              Mean number of votes eliminated                        32
              Mean percent of votes eliminated                    0.058%
              Number of races potentially affected                    3
              Percent races potentially affected                   0.35%


              Panel 2 (very conservative) - Assume 50% of votes cast without an ID
              for the winner are eliminated
              Mean number of votes eliminated                         16
              Mean percent of votes eliminated                     0.029%
              Number of races potentially affected                     2
              Percent races potentially affected                    0.23%


              Panel 3 (moderately conservative) - Assume 25% of votes cast without
              an ID for the winner are eliminated
              Mean number of votes eliminated                         8
              Mean percent of votes eliminated                    0.014%
              Number of races potentially affected                    2
              Percent races potentially affected                   0.23%


              Panel 4 (conservative) - Assume 25% of votes cast without an ID for
              both winner and runner-up are eliminated
              Mean number of votes eliminated                         13
              Mean percent of votes eliminated                     0.024%
              Number of races potentially affected                     2
              Percent races potentially affected                    0.23%

             Notes: Data include 426 primary and 432 general election races. In all panels,
             we observe the exact number of provisional ballots cast for each candidate. We
             conservatively assume that 40% of provisional ballots were due to the lack of
             an ID, which is significantly higher than the average 10.3% observed in the
             provisional ballot reports from different counties. In panels 1 to 4, we make
             assumptions about the proportion of votes cast without ID for the winner and
             runner-up that would be eliminated under a strict photo ID law, with panel 1
             showing the most extreme case. Thus, panel 1 shows the upper bound of the
             effects of a stricter law on election outcomes.




                                                  20

   Table 3: Effect of strict voter ID laws on turnout and election outcomes in state and national
                                                races
                                                           (1)                  (2)                  (3)
                                                                     State/National Elections
     State                                              Florida             Michigan             Michigan
     Election Years                                    2004-2016           2004 - 2016          2012 - 2016
     Number of races                                     1,132                1084                  445
     Number of votes cast per race                      707,621              406,923              422,962

     Panel 1 (extremely conservative) - Assume 60% of votes cast without an ID are for the winner,
     and all are eliminated
     Mean number of votes eliminated                308                 578                 614
     Mean percent of votes eliminated             0.038%               0.18%               0.19%
     Number of races potentially affected             1                   6                   4
     Percent races potentially affected            0.09%               0.55%               0.90%


     Panel 2 (very conservative) - Assume 60% of votes cast without an ID are for the winner, and
     50% are eliminated
     Mean number of votes eliminated                 154                289                 307
     Mean percent of votes eliminated              0.019%              0.09%               0.09%
     Number of races potentially affected              0                  4                   2
     Percent races potentially affected             0.00%              0.37%               0.45%


     Panel 3 (moderately conservative) - Assume 60% of votes cast without an ID are for the winner,
     and 25% are eliminated
     Mean number of votes eliminated                 77                145                  154
     Mean percent of votes eliminated             0.010%              0.05%               0.05%
     Number of races potentially affected             0                  1                   1
     Percent races potentially affected            0.00%              0.09%               0.22%

     Panel 4 (conservative) - Assume 60% and 40% of votes cast without an ID are for the winner and
     runner-up respectively, and 25% of all such votes are eliminated
     Mean number of votes eliminated                 129               241                 256
     Mean percent of votes eliminated              0.016%             0.08%               0.08%
     Number of races potentially affected              0                 0                   0
     Percent races potentially affected                  0.00%                0.00%                0.00%

   Notes: We make the following assumptions in this table: 1) In all panels we assume 60 percent of votes cast
   without an ID are cast for the winner since 58 percent of provisional ballots were cast for the winner in our
   candidate-level local election data. 2) In column 1 for Florida in all the panels, we conservatively assume that
   40% of provisional ballots were due to the lack of an ID, which is much higher than the average 10.3% observed
   in the provisional ballot reports from different counties. 3) Since we only observe the number of affidavits in
   Michigan for the elections from 2012 to 2016, for previous Michigan elections in column 2 we assume that the
   proportion of affidavit votes by county were the same as in 2012. 4) In panels 1 to 4, we make assumptions
   about the share of votes cast without ID for the winner and runner-up and the proportion of those votes that
   would be eliminated under a strict photo ID law, with panel 1 showing the most extreme case. Thus, panel 1
   shows the upper bound of the effects of a stricter law on election outcomes.




                                                         21

   Table 4: Effect of strict voter ID laws on election outcomes in presidential races from 1996 to
                                                 2016
             Table 4a: State-level presidential election results that could be overturned
                                                     Win margin       Win margin                         Electoral
         Year         State         Total votes                                         Changed to
                                                      (votes)         (percentage)                        votes

        2016        Michigan         4,799,284         10704             0.223            Clinton           16

        2008        Missouri         2,925,205         3903              0.133            Obama             10

        2000         Florida         5,963,110          537              0.009             Gore             29
        2000      New Mexico          598,605           366              0.061             Bush             5
        2000       Wisconsin         2,598,607         5708              0.220             Bush             11
       Notes: This table shows the state-level outcomes in presidential races from 1996 to 2016 where the
       margin of victory was less than 0.234% of total votes. Assuming that about 0.39% votes were cast
       without ID (as in Michigan in 2016), that 60% of them were for the winner (0.234% vote share), and
       that all of them would be eliminated (most extreme assumption in Table 3) via either prevention of fraud
       or voter disenfranchisement, these states would have flipped. The last two columns provide details of
       the new hypothetical winner and the number of electoral college votes they would gain.

                               Table 4b: Overall Effect on the Presidential race
                                  Actual Electoral     Electoral college flip        Changed Electoral    Outcome
        Year       Candidate
                                   College Votes              states                   college votes       change

                                                      MI
        2016        Clinton             232           16                                   248               No
                    Trump               306           -16                                  290
                                                      MO
        2008        Obama               365           10                                   375               No
                    McCain              173           -10                                  163
                                                      FL         NM       WI
        2000         Bush               271           -29         5       11               258               Yes
                     Gore               266           29         -5       -11              279
       Notes: This table shows the effect of potential changes in state-level outcomes on the presidential race
       using data from 1996 to 2016. For the election years with narrow state-level victories, we show the
       actual number of electoral college votes received, the changes at the state level, and the overall change
       in votes. Since 270 electoral college votes are necessary to win, we find that only the 2000 election
       could potentially have a different outcome under our most extreme assumption.




                                                            22

                                       APPENDIX

   Table A1: Availability of candidate-level ballot data from Florida counties
                                           Election Years
              County             2008          2010           2012          Total
              Duval               38              19           38             95
           Hillsborough           78              34           54            166
              Marion               -              13           26             39
           Miami Dade              -               -           240           240
              Orange               -              14           45             59
             Pinellas             103             20           63            186
              Putnam               -               2           28             30
             St Johns              -               -           29             29
            Suwannee               -               -           14             14
               Total              219             102          537           858
       Notes: Each cell in this table represents the number of races for which we were
       able to extract data for that county for that year.




                                             23

                    Table A2: Sources of provisional ballot reports from Florida
                                Provisional        Counted          Percentage of counted
                     Election                                                                  Weighted averages
        County                    ballots     provisional ballots   provisional ballots cast
                      Year                                                                      by election year
                                 counted        cast without id           without ID
        Duval                      1377              126                     9.2%
     Miami-Dade        2008        1203               52                     4.3%                   8.14%
        Orange                     503                73                    14.5%
        Duval                      3368              119                     3.5%
                       2010                                                                         4.85%
        Orange                     138                51                    37.0%
        Duval                      4460              570                    12.8%
                       2012                                                                         10.65%
        Orange                     1625               78                     4.8%
        Orange         2014        139                14                    10.1%                    10%
       Broward                     466                32                     6.9%
     Miami-Dade                    744               106                    14.2%
                       2016                                                                         18.74%
        Orange                     103                37                    35.9%
      Palm Beach                   667               196                    29.4%
       Broward                     246                23                     9.3%
        Orange         2018         71                14                    19.7%                   17.82%
      Palm Beach                   553               118                    21.3%

         Total                    15663             1609                    10.3%
   Notes: We obtained provisional ballot reports from five of the six largest counties in Florida for an
   assortment of years to discern the proportion of provisional ballots that are cast due to the lack of required
   ID. This table shows the number of provisional ballots that were counted and the subset of them that were
   cast because of the lack of ID. Weighted averages for each election year are shown in the last column. The
   last row shows the weighted average across all counties and election years in our data.




                                                           24

   Figure A1: Affidavit ballot used in Michigan




                       25

