                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          WELFARE STATE VS. MARKET FORCES IN A GLOBALIZATION ERA

                                         Assaf Razin
                                         Efraim Sadka
                                  Alexander Horst Schwemmer

                                       Working Paper 26201
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26201


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Assaf Razin, Efraim Sadka, and Alexander Horst Schwemmer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Welfare State vs. Market Forces in a Globalization Era
Assaf Razin, Efraim Sadka, and Alexander Horst Schwemmer
NBER Working Paper No. 26201
August 2019
JEL No. F0,F15

                                          ABSTRACT

Globalization radically changes income distribution and triggers intense international tax
competition. Therefore, globalization entails an extensive restructuring of the welfare state. We
analyze a parsimonious model of an open economy, in its trade and finance transactions with the
rest of the world, governed by voter-majority-controlled welfare state. We analyze the
interactions between taxation, provision of social benefits, and globalization. We demonstrate
how these interactions are grounded on trade-related and macro-related fundamentals, familiar
from a standard open-economy model:

(i) Degree of trade border frictions, (ii) Degree of international finance frictions, (iii) Relative
factor abundance that determines the capital intensity of the country's exports; and, (iv) Domestic
savings and productivity of domestic investment, which determines whether the country is a
financial capital exporter or importer.

We address the issues of whether the welfare state enhances (or inhibits) the trade and financial
openness driven by diminished border effects; whether globalization chips away at the generosity
of the welfare state; and, whether the welfare state efficiently spreads out the gains from
globalization from winners to losers.

Assaf Razin                                      Alexander Horst Schwemmer
Eitan Berglas School of Economics                Department of Economics
Tel Aviv University                              Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
Tel Aviv 69978                                   Geschwister-Scholl-Platz
ISRAEL                                           Munich, 80539
and Cornell University and CEPR                  Germany
and also NBER                                    alexander.schwemmer@outlook.com
ar256@cornell.edu

Efraim Sadka
Tel Aviv University
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978, ISRAEL
sadka@post.tau.ac.il
Globalization radically changes income distribution and triggers intense international tax

competition. Therefore, globalization entails an extensive restructuring of the welfare state. We

analyze a parsimonious model of an open economy, in its trade and finance transactions with the

rest of the world, governed by voter-majority-controlled welfare state. We analyze the interactions

between taxation, provision of social benefits, and globalization. We demonstrate how these

interactions are grounded on trade-related and macro-related fundamentals, familiar from a

standard open-economy model:


(i) Degree of trade border frictions, (ii) Degree of international finance frictions, (iii) Relative

factor abundance that determines the capital intensity of the country's exports; and, (iv) Domestic

savings and productivity of domestic investment, which determines whether the country is a

financial capital exporter or importer.


We address the issues of whether the welfare state enhances (or inhibits) the trade and financial

openness driven by diminished border effects; whether globalization chips away at the generosity

of the welfare state; and, whether the welfare state efficiently spreads out the gains from

globalization from winners to losers.




Introduction


       An interesting study by the political scientist Rogowski (1992) asks why countries differ

so greatly in their pattern of political divisions, and ensuing political coalitions, when international

trade expands. He argues that the owners of abundant primary factors of production in each

country assert themselves politically more when trade globalization intensifies, while owners of
scarce factors turn out to be politically defensive. To address these issues he utilizes a standard

factor-proportion model (with land, labor, and capital). The model predicts one of three kinds of

political cleavages: "class" coalition (labor against land and capital), "urban-rural" coalition" (land

against capital and labor), or "red-green" coalition (land and labor against capital). Nineteenth

century examples are: Germany's "marriage of iron and rye", Britain's "trade liberalism", and the

US "populism". For a capital-rich and labor-abundant country, where land is scarce, expanding

trade benefits both capitalists and workers, but harms landowners. Consequently, both capitalists

and workers-the urban sector-favor free trade against the interests of landowners. This helps

explain the British trade liberalism. When land and labor are scarce, expanding trade will benefit

only capital, and agriculture and labor ­ the "Green" and the "red"- are expected to unite against

trade openness. In "frontier" countries where land is abundant, only agriculture gain from free

trade. American farmers try to expand their influence in a "populist" movement of an anti-urban

streak.


    In these 19th century episodes, however, the welfare state was nonexistent. Consequently,

social safety nets could have played no role in lessening political cleavages arising from

globalization. In modern times, however, open economies have already welfare-state

institutions, put firmly in place. Welfare states are endowed with a tax-benefit arsenal

in facing the forces unleashed by the trade-finance integration.1


                                                            
1
  There has been an already extensive international- trade literature dedicated to the political
economy of commercial policy (e.g., tariffs), which is related to our paper. See Grossman and
Helpman (1994, 2001), Hillman (1982), Levy (1997) Magee et al (1989) Mayer (1984), Mayer
and Li (1994), and Rodrik (1995). Note that our focus in this paper, however, is on political-
economy interactions between globalization (both trade-related and financial-related) and the
welfare-state redistributive policies (e.g., labor and capital taxation, and the provision of social
The main mechanism, driving the welfare-state-globalization interactions, is international

tax competition. Financial and trade integration typically lower the tax on the mobile

factor, capital; thus eroding the tax bases associated with capital income, profits, and

high-skill labor. The launching of the European Union (EU) provides a "natural

experiment". Accordingly, Caminada et al (2010) assemble a large set of EU welfare-state

indicators. They look at a variety of indicators: of social protection, social expenditures,

replacement rates of unemployment, ,social assistance, and poverty indicators.2 Together,

these indicators may provide a relatively broad picture of the evolution of social protection

in the EU. They demonstrate that the initial level of public social expenditure prior to

the creation of the EU has a negative effect on the on EU provision of public social services

well after EU has been established. This indicates that countries with above average level

of the social protection indicator at the pre-EU period, reduce the provision of social

benefits after the launch of the EU; and, countries with below average level of the social

protection indicator at the pre-EU period, raise the provision of social benefits after the

                                                            
benefits. Rodrik (2011) invokes the concept of the political economy trilemma of the world
economy, which argues that globalization, national sovereignty, and democracy (the political
underpinning of the welfare state) cannot co-exist. There are pressures which operate to limit each
one of the three: sovereignty and mass politics work to constrain globalization (e.g., the Bretton
Woods world economy with capital controls), globalization and sovereignty constrain democracy
(e.g., post 1978 China), and globalization and democracy lead to limitations upon sovereignty
(e.g., European Union).

 
2
   They linearly regress the annual growth rate of several social protection indexes of EU members on the
level of the social protection indicator at the pre-EU period. They find that the coefficient of the social
protection indicator at the pre-EU period is negative. The coefficient for absolute -convergence is found
also to be negative. This an evidence suggests an absolute convergence (divergence) in social protection
levels across countries.  
 
launch of the EU. They also show that there is absolute convergence towards the bottom

in social protection levels across EU countries, possibly because of tax competition forces.


The paper develops a parsimonious model of small open economy, with a standard welfare-state

set-up, where the majority of the voter population govern social policies. The purpose is to shed

light on the interactions between globalization and the generosity of the welfare, and its fiscal

structure. The paper analyzes the trade-globalization effects, and financial-globalization effects,

on the distribution of income, and the ensuing welfare-state provision of social benefits, and tax

policies.. Our analysis suggests that the role of the welfare state in the presence of intensified

globalization, and the welfare state's voter attitudes toward openness, depend on rather familiar

open-economy fundamentals, such as: (i) Factor abundance and the related factor intensity of the

export good; (ii) Import or export of financial assets; and, (iii) High-skilled emigration.3

Furthermore, and in connection to the gains-from-trade proposition, we analyze the degree to

which the welfare state, governed by the majority of the voter population, is capable of spreading

the gains from trade-globalization, and financial-globalization to various income classes, which

are different in terms of both labor and capital income. Furthermore,


The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 1 briefly reviews the topic of border effects,

and the trade globalization where the border effects diminish Section 2 briefly surveys the topic of

international tax competition. Section three financial-arbitrage frictions and their effects on the



                                                            
3
    High-skilled emigration itself might influence the attitudes of voters towards the generosity of

the welfare state.


 
direction, and intensity, of capital flows. Section 4 develops a parsimonious model of the welfare

state, trade globalization, and financial globalization. Section 5 presents the model predictions

about trade globalization and the welfare state. Section 6 the model presents the model predictions

about trade globalization and the welfare state. Section 7 concludes.


1. Border Effects in International Trade


There exists large body of international trade  literature on  impediments to trade in goods due to border 

related friction cost: country specific standards, regulations, technical barriers to trade, together with

product-specific information costs, increase border effects. By the Lerner's Symmetry, any wedge

between the domestic and the world prices applied to the importable good is equivalent to a wedge between

world and domestic prices applied to the exportable good.

 The "border effect" in international trade refers to a situation in which there is higher volume of trade

within a country compared with the volume of trade across the country's borders. Gravity equations have

been widely used to infer trade-flow effects of various institutional arrangements. They have been

esspecially successful     to explain the     border-effect puzzle. McCallum (1995) estimates a

conventional gravity model where bilateral trade between Canadian provinces, or between a

Canadian province and US state, should depend on each of their province or state GDP has and

distance from the country's centers. His study uses 1988 data, just before the Canada­US free

trade agreement was signed, Although trade economists were not surprised at the existence of a border

effect, they find significant size of the estimated effect in McCallum (1995) perplexing. Anderson and

van Wincoop (2001) study         show why previous empirical studies have had an upward bias in the

estimation of the border effect. Anderson and van Wincoop (2001) argue that border effects have

an asymmetric effect on countries of different size, and in particular, have a larger effect on small

countries. They show previous border-effect estimations suffer from omitted variables bias. They
allow the omitted variables in, and find that national borders reduce trade between industrialized

countries by still significant amounts of 20-50 percent. Chen (2004), and Chen and Novy (2011),

identify industry-specific trade barriers that are responsible for border effects such as country 

specific  standards,  regulations,  etc.  Fouquin, and Hugot (2016), use a gravity theory-grounded

measure to create a rich data set of bilateral relative trade costs. The trade costs are aggregated to

obtain world indices, as well as indices along various trade routes. They find that the post-WWII

fall of trade costs in recent times began in Europe before extending to the rest of the world.


The present paper focuses on the gradual process of diminishing border effects (that is, the

increased intensity of trade globalization) on domestic factor prices and income inequality. For

this purpose, our model applies a standard factor proportion (Heckscher-Ohlin) model, except that

factors' supply is endogenous in the model. The endogeneity of labor supply stems from the

possibility of high-skilled emigration. The endogeneity of capital supply arises from the

endogeneity of domestic savings. The model lends itself in a straightforward manner to an analysis

of the effect of the world prices of final goods on domestic factor prices a la Stolper and Samuelson

(1941). In addition, the model includes a reinforcing effect whereby the change in the domestic

factor prices, triggers capital formation through savings a la Rybsczinski (1955). Increased trade

globalization intensity means simply an exogenous reduction in the wedge between world prices

and domestic final good prices. Naturally, this Stolper-Samuelson type changes in domestic factor

price changes trigger a standard reallocation process of domestic factors of production across

sectors and affect the prices of domestic factors of production. Furthermore, the ensuing changes

in factor prices trigger changes in savings and capital formation. The induced changes in high-

skilled emigration and capital formation lead in turn to changes in the factor supply. The latter
work through the Rybsczinski mechanism on re-configuration of sectoral outputs, and thus, the

volume of international trade.




2. International Tax Competition


Financial globalization triggers tax competition among countries, and the possibility of a "race to

the bottom".4 As a result, the tax burden may shift from the highly mobile factors (e.g. capital and

top-skilled labor) to the weakly mobile factors (e.g. low-skill labor). This shift has first-order

implications for both the functional and the size distribution of income. A country that imposes

high tax rates may push mobile factors (especially capital) abroad where the country cannot

effectively tax them, eroding its own tax base and lowering domestic economic activity at the same

time. It            may significantly affect corporate financing and location decisions of both US, and

European, multinational groups. In consequence, the enhanced competitive pressure could result

in an erosion of foreign countries' tax bases and an associated loss in tax revenue triggering a new

wave of international tax competition. 5 Figure 1 gives evidence for the intensity of corporate tax

competition following the launch of the European Union.



                                                            
4
  The Economist magazine put it succinctly: "Globalization is a tax problem for three reasons. First, firms have more 
freedom over where to locate. This will make it harder for a country to tax a business much more heavily than its 
competitors will. Second, globalization makes it hard to decide where a company should pay tax, regardless of 
where it is based. This gives them [the companies] plenty of scope to reduce tax bills by shifting operations around 
or by creating transfer pricing. Third, globalization nibbles away at the edges of taxes on Individuals. It is harder to 
tax personal income because skilled professional workers are more mobile than they were two decades ago." 
5 Michael Devereux, Rachel Griffith and Alexander Klemm (2002) analyze the development of taxes on corporate 
income in EU and G7 countries over the 1980s and the 1990sthey establish that tax revenues on profitable 
investments had fallen. In particular, taxes on income earned by multinational firms are subject to tax competition 
forces. Additional evidence pertaining to international tax competition for relatively mobile portfolio investments, 
so that a country with more mobility has lower capital tax rates, is abundant. See empirical support for the 
hypothesis in Hines (1999), Sorensen (2002), Besley, Griffith and Klemm (2001), Devereux and Griffith (2002), and 
Lassen and Sorensen (2002), Razin, Sadka, and Nam (2004), and Krautheim and SchmidtEisenhor (2011). 
                   Figure 1: Hall-Jorgenson Effective Tax Rates on Corporate Income: Selected EU Countries




                   Notes:
70%




60%




50%




                                                                                                                                                   Finland:

40%                                                                                                                                                Sweden:
                                                                                                                                                   Germany:
                                                                                                                                                   Austria:
                                                                                                                                                   UK:
%




                                                                                                                                                   Belgium
30%
                                                                                                                                                   Denmark:
                                                                                                                                                   France:
                                                                                                                                                   Italy:
                                                                                                                                                   Luxembourg:
20%                                                                                                                                                Spain:
                                                                                                                                                   Portugal:
                                                                                                                                                   Netherlands:
                                                                                                                                                   Ireland:

10%




    0%
         74   75    76   77   78   79   80   81   82   83   84   85   86   87     88   89   90   91   92   93   94   95   96   97   98   99   00


                                                                                year




                   Notes: Hall and Jorgenson (1967).
Assumptions: Equity finance, r = 4 %, inflation rate  = 4 %,  = 20 %, Normal tax life = 10

years. Countries (from top to bottom): Finland, Sweden, Germany, Austria, UK, Belgium

Denmark, France, Italy, Luxemburg, Spain, Portugal, Netherlands, Ireland. 6


3. Frictions in International-Finance Arbitrage


We capture the degree of financial globalization by the ease with which capital flows from one

country to another. We assume a pure source-based income taxation. This means that the country

does not impose taxes on foreign-source income of its residents, but taxes foreigners on their

income originating within the country. 7


Capital income of residents and foreigners (from domestic sources only) is taxed at a flat rate  .

Therefore; the net return on investing into domestic capital is 1                   1           for investors, where

r is the domestic interest rate.


                                                            
6
  Calculations based on the well-known work of Hall and Jorgenson (1967), who introduced the user cost of capital
approach; applied to international data by King and Fullerton (1984). Figure 1 follows the formula for the effective tax
rate on corporate income ( ), as refined by Auerbach (1983):

                                                  1      1 
                                        
                                                   1    1 
where
- Real cost of funds (real rate of return the firm must earn after corporate taxes by the instruction of its
shareholders).
 - physical rate of depreciation (assumed exponential)
 - statutory corporate tax rate
- Present value of depreciation allowances.
 
7
   Under the source principle of international taxation only income from domestic sources is subject to a tax, 
whereas foreignsource income is exempt. Under the residence principle, in contrast, resident income is taxed on a 
worldwide basis. Razin and Sadka (2017) illustrate diagrammatically the efficiency disadvantage of the   equilibrium 
under the source principle, compared to the residence equilibrium. Because (as in the DiamondMirrlees (1971); 
the  production efficiency proposition) and M the consumption possibilities frontier shrinks under the source 
principle, relative to the frontier under the residence principle, the latter is more efficient. However, tax revenue 
collection tends to be larger under the former, because of the existence of tax havens and lack of sufficient 
international tax coordination. The taxcompetition setup of source taxation is more pronounced in source
taxation than in residence taxation .Note, for instance, that tax competition has little influence on capital taxation 
under the residence principle with crosscountry information sharing. 
 
Assume that capital does flow internationally, but at some cost                                           0 per unit.8 A domestic

individual who invests abroad can thus gain only 1                                       1              , where   is the world

interest rate and   is the tax rate, levied abroad under a source-based taxation. In a small, open

economy context, the two (exogenous) variables   and   play an equivalent role, where the only

relevant variable is                                1              , which is the net of tax international interest rate.


We assume that the cost of capital flows applies symmetrically to foreign investors, i.e. their return

on investment in the domestic country is given by1                                         1            , where investing abroad

yields a return  .


The small open economy exports capital in case:


       (1) 1                                          ,


which means that 1                                                    , and therefore foreigners do not invest in the domestic

economy.


Similarly, the small open economy imports capital in case:


       (2) 1                                           ,


                                                            
8
  This cost may generate home bias of investment, as in the case of information asymmetry. See Razin, Sadka, and 
Yuen (1998). The parameter  captures (albeit in a reduced form) a group of frictions, contractual and
informational. Such frictions, which affect the volume and the composition and the volatility of international capital
flows, cause deviations from the "law of one rate of return". As an example, foreign direct investors get more
efficient outcomes than foreign portfolio investors do. The reason is that foreign direct investors have direct control
over management. Thus, they are able to make a better-informed decision of how to run the business. However, the
better information mires FDI investors with the "lemons" problem: If the investors' liquidity in the source country
dries up, forcing the investors to sell off their foreign subsidiaries, market participants would not know whether the
subsidiary is liquidated because of the investors' liquidity problems, or because of bad inside information about the
profitability of the subsidiary. Consequently, the market will place a discount on assets sold by an FDI investor, who
has the inside information, unlike the foreign portfolio investment, which has no inside information about
profitability of the investment. The "law of one rate of return" is not applicable to foreign direct investment because
of the "lemon problem". See Goldstein and Razin (2006). 
which means that    1                   , and therefore the residents of the small open economy

do not wish to invest abroad.


Remarkably, the foreign tax parameter,   , with which the domestic tax rate,  , competes, and

the financial globalization parameter,  , have similar effects on the small open economy when it

exports capital; but the opposite effects when it imports capital. Specifically, when   and  fall,

then capital export is boosted in the capital-export case. This is because the net return abroad to

domestic savers rises. Therefore simulating the tax competition effect on the welfare state

economy of reduced   is equivalent to the effect of a reduced  ; both indicate that the

globalization forces intensify. However, in the capital import case, a fall in   the net return

abroad to foreign savers increases, and therefore capital imports by the domestic economy

diminishes. A fall in  however raises the net return for foreign investors in the domestic

economy, which boosts capital, imports. Therefore simulating the tax competition effect on the

welfare state economy of reduced   has the opposite effect of a reduced  .




4. A Parsimonious Model


The paper's focus is twofold: (i) the effects of globalization on the volumes of capital flows, the

volume of trade, the emigration of high-skill labor, and income distribution; and, (ii) the role of

the welfare state, as shaped by majority voting, in enhancing the welfare of many (rather than just

a few) income groups in the presence of globalization and tax competition forces.
To put trade and financial globalization, tax competition, high-skilled emigration, and the

generosity of the welfare state, all in a coherent analytical framework, we develop here a political-

economy model, where the welfare state parameters (taxes and social benefits) are determined

through majority voting9. It is a stripped-down model consisting of the essential (minimal)

features, which allow us to analyze these issues.


To enable us to consider trade in goods we assume that there minimally are two tradable goods (x

and y). In the absence of uncertainty and differentiated products, each sector will either export or

import its standard product, but not both at the same time. World prices of x and y are exogenously

given for our small open economy with good x serving as a numeraire, whose price is normalized

to one, and the world price of y is denoted by p*.




There is an impediment to trade in goods. Specifically, goods can be exported, but again only at

some border related friction cost (e.g., country specific standards, regulations, etc.). For

concreteness of the notation, we consider y as an export good. A similar and straightforward

notation applies when x is the export good.10 We denote this cost per unit of price by  , so that

the domestic price of the export good y is


                                                                  
    (3)                                                               .



                                                            
9
     This is an extension of a model developed in (Razin and Sadka (2018). 
10
     By the Lerner Symmetry proposition, any wedge between the domestic and the world prices applied to

importables, is equivalent to a wedge between world and domestic prices applied to exportables.

 
In order to consider redistribution issues, which are at the heart of the welfare state, we assume

that there minimally are two types of individuals -- low skilled-poor (indexed ) and high-skilled

­rich (indexed ).There are two types of factors of production--capital (K) and labor (L). The

workers have two types of skills--low (l) and high (h). Labor market productivity of the skilled

individual is 1 and labor market productivity of the unskilled individual is         1.


Each high-skill individual is endowed with  units of good x, and  units of good y , respectively,

in the first period; a low-skill individual is endowed with only             1 units of the skilled

endowements. Thus, an skilled-rich individual enjoys both higher initial endowment ("wealth"),

and higher labor market skill than the unskilled-poor individual.




The overall size of the initial native-born population is normalized to one, where a proportion  of

the population is of high skill and a proportion 1      is of low skill. We denote by          0 the

number of high-skill emigrants. Note that when          0.5, then the low-skill form a majority and

will be decisive in the voting process. When                 0.5, assuming that emigrants do not

participate in the political process, the high skill form the majority and are decisive in the voting

process.


To consider saving and investment we assume that there minimally are two periods (1 and 2).


A representative firm produces good  according to a constant-returns-to scale technology:


    4               ,                         ,       , ,
where,          is the input of physical capital, and  is labor, measured in efficiency units, used in

the respective production process.           0 is a total factor productivity coefficient, and    and

1      are, respectively, the capital and labor shares in the sector producing .


Capital is employed together with labor in the first period with output generated in the second

period. We assume that labor is paid in the second period, at the end of the production process.


Capital ( ) is a composite good, produced in the first period as of a variable mix of  and  ,

according to:


(5)                           , where 0 <  <1.


To find the cost minimizing mix of x and y, of which a unit of capital (K) is composed of, one, has

to solve the following problem:


                                                  min            
                                                    ,



                                                  subject to:


                                                                1,


where  is the domestic price of  in period              1,2.


Solving this problem yields also the unit price  of capital as


(6)                       ,


where                              .
The labor supply in efficiency units (       is given by



 (7)                                                          1        .


Demands for labor and capital are given, respectively, by the marginal productivity conditions in

both sectors. Note that because labor and capital move freely between the two sectors, then the

factors of production earn the same remuneration across sectors, that is:



 (8)                                                   1         ,


 (9)                                                 1          


 (10)                                        1                         ,


 (11)                                        1                                 ,




where  is the capital- labor ratio in sector , that is                     ;  is the wage rare per efficiency

unit, paid in the second period after the completion of the production process. Note that for

simplicity we assume that capital fully depreciates at the end of the production process.


We denote by       the consumption of good g = x,y by an individual of type i = u,s in period t =

1,2. All individuals have identical preferences, given by



 (12)                                                                               ,
where 0 < a < 1, 0 < b < 1, d > 0,                                   0, and  is a uniform social benefit (provided in an equal

amount to all individuals), assumed (for simplicity) to be provided in the second period only. This

social benefit captures the various ingredients that a welfare state provides, such as health services,

education, in-kind transfers, etc. Note that the social benefit is not a perfect substitute to private

consumption11.


Individual budget constraints for period 1 and 2 are given, respectively, by:



  (13)                                                                                             .


  (14)                                1              1                     1                             ,


where,                  is domestic saving of individual i = u, s. Observe that when                              1    

                                                          is positive, then capital is exported and equation (1) is relevant;

whereas when                     1                                                       is negative, then capital is imported

and equation (2) is relevant.


We abstract from a tax on the initial endowments because these are in fixed supply at the beginning

of the first period, and a tax on them is not distortive; it will tend to be extremely high. Furthermore,

when the low-skill form the majority, they will tax them at a rate of 100%. For a similar reason,

we abstract also from a tax on consumption (VAT) because it is equivalent to a tax on wages

(which are taxed directly in our model), and a tax on the initial endowments (see, for instance,

Frenkel, Razin and Sadka (1991)).




                                                            
11
       In our model,   the redistribution made by the welfare state is in the form of an inkind benefit. 
Consumption demands are then given by:



 (15)                                                               .


 (16)                                                                       ,


                                                               =  1         1         1      ,
 (17)
                                                       and


 (18)                                                          =                           ,.




where   is a lifetime income (in present value) of an individual of type i  = u, s, given by  

                                
(19)                                                   ,


where


(20)           =
Finally, consider the government, which is active in a balanced-budget way only in the second

period. Its budget constraint is:



            (21)                                 1                                   .




Note that the government taxes capital income of both domestic residents and foreigners which

originates in the domestic economy,               . This means that when saving of domestic

residents exceeds domestic investment,                , with the excess invested abroad, then this

excess is not taxed at home. Converesely, when savings of domestic residents fall short of domestic

investment,             , with the shortage financed by foreigners, then this shortage is taxed by

the domestic government.


Clearance in the goods market in period 1, and period 2, respectively, yields:
              1                                                                    

                           1                                                            
 (22)
                            1                       


        and



                       1                                                       1       
 (23)
          ,               ,              1                                              ,




where


                   
(24)      =                                                               .



Note that when the country exports capital (that is, 1                                              ,

then it incurrs the cost of  on its capital exports. Conversely, when foreigners invest in the

domestic economy (that is, 1                                                  , then the country pays

foreiners only 1       1     , because they are taxed on their income originating in the domestic

economy; foreigners bears the friction cost  in this case. Note, however, that it follows from

equations (13) ­ (14) that equation (22) is redundant, as it merely states that exports/imports of

goods and capital are allowed.




Clearance in the labor market yields:
 (1)                                                    .


We allow skilled individuals to emigrate abroad according to the following equation:



 (26)                                            with       0, 0             1.


where  is the (exogenously given) utility level attained by s-individuals who reside abroad. Note

that the number of emigrants depends positively on the foreign-domestic utility differential, 

 .




As for the welfare state features in the model, we assume that the tax-transfer policy (that is, the

choice of  ,  and B) are determined by majority voting. Because the individuals in each of the

two skill groups are identical, the larger group determines policies, according to its own

preferences.. Thus, when  is less than 0.5 (and so is        ), the u-individuals form the majority,

and the tax-transfer policy is determined so as to maximize the u-individual utility level (that is,

 ). This regime is henceforth referred to as the u-regime. Similarly, when           (which is not

an exogenous variable) is larger than 0.5, the tax-transfer policy is determined by the s-individuals,

to maximize their utility level,  . This regime is henceforth referred to as the s-regime.


The forces of trade and financial globalization are intertwined in their implications for income

distribution and tax-transfer policies. To get a better insight into these interdependent effects we

consider separately trade globalization and financial globalization.
We resort to numerical simulations in order to characterize these two regimes. In particular, we

study how globalization (as proxied by the friction costs  and  ), and how tax competition (as

expressed by the tax parameters  and   ) affect these two regimes.


5. Trade globalization and Welfare-State Policies


In this section we start with the study of trade globalization, income distribution and the welfare

state. For this purpose, we shut off the channel of international financial flows in the model. Our

focus is on the implications of trade globalization through these effects for income distribution and

the ensuing political-economy benefits and taxes. As we shall see, these implications depends on:

(i) the factor abundance of our small open economy and the related factor intensity of the export

good; (ii) on whether or not there is complete specialization in the export good.12




                                                            
12
     Schott (2003) points to failure of existing attempts to find support for the idea that a country's

endowments determine its production and trade. These attempts have traditionally focused on the

overly restrictive, "one size fits all" equilibrium of Heckscher-Ohlin (HO) trade theory. In this

view all countries of the world producing all goods, so that both Japan and the Philippines, for

example, are assumed to produce identical electronics and apparel goods using the same

techniques. A second, far richer equilibrium is possible within the framework, however, in which

countries specialize in the particular subset of goods most suited to their mix of endowments, so

that relatively labor-abundant Philippines might produce labor intensive t-shirts and portable

radios while capital-abundant Japan manufactures capital intensive semiconductors and satellites.
5.1 Capital-Abundant Economy


Suppose that good y is more capital intensive than good x. Suppose further that our small open

economy is more capital abundant relative to the rest of the world. This means that the world

relative price of y (namely  ) is higher than the domestic autarky relative price of good y.


Recall that we measure the degree of trade globalization by the parameter  , which is an

impediment to trade in goods (equation (1)). First, we examine how trade globalization affects the

income distribution in the absence of the welfare state (that is,                                  0 . Then, we

examine how the welfare state responds to trade globalization under the two configurations of

political power balance: (i) Skill-rich majority; (ii) Unskilled-poor majority.


With sufficiently high  , the country is in autarky. Naturally, the autarkic relative price of the

would-be export good lies below the world relative price. In this range, a decline in  does not

affect the domestic prices, as long as the economy is still in autarky. When  continues to fall,

the country opens up to trade in goods; it exports good y and imports good x. In this non-autarkic

regime, a decline in  raises, as expected, the domestic price of the export good (y) toward the

world price p* (see equation (3)). Figure 2(a) shows that as  decreases, the autarky ceases to

exist first when the skilled form the majority in the welfare state13. As  further declines, then the

autarky collapses with the absence of the welfare state; Next, the autarky collapses last (in response

                                                            
Schott (2003) develops a methodology and provides evidence in support of a full-specialization,

Heckscher-Ohlin equilibrium.


 
  The levels of   for which there is autarky when the skilled form the majority in the welfare state does not 
13

appear in the figure. 
to a decrease in  ) when the unskilled form the majority in a welfare state. As long as the

impediment to trade is strong enough (that is,  is sufficiently high), the volume of exports is

flat. As  declines and autarky ceases to exist, export rise in response to the increase in its

domestic price,  , as shown in Figure 2(b). As  rises, more labor and capital shift to the export

sector (from the importable sector), until complete specialization in the export sector occurs (and

the importable good is no longer domestically produced).14 In accordance with Figure 2(a),

complete specialization occurs first when the skilled form the majority in the welfare state. Second,

is the no-welfare-state case, and last is when the unskilled form the majority in the welfare state.

Regardless of the intensity of globalization, the volume of exports is largest when the skilled-rich

form the majority, intermediate in the no-welfare-state case, and smallest when the unskilled-poor

form the majority.15


Figure 2 (the capital-abundant case): Exports and Prices


                                              (a) The domestic relative price of the export good,


                                              (b) The volume of exports


Note: For parameter values, see Appendix.



                                                            
14
    With full specialization, the factor price ratio, w/r, becomes constant. That is with further changes in   w and r 
increase by the same proportions, and the intertemporal price that drives saving and capital formation is flat. 
Therefore, the output of exportable y reaches its upper limit and becomes flat as well. With full specialization, the 
value of output is py. From Cobb Douglas preferences, agents have constant expenditure shares. That is, price
weighted consumption of exportable is a fraction    of value of output  = , implying  = . Therefore, if y 
reaches the upper limit and becomes constant with respect to further changes in     ,      and exports,     , 
become flat   as well. 

 
15
   In the parameter values employed in the simulations, there is no complete specialization when the unskilled 
form the majority in the welfare state even when there is no trade impediment (        0). 
Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 2 suggest that when the export good is more capital intensive (relative

to the import good) in a capital-abundant country (relative to the rest of the world), then: (i) the
skilled-rich are most pro-globalization; (ii) the unskilled-poor are least pro-globalization; and, (iii)

the case of no welfare state is in between.


Figure 3 describes the effect of increased trade globalization on the pre-tax factor prices. Parallel

to Figure 1, the flat segments reflect autarky (for high values of  ). Once  falls below the

autarky threshold, the return to capital rises and the wage falls in response to increased

globalization, as predicted by the Stolper-Samuelson mechanism; see Figure 2(a), which shows

that the relative price of capital-intensive good rises. When complete specialization occurs (and

this happens for our parameter values only in the no-welfare regime, or when the skilled form the

majority), then both factor prices rise as the degree of globalization intensifies. Note also that in

the case of a one-good production the two-factor prices rise at the same rate--the rate of increase

of the domestic price of the export good.


Figure 3(the capital abundant case): Pre-tax Factor Prices


                                        (a) Wage


                                       (b) Domestic return to capital


Note: For parameter values, see Appendix.
 Figure 4 describes the effect of increased globalization on the taxes and the social benefit. There

are several patterns to note. First, when the skilled form the majority, they levy taxes on labor only.

Analogously, when the unskilled form the majority, they levy taxes on capital only. This pattern
holds even though the two classes own both capital and labor. However, for our parameter values

(the skill-premium  and the wealth disparity), the skill-rich have higher stake in their capital

income, whereas the unskilled-poor have higher stake in their labor income.16


A second related pattern is that both classes maintain the welfare state when they form the majority.

In this regard, we note that the social benefit B is essential as it consists of some goods and services

that the market does not provide (e.g., job security, health care, etc.). The third pattern is that, as

the degree of globalization intensifies, the tax on labor (respectively, capital) rises when the skilled

(respectively, the unskilled) form the majority, and then declines. Indeed each class has an

incentive to raise the tax that hurts more the other class, but at some point, the distortion caused

by the higher tax stops and reverses the rising trend. When the skill-rich raise the labor tax, the

distortion stems from skilled emigration. When the unskilled-poor raise the capital tax, the

distortion stems from both the skilled emigration and the reduced savings and capital formation.


Figure 4 (the capital-abundant case): Taxes and Social Benefits


                                                               (a) Capital


                                                                (b) Labor


                                                               (c) Social Benefit




                                                            
16
   One may wonder why there are still tax and social benefit  changes in the economy in the l autarky state as    
falls, for the welfare state regime. The reason is that the pure market forces (indicated by the graph  of when the 
welfare state is  shut off) are leading to greater exports. The welfare state reacts in the presence of such market 
pressures by levying taxes and providing social benefits which exports for a range of values of    , until its value  is 
sufficiently low. At this point, the welfare state  gives in to  the "market forces" , and exports begin to  rise.  
 
Note:   For   parameter   values,   see   Appendix.
Figure 5 describes the effects of increased globalization on the well-being of the two classes. First,

in the no-welfare state case, the skilled-rich gain and the unskilled-poor lose as trade globalization

intensifies (recall that this is the capital-intensive export configuration). Naturally, a welfare state,

which provides the social benefit B, raises utility for all, independently of who form the majority

and of the degree of globalization. When the skilled-rich form the majority, increased globalization

hardly affects the unskilled-poor (the welfare state institution therefore mitigates the adverse effect

of the globalization forces per se on them), while benefiting the rich themselves. When the

unskilled-poor form the majority, they not only no longer lose from increased globalization (as in

the absence of a welfare state) - they actually gain. They manage to raise the burden on the skilled

to raise their utility, as globalization intensifies.


Figure 5 Capital abundant case): Utilities


                                    (a) Unskilled-poor utility


                                    (b) Skilled-rich utility


                                         Note: for parameter values, see Appendix.
5.2 Labor-Abundant Economy


 We turn now to a different set of parameter values that renders our small open economy to be a

labor-abundant relative to the rest of the world. That is the autarky price of the export good which

is now the labor-intensive good (good x) is below the world price of that good (1/p*).
As can be seen in Figure 2', as the degree of globalization intensifies (that is, as  declines), the

first departure from autarky occurs when the unskilled-poor form the majority. Next, is the case

of no welfare state; and the last departure from autarky occurs when the skilled-rich form the

majority. A mirror image is what happens to the volume of exports after the departure from

autarky: it is the largest when the unskilled-poor form the majority; intermediate under the no-

welfare-state regime, and smallest when the skilled-rich form the majority.


As in the capital-abundance case, also in the labor abundance case, when the skilled-rich form the

majority, they levy taxes on labor only. Analogously, when the unskilled-poor form the majority,

they levy taxes on capital only.


 In contrast to the capital-abundance case, it is now the unskilled-poor who are the most pro-

globalization; the skilled-rich are the least pro-globalization; and in the absence of a welfare state

system, the economy's posture toward globalization is in between.17


Figure 2'(The labor-abundant case): Exports and Prices


                                                               (a) The domestic relative price


                                                               (b) The volume of exports


                                                                  Note: for parameter values see Appendix.




                                                            
17
  Mayer (1984) analyzes endogenous commercial policies that the median voter chooses based on the capital and 
wage he/she is endowed with. 
An interesting contrast arises when looking at the well-being of the two classes; compare Figures

5 and 5'. First, the gainers from intensified globalization in the absence of the welfare state (where

only market forces without redistribution of income drive the equilibrium) are now the unskilled-

poor, whereas the losers are the skilled-rich. For it is now the labor-intensive good which is
exported, and consequently the wage rises and the return to capital falls with increased

globalization. In both the capital-intensive export and the labor-intensive export cases, the welfare

state, which provides the social benefit B, improves the well-being of the two classes,

irrespectively of the intensity of globalization.


Figure 5'(The labor-abundant case): Utilities


       Note: for parameter values: see Appendix.
In the present case, when the unskilled-poor form the majority, then increased globalization

ameliorates their well-being, as expected; whereas the skilled-rich are hardly affected (again, the

existence of the welfare state mitigates the adverse effects of globalization on them). When the
skilled-rich form the majority, they not only no longer lose from intensified globalization (as in

the absence of the welfare state)--they actually gain by increasing the burden on the unskilled-

poor.




6. Financial Globalization


We turn now to the case of financial globalization. As before, we capture the ease of globalization

by the level of the friction cost  . A lower level of  means a higher degree of financial

globalization. Note that in the case of capital exports (corresponding to a positive sum of net

foreign assets position), a decline in  raises the return to investing abroad, and thereby stimulates

it (see equation (1)). In the case of capital imports (corresponding to a negative sum of net foreign

assets position) , a decline in  raises the return to foreigners on their investment in our small

open economy, and thereby accelerates it (see equation (2)).


6.1 Capital Exports


We consider first the case of capital exports.


Figure 6(a)    suggests, as expected, that a decline in  increases unambiguously the export of

capital. The mirror image of this graph is illustrated in Figure 6(b) where we can see that the higher

volume of capital exports decreases the stock of domestic capital. This result holds no matter

whether the skilled-rich or unskilled-poor form the majority; or whether the welfare state is

present.


Figure 6: Capital Exports and Domestic Capital
 (a)Volume of capital exports


                        (b) Stock of domestic capital


                        (c) Savings; Note: For parameter values, see Appendix.




Interestingly, both the skilled-rich and the unskilled-poor increase the level of capital exports,

relative to the case of no-welfare-state, for all levels of  . As expected, with source based capital

taxation in the welfare state, which exempts capital exported abroad from taxes, while levying

taxes on capital invested at home, the incentive to export capital is amplified. One may wonder

why, notwithstanding      the fact that the welfare state encourages capital exports, the domestic

stock of capital is nevertheless still larger in the presence of the welfare state, relative to the case

of no-welfare-state. The reason is that the welfare state enhances wellbeing and boosts domestic

saving (see Figure 6(c). Naturally, when the capital-labor ratio falls, as the result of capital exports,

pre-tax return to capital return to capital rises and the pre-tax wage falls.




Figure 7 presents the effect of increased globalization on the taxes and the social benefit.


Both when the skilled-rich form the majority, or the unskilled-poor form the majority they levy

taxes on both capital and labor. As globalization intensifies and the capital tax base shrinks, as a

result of capital outflows, both types of majority raise taxes on labor and capital. The social benefit,
B, being essential, consisting of some goods and services that the market does not provide(e.g.,

job security, health care, etc.) rise moderately as  falls and wellbeing is ameliorated .
Figure 7 (The capital-export case): Taxes and Social Benefits


                               (a) Capital tax rate


                               (b) Labor tax rate


                               (c) The volume of social benefits


                                   Note: for parameter values, see Appendix.




Naturally, the welfare state     which provides the social benefit B,         raises utility for all,

independently of who form the majority and of the degree of globalization.




6.2 Capital Imports


We turn now to the case of capital imports.


Figure 8(a) suggests, as expected that a decline in  increases unambiguously the imports of

capital, in the absence of a welfare state (where market forces work alone). The mirror image of

this graph is illustrated in Figure 8(b), where we can see that the higher the volume of capital

imports increases, naturally, the stock of domestic capital. Note also that when the stock of

domestic capital increases, then the return to capital falls and the wage rate rises. Naturally, very
high values of  deter capital imports altogether, and the small open economy is in a financial

autarky. Note that as  falls the economy moves out of the autarky state first in the case of no

welfare state; second, when the skilled-rich form the majority; and third, when the unskilled-poor

form the majority.18




Interestingly, the unskilled-poor lower the level of capital imports more than the skilled-rich; the

both reduce capital imports relative to the case of no-welfare-state. As expected, with source based

capital taxation, which taxes capital imported from abroad, the incentive of foreigners to invest

in the small open economy are dampened by the existence of the welfare state. One may wonder

why the domestic stock of capital is nevertheless still larger when the skilled-rich                          form the

majority, relative the no welfare state case, even though they discourage capital imports (see

Figure 8(b)). The reason is that the welfare state in this case boosts domestic saving sufficiently

(see Figure 8(c)) to compensate for the squeezed capital inflow.


Figure 8: Capital imports and the stock of domestic capital


                                       (a) The volume of capital imports


                                       (b) The stock of domestic capital


                                       (c) The volume of savings


                                                            
18
   One may wonder why there are still changes in the economy in the financial autarky state as    falls, for the 
welfare state regime. The reason is that the pure market forces (indicated by the graph  of when the welfare state 
is shut off) are leading to capital imports. The welfare state reacts in the presence of such market pressures by 
levying taxes and providing social benefits which curtail imports of capital for a range of values of    , until its 
value  is sufficiently low. At this point the welfare state gives  in to  the "market forces" , and capital start coming 
in. 
Note: For parameter values, see Appendix.


Figure 9 presents the rates of taxes and the volume of social benefits when the small open economy

imports capital from the rest of the world. When the skilled-rich form the majority, they choose

to impose no taxes on capital. They lower moderately the tax rate on labor as  falls. Interestingly,

when the unskilled-poor form the majority, they increase the tax on labor (though still this tax is

at a lower rate than when the skilled-rich form the majority), and lower sharply the tax on capital

once they depart from financial autarky and start to import capital. When the skilled-rich form the

majority the social benefits follow a similar pattern as the labor tax rate does (recall that they levy

no tax on capital): as  falls, they lower moderately the volume of social benefits.


Figure 9 (The capital import case): taxes and social benefits


         (a) Tax rate on capital


         (b) Tax rate on labor


         (c) The volume of social benefits


             Note: for parameter values, see Appendix.
7. Conclusion


The paper highlights key trade-related and finance-related mechanisms, linking forces of

globalization to the welfare state fiscal structure. The Welfare state, which provides social benefit

that are financed by levying labor and capital taxes, is governed by the majority of the voter

population. At the root cause of the interactions between the welfare state and globalization lies

the world markets, inflicting intense pressures on the welfare state. These pressures force

significaaaaat   fiscal policy changes for the economy to be able to compete internationally.

Furthermore, they radically change the capital and labor income of various classes.


We demonstrate how interactions between globalization forces and welfare-state restructuring are

grounded on trade-related and macro-related fundamentals, familiar from a standard open-

economy model: (i) Degree of trade border frictions, (ii) Degree of international finance frictions,

(iii) Relative factor abundance that determines the capital intensity of the country's exports; and,

(iv) Domestic savings and productivity of domestic investment, which determines whether the

country is a financial capital exporter or importer.


We address the issues of whether the welfare state enhances (or inhibits) the trade and financial

openness driven by diminished border effects; whether globalization chips away at the generosity

of the welfare state; and, whether the welfare state efficiently spreads out the gains from

globalization from winners to losers.
We find that when the country is capital-abundant relative to the rest of the world, then: the when

the skilled-rich form the majority, trade-globalization intensity       is the strongest; When the

unskilled-poor form the majority, trade-globalization intensity is the weakest; and, in the absence

of a welfare state institutions, trade-globalization is of intermediate strength. However, when the

country is more labor abundant relative to the rest of the then the unskilled-poor are the most pro-

globalization; the skilled-rich are the least pro-globalization; and, in the absence of a welfare state

system, the economy's posture toward globalization is in between the other two regimes.


 

In the labor abundant case,        when the unskilled-poor form the majority, then increased

globalization ameliorates their well-being largely because wages are depressed, as expected;

whereas the skilled-rich are hardly affected (again, the existence of the welfare state mitigates the

adverse effects of globalization on them). When the skilled-rich form the majority, they not only

no longer lose from intensified globalization (as in the absence of the welfare state)--they actually

gain by increasing the burden on the unskilled-poor.


If the economy channels it's saving both at home and abroad, both the skilled-rich and the

unskilled-poor, when they form a majority, tend to increase the level of capital exports, relative

to the case of no-welfare-state. As expected, with source based capital taxation in the welfare state,

which exempts capital exported abroad from taxes, while levying taxes on capital invested at

home, the incentive to export capital is amplified. Why, notwithstanding the fact that the welfare

state encourages capital exports, the domestic stock of capital is nevertheless still larger in the

presence of the welfare state, relative to the case of no-welfare-state. The reason is that the welfare
state enhances wellbeing and boosts domestic saving, which raises the domestic stock of capital

notwithstanding the rise in the volume of capital outflows.


In the capital import case, though, when the unskilled-poor form a majority, they lower the level

of capital imports more than when the skilled-rich form a majority. In both cases, the welfare state

tend to reduce the volume of capital imports relative to the case of no-welfare-state, where only

market forces drive the capital inflows. Interestingly, the domestic stock of capital is nevertheless

still larger when the skilled-rich form the majority, relative the no welfare state case, even though

they discourage capital imports. However, when the unskilled-poor form the majority, the

domestic stock of capital is smaller relative the no welfare state case, because they discourage

capital imports in excess.


Our analysis addresses the issue of how increased globalization affects the well-being of the

skilled-rich and the unskilled-poor. When the economy is capital abundant, market forces lead to

gains for the skilled-rich, and loses for unskilled-poor lose as trade globalization intensifies. This

configuration is reversed when the economy is labor abundant. In the case of a capital exporting

country, market forces lead to gains for the skilled-rich, and loses for unskilled-poor lose as trade

globalization intensifies; this configuration is reversed in the capital importing case. Naturally, a

welfare state, which provides the social benefits (a public good or a social service) that the market

cannot supply, alleviates the individual utility for all, independently of who forms the majority. or

the intensity of globalization.
Appendix:   Parameter Values 

Cross regime common parameter values 




    1                         0.25 
    P2                      0.45 
                             0.6 
                             0.5 
                            0.05 
    A1                          5 
    A2                          5 
    T                           2 
                              0.5 
    tk*                      0.4 
    Z                       0.05 
                               2 
    U*                       1.5 
    ac                        0.5 
    ak                        0.5 
    xu                        0.5 
                                1 
    xs                        0.5 
 

 

Regimespecific parameter values 

                                                          
                    Trade                                 
    parameter  value                  Figures         
     *
    p                      1.56  Kspecialization 
                                 L
    p*              0.70422535  specialization    =1/1.42 
    trade                  0­9%                   
                 Financial liberalization                 
     *
    R                         3.5  Kexport            
     *
    R                        3.02  Kimport            
    financial              0­9%                   
 
References


Anderson, James E., and Eric van Win coop (2003), "Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
Puzzle," American Economic Review, vol. 93, no. 1 pp. 170-92.

Besley, Tim, Rachel Griffith and Alexander Klemm (2001). "Empirical Evidence

     on Fiscal Interdependence in OECD Countries." Institute for Fiscal Studies.




Caminada, Koen, Kees Goudswaard, and Olaf Van Vliet, (2010), "Patterns of Welfare State

     Indicators in the EU: Is there Convergence?" Journal of Common Market Studies, Volume

       48, Issue 3, June 2010, Pages 529-556.

Chen. Natalie, (2004), "Intra-national versus international trade in the European Union:

why do national borders matter?," Journal of International Economics, Volume 63, Issue

1, May 2004, Pages 93-118.


Chen, Natalie, and Dennis Novy (2011), "Gravity, trade integration, and heterogeneity

across industries," Journal of International Economics, Volume 85, Issue 2, November

2011, Pages 206-221.


Diamond, Peter A., and James A. Mirrlees (1971), "Optimal Taxation and Public Production I:

Production Efficiency," The American Economic Review Vol. 61, No. 1 (March 1971), pp. 8-27.


Devereux, Michael P., and Rachel Griffith (2002). "The Impact of Corporate
    Taxation on the Location of Capital: A Review." Swedish Economic Policy Review.

Devereux, Michael P., and Rachel Griffith, and Alexander Klemm (2002), "              Corporate

      income tax reforms and international tax competition," Economic Policy, Volume

      17, Issue 35, 1 October 2002, Pages 449--495.

Frenkel, Jacob A., Assaf Razin, and Efraim Sadka, (1991), International Taxation in an Integrated

World, Cambridge: MA, MIT Press.


Fouquin,   Michel, and Jules Hugot , 2016. "Two Centuries of Bilateral Trade and

Gravity Data: 1827-2014," CEPII Working Paper 2016- 14 , May 2016 , CEPII. 


Goldstein Itay and Assaf Razin (2006), "An information-based trade off between foreign

    direct investment and foreign portfolio investment," Journal of International

    Economics, Volume 7, Issue 1, September 2006, pp. 271-295.




Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman (1994),"Protection for Sale," The American

Economic Review, 84 (4), 833-850.


Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman, (2001), Special Interest Politics, MIT Press.


Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenseon (1967). "Tax Policy and Investment

     Behavior." American Economic Review 57: 391-414.

Hillman, Arye (1982), ,,Declining industries and political-support protectionist motives,"

The American Economic Review, 72(5), 1180-1187.


Hines, James R. (1999). "Lessons from Behavioral Responses to International

     Taxation." National Tax Journal 52: 304-322.
Krautheim, Sebastian, and Tim Schmidt-Eisenhor (2011), "Heterogeneous firms, `profit

     shifting' FDI and international tax competition," Journal of Public Economics

     Volume 95, Issues 1­2, February, Pages 122-133.

Lassen, David D. and Peter Birch Sorensen (2002). "Fnancing the NordicWelfare

    States: The Challenge of Globalization to Taxation in Nordic Countries."

    A Report prepared for the Nordic Council of Ministers, June.


Levy, P. I., (1997), ,,A political-economic analysis of free trade agreements," The

American Economic Review, 74 (5)506-519.


Magee, S. P., Brock, W. A., and L. Young, (1989), Black hole tariff and endogenous policy

theory, Cambridge Books.




Mayer, Wolfgang, (1984), "Endogenous Tariff Formation," American Economic Review

74:5, December 1984, pp. 970-985.


Mayer, Wolfgang, and J. Li (1994), ,,Interest groups, electoral competition, and

probabilistic voting for trade policies," Economics and Politics, 6 (1), 59-77.


McCallum, J. (1995), `National Borders Matter: Canadian-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns',

American Economic Review, 85, 3, 615--23.


Razin, Assaf, Sadka, Efraim and Chi-Wa, Yuen, (1998). "A pecking order of capital
inflows and international tax principles," Journal of International Economics, Elsevier,
vol. 44(1), pages 45-68, February.

Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Chang Woon Nam (2005), The Decline of the Welfare
        State: Demography and Globalization, MIT Press.



Rodrik, Dani, (1995), ,,Political economy of trade policy," Handbook of International
Economics, 3, 1457-1494.

Rodrik, Dani (2011), The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the World

       Economy, W.W. Norton.

Rogowski, Ronald (1992) Commerce and Coalitions How Trade Affects Domestic Political

Alignments, Princeton University Press.


Rybczynski, T. M. 1955. "Factor Endowments and Relative Commodity Prices." Economica 22:

336-341.


Schott, Peter K. (2003) "One Size Fits All? Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization in Global Production"

American Economic Review, Vol 93, No 3, pp. 686-708.


Samuelson, Paul. 1939. "The Gains from International Trade."         The Canadian Journal of

Economics and Political Science / Revue Canadienne d'Economique et de Science Politique. 5(2):

195-205.


Sorensen, Peter Birch (2002). "The Case for International Tax Coordination

      Reconsidered." Economic Policy 31: 429-472.




Stolper, Wolfgang A., and Paul A. Samuelson (1941), "protection and real wages," The Review

of Economic Studies


Vol. 9, No. 1 (Nov., 1941), pp. 58-73
Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2017), "International Tax Reforms with Flexible Prices," CEPR

Vox-EU.


Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2018), "The Welfare State besides Globalization Forces," NBER

working paper No 24919.
