                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             A RETRIEVED-CONTEXT THEORY OF FINANCIAL DECISIONS

                                     Jessica A. Wachter
                                    Michael Jacob Kahana

                                      Working Paper 26200
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26200


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




We are grateful to Ernst Fehr, Cary Frydman, Nicola Gennaioli, Ulrike Malmendier, Nikolai
Roussanov, Andrei Shleifer, and seminar participants at Wharton, at the NBER Behavioral
Finance Meeting, at the NBER Summer Institute, and at the Sloan/Nomis Workshop on the
Cognitive Foundations for Human Behavior for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jessica A. Wachter and Michael Jacob Kahana. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Retrieved-Context Theory Of Financial Decisions
Jessica A. Wachter and Michael Jacob Kahana
NBER Working Paper No. 26200
August 2019
JEL No. D91,E71,G11,G12,G41

                                          ABSTRACT

Studies of human memory indicate that features of an event evoke memories of prior associated
contextual states, which in turn become associated with the current event's features. This
mechanism allows the remote past to influence the present, even as agents gradually update their
beliefs about their environment. We apply a version of retrieved context theory, drawn from the
literature on human memory, to four problems in asset pricing and portfolio choice: over-
persistence of beliefs, providence of financial crises, price momentum, and the impact of fear on
asset allocation. These examples suggest a recasting of neoclassical rational expectations in terms
of beliefs as governed by principles of human memory.


Jessica A. Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu

Michael Jacob Kahana
University of Pennsylvania
425 South University Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19104
kahana@psych.upenn.edu
1     Introduction

Standard decision-making under uncertainty starts with a probability space and an
information structure. The information structure implies that the agent associates a
value with every subset of the space and then maximizes expected utility. This is
the approach of Savage (1954). The difficulty that agents have in forming beliefs over
an entire state space has been formulated in the Ellsberg paradox (Ellsberg, 1961),
ambiguity aversion formalized by Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989) and in the alternative
representations of choice as a probabilistic selection among a small set of alternatives,
due to Luce (1959) and McFadden (2001).1 The set of possible states of nature is
impossibly large and ever-changing. Nonetheless, we as individuals do manage to
make decisions under uncertainty.
    In this paper, we propose a memory-based model of decision-making under uncer-
tainty. A wealth of data support the idea of a human memory system that maintains a
record of associations between experiential features of the environment, and underlying
contextual states (Kahana, 2012). This record of associations, together with inference
about the current contextual state, constitutes a belief system that could potentially
affect any kind of choice under uncertainty. This belief system responds to the current
environment through retrieved context. The mechanism of retrieved context is how
memory "knows" what information is most relevant to bring forward to our attention
at any given time. At the same time, any new experience, and the context itself, is
then stored again in the memory system (Howard and Kahana, 2002).
    This paper applies these concepts to puzzles in asset pricing and portfolio choice
that defy the standard Bayesian paradigm. Chief among these are the result that life
experience has near-permanent effects on financial decision making (Malmendier and
    1
      The problem of determining the underlying state space continues to be a point of contention in
recent literature on ambiguity aversion: see, for example, the debate concerning rectangularity of the
model set (Epstein and Schneider, 2003; Hansen and Sargent, 2018).



                                                  1
Nagel, 2011, 2016; Malmendier et al., 2017; Malmendier and Shen, 2018), and that
an exogenous cue, such as a horror movie, can influence financial decisions (Guiso
et al., 2018). More speculatively, we then apply the framework to a broader set of
phenomena, such as the sudden onset of a financial crisis, and the momentum effect in
the cross-section of asset returns.
   When making a decision, an agent is confronted by certain features of the environ-
ment. For simplicity, we assume that features are perceived as discrete, and that there
are a finite number of possible features pertaining to a particular decision. A feature
vector, then is an element of B n  Rn , where B n is a set of basis vectors that spans
n-dimensional space. For convenience, we assume the standard basis. That is, the
time-t features vector ft has ith element equal to 1 if the ith instance of the feature
is realized at time t and all other elements equal to zero. One can think of the fea-
tures vector as a mathematical representation of objective, verifiable, and most likely
transitory, aspects of the environment.
   Features are connected over time through context. Context is persistent (usually)
and endows the agent with an understanding of possibly latent aspects of the envi-
ronment that are relevant for the decision at hand. Context may also be subjective.
Specifically, define the context space as the standard simplex Ac  Rm , for m  n.
That is Ac = {ct = [c1t , . . . , cmt ]    Rm |  cit = 1}, where  denotes a conforming
vector of ones. We will think of ct as assigning probabilities to the underlying states
of nature, and at that point proceed in a manner similar to the standard economic
approach. Indeed, a special case of our framework will be the Bayesian problem un-
der which the agent learns about an unobserved state (context) from observed data
(features). Principles of memory, however, can lead context to evolve in ways that are
distinctly non-Bayesian.
   Whereas many applications of psychological principles to economic decision making
have focused on cognitive biases such as loss aversion and narrow framing (see Barberis


                                               2
(2013)), or on limited attention (see Gabaix (2019)) the literature on human learning
and memory offers a different perspective. Three major laws govern the human memory
system: similarity, contiguity, and recency: Similarity refers to the priority accorded
to information that is similar to the presently active features, contiguity refers to the
priority given to features that share a history of co-occurrence with the presently active
features, and recency refers to priority given to recently experienced features. All three
"laws" exhibit universality across agents, feature types, and memory tasks and thus
provide a strong basis for a theory of economic decision-making.
   While few economic models explicitly incorporate these laws, there are exceptions.
Gilboa and Schmeidler (1995) replace axiomatic expected utility with utility computed
using probabilities that incorporate the similarity of the current situation to past situ-
ations. Mullainathan (2002) proposes a model in which agents tend to remember those
past events which resemble current events, and where a previous recollection increases
the likelihood of future recollection. He applies the model to the consumption-savings
decision. Nagel and Xu (2018) show that a constant-gain learning rule about growth
in dividends can explain a number of asset pricing puzzles; they motivate this learning
rule using the memory principle of recency. Recency-bias is present also in models of
extrapolative expectations (Barberis et al., 2015) and in natural expectations (Fuster
et al., 2010). These models do not employ context-based retrieval, which is the focus
of our paper. Bordalo et al. (2019) develop a model based on the geometric similarity
of representations in memory. They focus on the the role that similarity in memory
representations plays in accounting for the propensity of agents to make large expen-
ditures on housing or durable goods when lower expenditures would appear optimal
by standard theory. Their work differs from ours in that we focus on the retrieval of
prior contextual states, and we directly model contextual evolution. In their model,
as in psychological studies such as Godden and Baddeley (1975), context is embedded
in the environment, and thus is static; the feature layer of the environment and the


                                            3
context layer are the same.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the general
form of the memory model we consider, and how we integrate it into a model for
decision-making. Section 3 describes the application to over-persistence of memory.
Section 4 shows how the jump back in time (Howard et al., 2012a) can lead to a model
of financial crises. Section 5 shows how the slow adjustment of context leads to a model
of momentum. Section 6 shows how the model reproduces a result that a seemingly
irrelevant stimulus, such as a movie, can change portfolio choice. Section 7 concludes.



2     Integrating Memory into Decision Making

Unless agents have full access to all decision-relevant information at the moment of
choice, they must use their memory of past experiences to guide their decisions. The
question of how past experiences influence present behavior has occupied the attention
of experimental psychologists for more than a century (Ebbinghaus, 1913; M¨
                                                                          uller and
Pilzecker, 1900; Jost, 1897; M¨
                              uller and Schumann, 1894; Ladd and Woodworth, 1911;
Carr, 1931). Because memories of recent experiences readily come to mind, early schol-
ars sought to uncover the factors that lead to forgetting. Their experiments quickly
challenged the folk assertion that memories decay over time, eventually becoming com-
pletely erased. Rather, they found that removing a source of interference, or reinstating
the "context" of original learning, readily restored these seemingly forgotten memo-
ries (McGeoch, 1932; Underwood, 1948; Estes, 1955). In these early papers, context
represents the set of latent (or background) information not specifically related to the
present stimulus. Such contextual information could include extrinsic features of the
environment, such as the room or setting in which information is studied (Abernathy,
1940; Godden and Baddeley, 1975), but could also include internal states of the agent,
including the current set of thoughts, emotions, goals, and concerns that form the


                                           4
cognitive milieu in which new learning occurs (Kahana, 2012). According to modern
memory theories, the set of psychological (or neural) features that represent a stimulus
enter into association with a mental representation of context, and the database of
such associations form the basis for performance in subsequent recall, recognition, and
categorization tasks (Howard and Kahana, 2002).
   In this paper, we use a dynamic model of contextual coding based closely on that
developed by Polyn et al. (2009) to account for data on the dynamics of memory search.
Consider an experiment in which the agent studies items, denoted fi , i = 1, . . . , N ,
where fi is a basis vector in Rn , for n large. Memory associates items with (latent)
context, ci  Rm via a matrix that sums the outer products of item and context vectors.
We can this m × n the features-to-context matrix, and we denote it by W f c .2 We
will give an explicit form for this matrix in what follows. The model is associative in
the sense that "cueing" with context allows the model to recover the items associated
with that context, and cueing with an item (a feature) recovers the contexts previously
associated with that item.
   Context for a current item i depends on context for the previous item and the
context associated with the new item presented. That is, context satisfies the recursion


                                      ci = i ci-1 + cin
                                                     i ,                                      (1)


where memory retrieves cin
                        i from the item, based on the prior history of associations

between items and context:
                                                   c
                                               Wif
                                                 -1 fi
                                       cin
                                        i =         c
                                                             .                                (2)
                                              ||Wif
                                                  -1 fi ||

Note that (2) implies that cin
                            i is scaled so that its length equals one for a given norm ||·||.

According to Equations 1 and 2, context is a recency-weighted sum of presented items.
   2
    Memory models such as Polyn et al. (2009) and Howard and Kahana (2002) make use of a second
matrix called the context-to-features matrix W cf . The superscript in W f c distinguishes it from
W cf . We do not use W cf in this study.


                                                5
The amount by which element values decay with each presented item is governed by
the model parameter  . In the Polyn et al. (2009) and related models, it is convenient
to have || · || be the L2 -norm. In order that ci lie on the unit circle, a linear relation
between ci , ci-1 and cin
                       i must hold only approximately. For this reason, i  1 -  ,

which is why the coefficient on ci-1 has an i subscript.3 Polyn et al. (2009) close the
                       f c
model by initializing W0   using long-standing associations (semantic memory) and
recursively defining
                                     Wif c = Wif c
                                               -1 + ci fi .                                 (4)

   Equation 4 implies an intuitive relation between a feature and the context it re-
trieves. Specifically:

                                   c             i                     i
                               Wif
                                 -1 fi
                       cin
                        i =         c
                                                       (cj fj )fi =          cj (fj fi ).   (5)
                              ||Wif
                                  -1 fi ||      j =0                  j =0



Note that fj fi is simply the inner product of fj with fi , and thus is a scalar. Under
our specification with these as orthonormal basis vectors, this value equals zero if
fj = fi and 1 otherwise. Thus item i recalls the context under which the agent last
experienced item i. If the subject experiences i under multiple contexts, the subject
recalls a weighted average of the contexts, where the weights are given by the number
of times the subject experiences fi . Also, because context is autoregressive, recall of
item i calls to mind all of the items that are near to i in the sense that they are also
associated with the context.
   Before turning to the application of the memory model to financial decision-making,
we briefly summarize the psychological and neural evidence for context as an internal
state.
   3
       Specifically,
                                   1 +  2 [(ci-1 · cin 2                 in
                          i =                       i ) - 1] -  (ci-1 · ci ).               (3)




                                                       6
2.1     Psychological and Neural Basis for Contextual Retrieval

In the memory laboratory, researchers create experiences by presenting subjects with
lists of easily identifiable items, such as common words or recognizable pictures. Sub-
jects attempt to remember the previously experienced items under varying retrieval
conditions. These conditions include free recall, in which subjects recall as many items
as they can in any order, cued recall, in which subjects attempt to recall a particu-
lar target item in response to a cue, and recognition in which subjects judge whether
or not they encountered a test item on a study list. In each of these experimental
paradigms, memory obeys the classic "Laws of Association" which appear first in the
work of Aristotle, and later in Hume (1748). The first of these is recency : human sub-
jects exhibit better memory for recent experiences, semantic similarity : we remember
experiences that are most similar in meaning to those we are currently experiencing,
and finally, temporal contiguity : we remember items that occurred contiguously in time
to recently-recalled items.
    A longstanding and persistently active research agenda in experimental psychology
seeks to uncover the cognitive and neural mechanisms that could give rise to these
regularities. Experimental psychologists have proposed many hypotheses and have
(accordingly) refined the tasks above in a number of ways. Some striking findings
include the fact that recency and contiguity have similar magnitudes at short and long
time scales.4
    Several classic explanations, though successful in many ways, struggled to explain
    4
       To measure the effect of contiguity on memory retrieval, researchers examine subjects' tendency
to successively recall items experienced in proximate list positions. In free recall, this tendency appears
as decreasing probability of successively recalling items fi and fi+lag as a function of lag , conditional
on the availability of that transition (Kahana, 1996). This function reaches its maximum at lag = ±1,
but also exhibits a forward asymmetry in the form of higher probability for positive as compared with
negative lags. Equations 1­4 generate a forward asymmetry in the contiguity effect because recalling
an item reinstates both its associated study-list context and its associated pre-experimental context.
Whereas the study-list context became associated, symmetrically, with both prior and subsequent
list items, the pre-experimental context became associated only with subsequently encoded list items,
leading to a forward asymmetric contiguity effect, as seen in the data.


                                                    7
this scale invariance. One highly influential class of explanations posits the existence
of a specialized retrieval process for recently-experienced items (short-term memory).5
A related idea is that associations chain together in the mind of the subject.6 In con-
trast, retrieved context theory does not derive contiguity and similarity through direct
interitem associations. Rather, they arise because the contextual information retrieved
during the recall of an item overlaps with the contextual information associated with
similar and neighboring items. Underlying context naturally generates scale invariance.
    Figure 1 summarizes some of the evidence supportive of context retrieval. Figure 1A
shows that interitem distraction and test delay do not disrupt the temporal contiguity
effect (TCE) seen in the relation between transition probability and lag, which speaks
directly to time-scale invariance. Figure 1B-D shows that the TCE appears robustly
for both younger and older adults, for subjects of varying intellectual ability, and for
both na¨
       ive and highly practiced subjects. Figure 1E shows that the TCE appears
even for transitions between items studied on completely distinct lists, despite these
items being separated by many other item presentations. Figure 1F-H shows that
the TCE also predicts confusions between different study pairs in a cued recall task,
in errors made during probed recall of serial lists, and in tasks that do not depend
on inter-item associations at all, such as picture recognition (see caption for details).
Finally, long-range contiguity appears in many real-life memory tasks, such as recalling
autobiographical memories(Moreton and Ward, 2010) and remembering news events
    5
      The view that recency arises from specialized retrieval processes associated with short-term mem-
ory rose to prominence in the 1960s. According to these dual-store models, separate short-term and
long-term memory stores support retrieval of information experienced at short and long time scales,
with short-term (or "working") memory holding a small number of information units through an
active rehearsal process and supporting the rapid and accurate retrieval and manipulation of that
information. According to these models, retrieval from long-term memory involved a search process
guided by interitem associations and context-to-item associations, and subject to interference from
similar memories (Kahana, 2012).
    6
      Continental philosophers saw contiguity as the result of chained associations (Herbart, 1834)
that could be easily disrupted by interfering mental activity (Thorndike, 1932). This idea took form
in cognitive models that conceived of associations as being forged in a limited-capacity short-term
memory store (Atkinson and Shiffrin, 1968; Raaijmakers and Shiffrin, 1980), perhaps arising as the
result of imagery or linguistic mediation (Murdock, 1974).


                                                  8
(Uitvlugt and Healey, 2019).
   A second source of data in favor of retrieved context arises from neurobiology. At
a neurobiological level, this implies that the brain states representing the context of
an original experience reactivate or replay during the subsequent remembering of that
experience. Several studies tested this idea using neural recordings. These studies
found that in free recall (Manning et al., 2011a), cued recall (Yaffe et al., 2014) and
recognition memory (Howard et al., 2012b; Folkerts et al., 2018) brain activity during
memory retrieval resembles not only the activity of the original studied item, but
also the brain states associated with neighboring items in the study list. Thus, one
observes contiguity both at the behavioral and at the neural level, with these effects
being strongly correlated (Manning et al., 2011a). Finally, this recursive nature of
the contextual retrieval process offers a unified account of many other psychological
phenomena including the spacing effect (Lohnas and Kahana, 2014b), the compound
cueing effect (Lohnas and Kahana, 2014a), and the phenomena of memory consolidation
and reconsolidation (Sederberg et al., 2011).
   Memory theory thus indicates that remembering an item involves a jump-back-in-
time to the state of mind that obtained when the item was previously experienced. This
neural reinstatement, in turn, becomes re-encoded with the new experience and also
persists to flavor the encoding of subsequently experienced items. The persistence of
the previously retrieved contextual states enables memory to carry the distant past into
the future, allowing the contextual states associated with an old memory to re-enter
one's life following a salient cue and associate with subsequent "neutral" memories.
While the original memory is retained in association with its encoding context, the
retrieval and re-experiencing of that memory forms a new memory in association with
the mixture of the prior and retrieved context. Memory theory thus also predicts that
multiple recalls of an item will largely appear to the agent as if there were multiple
experiences, when in fact there was only perhaps a single experience. The well-known


                                           9
existence of post-traumatic stress disorder attests to the power of continually recurring
danger that is wholly in the mind of an agent.


2.2     Retrieved-context theory and financial decisions

The above theory treats memory as an outcome of a mechanistic process. There is no
explicit decision-maker facing an objective function. To map the above framework into
financial decisions, we assume a link between memory and the subjective probability
the agent assigns to future events. The equations themselves suggest such a link.
For example, (2) reflects storage of co-occurrences of features with contexts, while (1)
reflects (partial) updating of beliefs based on new information.
    We start by making a simple technical change. We replace the normalization of the
context vector by the L2 -norm with normalization by the L1 -norm.7 Because elements
of context are positive, this implies that context vectors sum to one; it is natural then
to interpret the context vector as a vector of probabilities. That is, we define ct  Ac ,
the simplex in m-dimensional space, to be the agent's context at time t.
    Equation 1 becomes
                                         ct = ct-1 + cin
                                                      t ,                                          (6)

with  = 1 -  ,8 and where
                                                     c
                                                 Wtf
                                                   -1 ft
                                         cin
                                          t =         c
                                                               ,                                   (7)
                                                ||Wtf
                                                    -1 ft ||

where, for the remainder of the paper ||v || will denote the sum of the absolute values of
elements of v . Because ft are basis vectors and the elements of W f c are non-negative,
this reduces to the sum of the elements.
    Because (7) defines cin
                         t up to a positive scalar, we can normalize W
                                                                       f c
                                                                           with no
   7
      There is no experimental evidence in favor of one norm versus the other. The L2 -norm is conve-
nient for modeling free recall, which requires retrieving features from context as well as context from
features.
    8
      Because ct-1 , cin
                      t  Ac , ct  Ac . Unlike, (1), the relation between  = 1 -  is exact.




                                                  10
change contextual dynamics. It will be convenient to normalize W f c so that its
elements sum to one: Specifically, define

                                                  t
                                          1
                               Wtf c   =               cs f s ,                      (8)
                                         t+      s=-



where  represents the length of the prior sample. Equivalently, we can initialize Wtf c
at zero, and use the following updating rule, starting at  :

                                    + t - 1 f c    1
                         Wtf c =           Wt-1 +    ct f .                          (9)
                                     +t            +t t

While (4) and (9) may appear to be two alternative ways of closing the model, they
generate identical implications for context evolution, assuming that we normalize ele-
ments of ct to sum to 1. In the special case where the vectors ct are also basis vectors,
(8) represents the joint probability distribution of context and features.
   The resultant model, when combined with standard economic optimization, be-
comes a memory-driven model of choice under uncertainty. The agent still maximizes
utility subject to the usual constraints. However, beliefs come from memory. Figure 2
illustrates the mechanism behind retrieved context theory. The current state of context
contains both an autocorrelated component that overlaps with the contexts of recent
experiences, and a retrieved context component that overlaps with items experienced
close in time to the just-recalled item(s). The figure illustrates these two effects as
spotlights shining down on memories arrayed on the stage of life. Memories are not
truly forgotten, but just obscured when they fall outside of the spotlights.




                                            11
3     Retrieved-context theory and the persistence of

      beliefs

A classic problem in asset allocation is that of an investor allocating wealth between a
risky asset (with unknown return) and a riskless asset with known return (Arrow, 1971;
Pratt, 1976). This deceptively simple problem is the subject of a large and sophisti-
cated literature (Wachter, 2010). In a new take on this classic problem, Malmendier
and Nagel (2011) report an intriguing pattern in the portfolio choice of investors in
the Survey of Consumer Finances. Investors whose lifetime experience includes periods
with lower stock returns invested a lower percentage of their wealth in stocks as com-
pared with investors whose lifetime experience includes periods with higher returns.
While, on one level this may seem intuitive, it is a puzzle from the point of view of
standard asset allocation theories. For one thing, experience should not matter, only
objective data on returns. For another, even if investors over-weight their own expe-
rience, and under-weight returns outside of their experience, investors in the sample
had experiences of sufficiently long length (and the return distribution is sufficiently
ergodic) such that their beliefs should quickly converge.
    Here, we abstract from many interesting features of the Malmendier and Nagel
(2011) study. For example, investors exhibit a recency effect (their portfolio choice
depends more on recent observations than on past observations) which we do not
emphasize here, but which is very much in the spirit of a memory model. We focus on
a qualitative implication of their results, namely, that personal experiences can continue
to influence investors' beliefs, even though there are sufficient data (if investors were
Bayesian) to over-ride a specific time path of experience. Thus, in this section, we focus
simply on the question of persistence of beliefs, abstracting both from many features of
memory models, and many features of the portfolio choice data. We do so to highlight
the novel implications of the theory.

                                           12
3.1    The portfolio choice problem

We consider the problem of an investor choosing to allocate wealth between a risky
stock, with return r
                   ~, and a riskfree bond. For simplicity, we assume the bond has a
net return of zero. The agent also receives risky labor income y
                                                               ~. We assume the agent
begins with wealth of one. The agent prefers more wealth to less, and is risk averse.
We tractably capture these preferences by assuming utility is an increasing function of
the mean of wealth and a decreasing function of the variance (Markowitz, 1952):


                                       ~ ] - 1 Var(X
                                max E [X           ~)                             (10)
                                             2

where  is the percent allocation to the risky asset, and where the assumptions above
imply that wealth equals
                                   ~ = 1 + r
                                   X       ~+ y
                                              ~.                                  (11)

The expectation and the variance in (10) are with respect to the agents' subjective
preferences. Substituting (11) into (10), and setting the derivative of the objective
function with respect to  equal to zero leads to

                                      ~ - Cov (~
                                    E r         r, y
                                                   ~)
                                =                     .                           (12)
                                        Var (~
                                             r)

If stocks deliver a low return in a negative labor income state, that makes them
unattractive.
   Assume that the risky return takes on two possible values r(gain) > r(loss). As-
sume labor income y
                  ~ takes on two possible values y (normal) > y (depression). We
consider beliefs that take the following form: gain and loss states each occur with
probability 1/2, that a gain and a depression cannot co-occur, and that a depression
has (unconditional) probability p, for p  1/2. The following matrix captures the state



                                          13
space and the probabilities:

                                                                                     
                                                                        1   1
            Prob(gain & normal)       Prob(loss & normal)               2   2
                                                                                -p
    P =                                                         =                    ,
            Prob(gain & depression) Prob(loss & depression)             0       p

             1
where p  [0, 2 ].
   We assume r
             ~ has mean 1, which implies r                ~(loss) = 1 -  , where 
                                         ~(gain) = 1 +  , r
is the standard deviation of r
                             ~. Let y
                                    ~(normal) = y > 0 and y
                                                          ~(depression) = 0. Then.
Er          r) =  2 . Note that y
 ~ = 1, Var(~                   ~ is a Bernoulli random variable multiplied by a
constant y , so that:


                                    ~ = (1 - p)y
                                   Ey

                                    y ) = p(1 - p)y 2 .
                                Var(~


Direct calculation implies

                                         1             1
                Cov(~
                    r, y       r - Er
                       ~) = E (~      y = y -
                                    ~)~                  - p y = py.
                                         2             2

Then the optimal allocation (12) equals

                                            1 - py
                                    (p) =          .                                    (13)
                                               2

The greater the probability that the agent assigns to the depression, the less he or she
allocates to the risky asset.


3.2    Memory for stock market gains and losses

We identify the feature vector ft with realizations of the stock market, so that ft =
[1, 0] represents gain, and ft = [0, 1] represents loss. We assume the context vector


                                            14
ct represents the unobserved labor market state. ct = [1, 0] implies 100% probability
on no depression in the labor market.
    Define the features-to-context matrix as in (8). If the length of the prior series,  ,
is sufficiently large, and if the labor income state is observed perfectly perfectly:


                                              f c
                                             W0   =P                                              (14)


However, suppose instead that the agent has experienced a biased sample (or otherwise
has formed a set of associations) in which the depression is over-represented (p > p):

                                                                           
                                  f c
                                                        1
                                                        2
                                                            1
                                                            2
                                                                - p
                                 W0   = P                                  .                      (15)
                                                                    
                                                        0       p

For a Bayesian agent the effect of a distorted prior disappears relatively quickly.
    Consider instead the implications of context retrieval. We apply the model de-
scribed above, with the restriction (for simplicity) of  = 1.9 We thus use the following
recursion for context:
                                                   c
                                           ct  Wtf
                                                 -1 ft ,                                          (16)

where Wtf c evolves according to (9).
    Suppose the agent starts with (15). Consider what happens at t = 1. A stock
market gain retrieves 100% probability on the normal labor income state:

                                                                           
                                        f c 
                                                    1                  1
                                   c1  W0                                  
                                                    0                  0
   9
     Allowing for   1 would not change the inference on the unconditional probability of a depression
state, but would alter the covariances, which would affect the quantitative conclusions (though not the
qualitative ones). One solution is to assume neutral features on stock market returns and the labor
market state that are the most common (see Howard and Kahana (2002)). In subsequent examples,
we allow for both  < 1 and neutral features.




                                                  15
A stock market loss, on the other hand, retrieves a positive probability of a depression,
even if one has not occurred :

                                                                                            
                                                      1                                  
                          f c 
                                         0            2
                                                           -p                  1 - 2p
                     c1  W0                  =                                              
                                                                                      
                                         1                 p                     2p

That is, the agent recalls the depression. The key difference between this model and
a rational updating model is that this act of recollecting implies that there is a new
"depression" observation in the agent's mental database.
   Consider then what happens to the W f c matrix:


                              f c                f c    1
                             W1   =             W0   +    c1 f 1 ,
                                             1+        1+

where                                                                           
                                   1                                    1 0
                          
                                         [1, 0]           =                                 if gain
                                   0                                    0 0
                          
               c1 f 1 =                                                                               (17)
                                                        
                            1 - 2p             0 1 - 2p
                                     [0, 1] =             if loss
                                                      
                              2p               0   2p
                          

                                                             f c
Regardless of whether a gain or loss occurs, the columns of W1   relate to those of
 f c
W0   by a constant of proportionality. Thus, at time 2, a stock market gain retrieves
[1, 0] , whereas a stock market loss retrieves [1 - 2p , 2p ] . The agent's probability
distribution is the same as before.
   A formal induction argument (see Appendix A) shows that, after t periods of which
k are gains:

                                                                                               
                                                                             t-k
                                1 
                                        +     k     1
                                                   (2 - p )  +
                                                             
                                                                 + (1 - 2p ) 
                 Wtf c =        2  +t         +t               t              +t               .      (18)
                                                                                t-k
                                        0                      p  +
                                                                  
                                                                    t
                                                                        +   2 p  +t



It follows that, in the limit at t approaches infinity, Wtf c gets closer and closer to

                                                      16
P  :10
                                       plimt Wtf c = P  .

It does not matter how much data the agent observes: probabilities remain distorted.
    Why, intuitively, does the agent fail to update his or her probabilities? The reason
is that the agent's memory over-associates a stock market loss with a depression. The
appearance of a stock market loss, then reinstates the depression context. This act of
recalling the depression context is similar to the experiencing the depression. Thus,
a high probability of depression remains associated with losses in the mind of the
agent. Interestingly, if the agent happened to arrive at the correct probabilities at the
beginning, the updating rule (16) would have produced the correct probabilities P .
    Figure 3 contrasts implications for three types of agents: the agent who knows
the true probability, the agent who starts with an incorrect prior and learns the true
probability according to Bayesian updating, and the agent who starts with the same
incorrect prior and whose learning is subject to context retrieval. For the purposes
of the figure, p = 0.02, p = 0.50,  = 1, and y = 2.11 Figure 3 shows the mean
of the posterior distribution for p. The Bayesian agent's beliefs converge quickly to
something close to the truth. Thus, while precise convergence to a 2% probability of
Depression takes many years, updating is very fast for values of the probability that
are far from the truth. Twenty years of data suffice to bring the probability sufficiently
close so that the resulting portfolio allocation is virtually indistinguishable from that
of the full-information agent. On the other hand, the agent who relies on memory does
not learn, and can maintain an incorrect probability even in the face of many years of
   10
     Note that k/( + t)  1/2, (t - k )/( + t)  1/2, and  /( + t)  0.
   11
     The Bayesian investor has an uninformative prior. Given the likelihood implied by Bernoulli
observations on y ~, the posterior Beta (see Appendix B). We report the mean of this distribution,
which is all that is required to (12), since the covariance is linear in the depression probability. Note
that the Bayesian agent who infers the correct probability thus behaves the same as the agent who is
certain about the probability; we abstract from the effect of parameter uncertainty.




                                                   17
evidence.12 The point is that memory itself produces a distorted database because the
agent relives his worst fears when a stock market downturn occurs.



4        Context and the jump back in time: Application

         to the financial crisis

The failure of Lehman Brothers is widely recognized as a point of inflection in the 2008
financial crisis.13
     An open question is: why was the failure of Lehman Brothers so pivotal? A grow-
ing line of research answers this question by focusing on the importance of financial
intermediation to the overall the economy. Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) and He
and Krishnamurthy (2013) develop models in which the balance sheets of intermedi-
aries contribute to business cycle fluctuations. However, while it may be necessary
to have specialized institutions trade certain complicated investments, it is not clear
why the failure of a financial institution should be followed by a broad-based stock
market decline. Common stocks are not intermediated assets: trading costs for com-
mon stocks, already quite low for the past half-century, have only gotten lower (Jones,
2002). Another possibility is that Lehman represented a sunspot that caused a run
on other intermediaries, and other forms of debt (Allen and Gale, 2009; Gorton and
Metrick, 2012). Unanswered is why this should cause the stock market to crash, as
it did in the fall of 2008, when most companies have very low leverage and can fund
themselves through retained earnings?14 .
    12
      Recent survey evidence (Goetzmann et al., 2017) indicates irrationally high levels of fear of stock
market crashes, and that exogenous events can trigger such fears. The latter point is specifically
addressed in the model below.
   13
      See, for example, French et al. (2010).
   14
      Kahle and Stulz (2013) argue that firms dependent on bank-lending were not unduly affected by
the crisis. Gomes et al. (2019) argue that fluctuations in borrowing conditions are more likely to be
affected by investment opportunities than the other way around.




                                                   18
    A third possibility, which Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018) emphasize, is that indi-
viduals and banks took on too much debt because they incorrectly extrapolated that
the environment was riskfree. This debt created unstable conditions. The Lehman
bankruptcy reminded agents of the risk that they faced. This possibility is most in
the spirit of the model here. However, while related, the two explanations are distinct.
In our model, the risk is illusory, whereas is the neglected risk hypothesis (as usually
formulated), the risk caused by excessive debt is real. While our view may be extreme,
in fact, the Great Recession was nothing like the Great Depression.15 The realized
outcome does not seem commensurate with the panic in the fall of 2008.16
    Our hypothesis is that the financial crisis was a psychological event caused by the
failure of Lehman Brothers. The actual realization of a important financial institution
failing in the absence of insurance reminded investors of the Great Depression.17 Some
felt that they had ­ literally ­ returned to the Great Depression. Investors experienced
what the memory literature refers to as a jump back in time (Manning et al., 2011b;
Howard et al., 2012a). Once this feeling entered the discourse, it proved hard to shake.
Subsequent events showed that in fact there was no Great Depression. This was only
revealed, though, over time. Somehow, what emerged from the crisis and recession was
not a feeling of relief but rather a renewed emphasis on the fragility of the financial
sector and the possibility that a Great Depression might in fact occur. The model
below formalizes this intuition.
  15
      The effect of the financial crisis on aggregate consumption was relatively minor: from the start
of 2008 to the end of 2009, aggregate consumption fell by 3%, and consumption began to recover by
2010. In contrast, consumption fell by 16% in the Great Depression.
   16
      This outcome was endogenous to the policy response, which may have prevented further declines.
Note however that policy makers may be subject to the same context dynamics discussed here; they
may also be responsive to stock market outcomes. The resultant multiple equilibria stemming from
belief dynamics are beyond the scope of this article.
   17
      See,    for example,       the reporting of The Guardian on the day's events:
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/15/marketturmoil.stockmarkets.




                                                 19
4.1    Asset prices

We consider an economy in which there is a single, representative agent. This agent
faces a consumption and investment choice. Following Lucas (1978), we assume an en-
dowment economy, in which there is no technology for moving resources across periods.
Thus prices equilibrate to make consumption optimal.
   In this economy, stock prices are expected discounted values of future cash flows.
When cash flows occur at times that are risky for the agent, they receive a higher
discount rate: namely a premium. Thus, if the economy suddenly becomes riskier,
stock prices may suddenly fall, even if very little has changed in terms of observable
cash flows. The disaster risk framework (Tsai and Wachter, 2015) offers a way to think
about how prices can change suddenly even if observables do not.
   Specifically, the agent faces a consumption process that has normal risk, and rare-
event risk. The rare events occur with probability approximately equal to p, which is
small (the use of exponentials below implies convenient analytical expressions as the
time interval shrinks). We use the model of Barro (2006) for the consumption process.


                           log Ct+1 = log Ct + µ + ut+1 + vt+1 ,                 (19)


where ut+1 and vt+1 are independent, ut+1  N (0,  2 ) and

                                
                                      0          with prob. e-p
                       vt+1 =                                                    (20)
                                 log(1 - b) with prob. 1 - e-p


where b is a random variable with support on [0, 1). The aggregate market is a claim
to cash flows satisfying


                           log Dt+1 = log Dt + µ + ut+1 + vt+1                   (21)



                                            20
with  > 1. This assumption captures the fact that dividends fall by more than
consumption during financial disasters (Longstaff and Piazzesi, 2004).
      We assume that at every period, the agent maximizes utility

                                          
                                     Et          s log Cs
                                          s=1


Let St equal the value of the aggregate stock market, namely the claim to cash flows
(C.1). The first-order conditions of the agent imply


                              St = Et [Mt+1 (St+1 + Dt+1 )] ,                       (22)


where the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution equals

                                                            -1
                                                  Ct+1
                                 Mt+1 =                          .
                                                   Ct

Equilibrium requires that optimal consumption satisfy (19) and (20) and that cash
flows equal (C.1). Asset prices adjust to satisfy the first-order conditions for the rep-
resentative agent.
      In Appendix C, we show (22) has solution

                                       
                                                           (p)
                             St = Dt         (p)n =                                 (23)
                                       n=1
                                                         1 - (p)

for
                        (p) =  e-p + (1 - e-p )E (1 - b)-                           (24)

When  > 1, an increase in p (in a comparative statics sense), lowers the price.




                                                21
    The riskfree rate also solves first-order condition, and equals


                1 + rf = E [Mt+1 ]-1
                                                                      -1
                                    1   2                        1
                         =  -1 eµ- 2        e-p + (1 - e-p )E              ,
                                                                1-b

From (C.2), we can see that an increase in the disaster probability p lowers the riskfree
rate. This is intuitive: an increase in the disaster probability leads the investor to want
to save to protect against the disaster realization. Bond prices rise, and riskfree rates
fall.


4.2     Memory for rare events

We identify features with the state of the financial system, so ft = [1, 0] represents
normal times and ft = [0, 1] represents a crisis. We identify context with the state
of the underlying economy, so ct = [1, 0]       represents normal times, and ct = [0, 1]
represents a depression state.
    Using the interpretation of prior associations as probabilities, we can write

                                                                                     
    f c
                  Prob(no crisis & no depression) Prob(crisis & no depression)
   W0   =                                                                            (25)
                                                                                     
              Prob(no crisis & depression)             Prob(crisis & depression)
                                 
              1 - pc pc (1 - q )
           =                     ,                                                    (26)
                          c
                0        pq

where


          pc = probability of a financial crisis

           q = probability of an economic disaster, given a financial crisis,


namely, in investors' minds, economic disaster is always accompanied by crisis.

                                              22
   We connect context to asset prices by assuming, for simplicity, homogeneous in-
vestors aggregating to the representative agent of the previous section. Agents extract
probabilities of a disaster from ct (the probability is the second element of ct ), and
view these probabilities (again, for simplicity) as permanent.
   We assumed the generalized context evolution (6), with context retrieval (7). We
assume that in the recent past, the agent observes mainly neutral features: ft = [1, 0] .
Assuming that the features-to-context matrix is in the steady state given by (25),
neutral features imply the neutral context:

                                                                     
                                                    1            1
                                 cin  f c 
                                  t  W0
                                                                     .                         (27)
                                                    0            0

Given sufficiently many observations of neutral features, context reaches a steady state
value ct = [1, 0] , as follows from setting ct = ct-1 in (6).18 The model thus implies
neglected risk (Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2018).
   Though agents neglect the depression state, they have not forgotten it. Represent-
ing the failure of Lehman brothers is f1 = [0, 1] , the well-publicized failure of a major
financial institution. It follows that
                                                                        
                                                0             1-q
                              cin  f c 
                               1  W0
                                                                        .                      (28)
                                                1                q

Equation 28 represents reinstatement of the depression context. Even though a depres-
sion has not occurred, the agent is reminded strongly of a depression because of the
financial crisis. The stronger the association between depression and crisis (the higher
is q ), the greater this reinstatement.
  18
     The discussion thus far assumes Wtf c remains fixed. However, even if we were to allow for
updating this matrix, as we do below, it would not change (27). This is because only the relative
weights on the elements would change. (27) does not depend on the weights, but only on the fact that
a depression and a crisis cannot co-occur.


                                                23
   Because context is autoregressive, the agent is still partially in the non-crisis con-
text. The retrieved depression context mixes with the prior neutral context to form

                                                              
                                          1           1-q
                               c1 =           +                                       (29)
                                          0               q

The probability of a depression changes from zero to q , causing an immediate decline
in stock prices (23) and in the riskfree rate (C.2).
   What does the model say about the time path of context, and hence that prices
and the riskfree rate, following the event? We discuss in detail one such possible path.
Consistent with events in late 2008, we assume several (specifically, three) observations
of crisis features, and then neutral features. First, consider the effect of the crisis on
memory. If  is the length of the prior sample, we have


          f c           f c     1
         W1   =        W0   +       c1 f
                    +1          +1 1
                                                               
                             c   c
                      1 - p p (1 - q )       1  0  +  (1 - q ) 
                 =                        +                                           (30)
                    +1    0        pc q      +1 0    q


Memory updates with the term c1 f1 . The appearance of f1 states that a crisis has oc-
curred ­ it says nothing about a depression. However, c1 does contain some probability
of a depression, specifically, q . Thus, regardless of whether or not a depression actually
                                                  f c
occurs, the agent updates memory, represented by W1   , with a partial observation of
a depression, co-occurring with crisis.
   Now suppose that the agent again observes crisis features, retrieving, again, the
depression context:                                       
                                                      0
                                   cin  f c 
                                    2  W1
                                                          .                           (31)
                                                      1




                                              24
Retrieved context mixes with the prior context to form


                        c2 = c1 + cin
                                   2
                                             
                                 1     1 - q
                           = 2   +            + cin
                                                 2
                                 0       q

The agent starts to forget that normal features were part of the environment, as an
ever-decreasing weight is placed on the original neglected risk context [1, 0] . Similarly:

                                                      
                                1             1-q
                     c3 =  3         + 2               + cin   in
                                                          2 + c3
                                0                 q

As long as the agent continues to observe crisis features, the weight on the depression
state increases and the weight on the normal state decreases. Memory continues to be
updated, as crisis features, and the depression state combine.
   Something interesting happens when the agent finally observes neutral features
again. Suppose for concreteness that this occurs at time 4. First, the agent will
retrieve the neutral context, with no probability on depression:

                                                             
                                              1          1
                              cin  f c 
                               4  W3
                                                  =          .
                                              0          0

                                                      f c
this is because only the (1,2) and (2,2) elements of W3   have changed relative to
 f c
W0   . However, the depression is still in context. Thus the agent associates the
depression not only with crisis features, but also with neutral features. That is, even if
the depression did not occur, and regardless of the number of observed neutral features,
the agent will continue to remember the depression.
   As an example calibration, we assume pc = .025, q = 0.5, a decline in aggregate
consumption of 20%,  = 2. Here, and in the applications that follow, we assume


                                            25
 = 0.65, found in Polyn et al. (2009) and Healey and Kahana (2016). We assume
the agent observes a prior sample of 20 years. The agent begins in a neutral context,
observes three periods worth of crisis features, and then 10 periods of neutral features.
Figure 4 shows the time path of the price-dividend ratio. The real riskfree rate, which
begins at 3%, and falls as low as -1%, follows a very similar path.
     First note that the crisis leads to a jump back in time, namely an immediate decline
in the price-dividend ratio and in the interest rate. Both continue to decline, as the
agent continues to observe crisis features. Both occurred during the 2008 financial
crisis. While the economy recovers, following observation of neutral features, recovery
is incomplete. Because the agent continues to remember a depression (that did not
occur), neither stock prices nor interest rates return to pre-crisis levels, even after 15
years.



5        Sticky context: application to price momentum

We show how context theory accounts for the price momentum effect: the finding that
stocks with the highest price appreciation measured over the last 12 months ("winners")
outperform those with the lowest price appreciation ("losers") by a wide margin. When
sorted into deciles, the winners-minus-losers portfolio, formed on the extreme deciles,
generates an annual return of about 11% (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993).19
     We assume a simple neoclassical production model in which productivity, earnings,
and dividends all covary up to a scale factor. We consider a cross-section of firms,
indexed by k = 1, . . . , K , and let g (k ) denote the growth rate in productivity for firm
k . We assume g (k ) can take on one of two possible values: g (k )  {gH , gL }, for gL < gH .
In principle, agents do not observe g (k ), but they can infer it from realized earnings
    19
    The model presented here can be seen as a foundation for under-reaction, which is studied by
Daniel et al. (1998) and Barberis et al. (1998), or for slow information diffusion (Hong and Stein,
1999).



                                                26
(equivalently dividend) growth. The joint contingency matrix is

                                                                                                                           
                 Prob(Dk,t+1 /Dkt = g (k ) = gH )                      Prob(Dk,t+1 /Dkt = gL & g (k ) = gH )
P =                                                                                                                        ,
         Prob(Dk,t+1 /Dkt = gH & g (k ) = gL )                             Prob(Dk,t+1 /Dkt = g (k ) = gL )

where Dkt > 0 denotes the dividend for firm k at time t. Assume investors are risk-
neutral with discount rate r, such that r > gH > gL .
   For simplicity, we assume that growth rates are permanent and that there are no
other shocks.20 Let p be the probability that g (k ) = gH , for all k . Then the correct
matrix of joint contingencies equals

                                                                            
                                                             p         0
                                                    P =                     .                                             (32)
                                                             0 1-p


Let Vkt  Skt /Dkt ("valuation ratio") denote the price-dividend ratio for firm k , where
Skt is the stock price. The valuation ratio depends only on the probability of a firm
being a high growth firm. Given a subjective probability p
                                                         ~(k ) of firm k having growth
            21
rate gH ,
                                                         1 + gH               1 + gL
                              V (~
                                 p(k )) = p
                                          ~(k )                 + (1 - p
                                                                       ~(k ))        .                                    (33)
                                                         r - gH               r - gL

   Consider a set of firms indexed by j (j = 1, . . . , J ) for which investors do not know
the growth rate. As in previous sections, we assume investors form judgements about
the growth rate based on a context. We allow firm j to have a firm-specific context
   20
      Useful generalizations would be to assume a Markov switching model, and/or have an iid shock
(or potentially measurement error) create a wedge between observed and true earnings. For our basic
qualitative result, this model is sufficient however.
   21
      The intermediate steps in this calculation are as follows
                                                                                        
                                                    Dk,t                                                  Dk,t
    V (~
       p(k ))       ~(k )E
                  = p                   (1 + r)-s        | g = gH + (1 - p
                                                                         ~(k ))E              (1 + r)-s        | g = gL
                                  t=1
                                                    Dk0                                 t=1
                                                                                                          Dk0
                                               t                                    t
                                    1 + gH                                 1 + gL
                  = p
                    ~(k )                           + (1 - p
                                                           ~(k ))
                            t=1
                                     1+r                            t=1
                                                                            1+r



                                                               27
cjt ; we will denote features for firm j as fjt .22 We identify observed dividend growth
with features and productivity growth with context. Thus high dividend growth for
firm j at time t corresponds to fjt = [1, 0] , whereas low dividend growth corresponds
to fjt = [0, 1] . We assume that investors start with semantic knowledge that relates
observed dividend growth (features), to productivity growth (context):

                                             0      K
                                W f c                   ckt fkt  P.                         (34)
                                          t=- k=1


We assume that prior sample is sufficiently large (because it includes both prior periods
and a large cross-section of firms) that we can ignore dynamics in (34) in what follows.
   We assume, for all firms j , that

                                                            
                                                        p
                                       cj 0 =               
                                                    1-p


We can think of this as a prior belief, consistent with (32). Firms j with latent state
g = gH experience fj 1 = [1, 0] , whereas firms j with low latent state g = gL experience
fj 1 = [0, 1] . It follows from the features-to-context matrix (34) that cin
                                                                          j 1 = fj 1 for all

j . Applying (6), winners have time-1 context of

                                                               
                                             p + 1 - 
                                   cj 1 =                      .
                                                 (1 - p)

Because p + 1 -  > p, the subjective probability of high growth has increased. Losers
have time-1 context of                                             
                                                      p
                                cj 1 =                             .
                                          (1 - p) + 1 - 
  22
     Equivalently, we could expand context and features vectors so that they include contexts and
features for all firms, with zeros in off-diagonal positions.



                                                 28
Because p < p, the subjective probability of high growth has decreased. Finally note
that for stock j , the price change

                        Sj 1   Dj 1 Sj 1 /Dj 1                V (~
                                                                 p1 (j ))
                             =                 = (g (j ) + 1)             ,           (35)
                        Sj 0   Dj 0 Sj 0 /Dj 0                V (~
                                                                 p0 (j ))

for p
    ~t (j ) equal to the second element of cjt .
   It follows from (33), that the price-dividend ratio is an increasing function of p
                                                                                    ~.
                                                                                       Dj 1
Moreover, high growth firms also have higher realized values of dividend growth        Dj 0
                                                                                            .
The price change (35) is therefore higher for firms with g = gH than for g = gL . The
first set of firms are therefore "winners" when sorted on previous price change; the
others are "losers".
   The high-growth features of time-1 is what makes the winning stocks winners and
the losing stocks losers. It is not surprising that positive earnings surprises should lead
investors to update their probabilities of a stock having high long-run earnings growth.
The key implication of context dynamics (6) is that this updating is incomplete.
   Indeed, in subsequent periods, context puts ever-increasing weight on the high-
growth state for winning firms and ever-decreasing weight for losing firms, as more
features consistent with the true underlying growth rate emerge. Eventually the context
vectors converge, with convergence being faster for lower values of . When beliefs
eventually do converge, returns on the two firms are the same. Before this limit,
however, returns on winning firms will always be above returns on losing firms.
   Figure 5 shows the prices and returns on winners and losers and constrasts the
implications of retrieved-context theory with Bayesian updating (in this case, Bayesian
updating is identical to full information). The key assumption in this model that
differentiates it from Bayesian updating is the slow evolution of context implied by (6).
In the simple model outlined above, a Bayesian investor should update immediately
to 100% probability in the high growth state upon observing one observation. More


                                               29
generally, beliefs under Bayesian updating should follow a martingale. One cannot
have positive "surprises" systematically following positive events. Yet that is what the
data appear to show (Chan et al., 1996).
    From a psychological perspective, the reason updating is slow is that c0 , representing
a low probability of a high growth state is still in investors' context when they evaluate
the new information. Repeated observations are required before c0 disappears from
context. A Bayesian investor, on the other hand, would understand that an earnings
increase of the magnitude observed at time 1 could only be associated with a permanent
shift. Prices would adjust immediately, and there would be no effect on future returns.



6     Fear and asset allocation

Guiso et al. (2018) observe that watching a horror movie influences the risk premium
investors require to hold risky assets.23 What is striking about this experiment is that
fear alone, as opposed to new information, has a substantial effect on risk taking. Here,
we apply retrieved-context theory to explain how an emotional experience can change
portfolio holdings.
    We will need to modify the simple model required to explain the effect of the
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy on stock market valuations of the previous section. In
Section 4, a cue triggered a jump back in time, namely a sudden jump in beliefs
regarding the probability of a Great Depression. This stimulus had previously been
directly associated with a Great Depression. However, in that case, agents could have
believed that the true probability of a Great Depression had changed. In this section,
   23
      In another highly relevant contribution, Cohn et al. (2015) report results from an experiment on
financial professionals, in which some viewed a fictive chart of a booming stock market, while others
viewed a chart with a market crash. In both cases, professionals answered questions about their
trading strategies during the event in question. They then performed an investment task. Investors
in the boom condition invested 17 percentage points more in the risky asset that those in the bust
condition. The authors further identify fear as the channel. Thus the results of the Cohn et al. (2015)
study are very much within the spirit of the model we discuss here.



                                                  30
where we seek to explain experimental evidence, subjects were told explicitly that risks
had not changed, and yet there was a change in portfolio choice.
   We hypothesize that fear operates through the memory channel. As we have shown,
the context-retrieval mechanism allows negative associations to have both a short-lived
effect (through the autoregressive structure) and a highly persistent effect (through the
features to context matrix). It will be the first that that is the focus of this section.
   We assume that the feature state can consist of the presence of danger, which may
or may not be associated with a financial crisis. Danger is evoked by the kind of movie
that Guiso et al. (2018) showed in their experiment. The feature space consists of:

                                
                                 e if no danger & no crisis
                                 1
                                
                         ft =      e2 if danger & no crisis
                                
                                   e3 if danger & crisis
                                


where ej is the j th basis vector. We assume a two-dimensional context vector, depend-
ing on whether the underlying state represents a high level of risk or a low level of risk.
We refer to ft = e1 as neutral features.
   As in Section 3, we consider the portfolio choice problem of an agent investing in a
risky asset and a riskless asset. Let r
                                      ~ denote the risky asset return, and  the percent
allocation to the risky asset. Without loss of generality, we assume the agent starts the
period with financial wealth equal to one, so that end-of-period financial wealth equals
1 + r
    ~. Similarly to Section 3, the agent also faces the possibility of a negative labor
market outcome, which we denote by y
                                   ~. We can think of y
                                                      ~ as health expenditures or
other financial obligations (such as a mortgage), net of labor income. To summarize,
the agent solves
                                   max Eu(1 +  r
                                               ~+ y
                                                  ~).                                 (36)
                                     




                                            31
We model y
         ~ as a Bernoulli random variable:

                               
                                0 with probability 1 - p
                            y
                            ~=
                                -b with probability p,


with b  [0, 1]. We assume r
                          ~ also takes on two possible outcomes (each with equal
probability), and has mean µ and standard deviation  . Unlike the model in Section 3,
y
~ and r
      ~ are uncorrelated.
   In Section 3, agents invested less in stocks in response to fear about a depression
state. The mechanism in that section was a covariance between labor in come and the
stock return. In this section, we hypothesize that agents experience fear of physical
danger after watching the horror movie. However, we cannot rely on covariance between
physical danger and the risky asset return (which would be implausible) to generate
the decreased investment in the risky asset.
   To allow y
            ~ to affect the agent's portfolio choice, we assume log utility, as in Section 4.
Fixing an outcome y
                  ~ = y , (36), given u(x) = log x, implies decreasing relative risk
aversion; the agent is very averse to declines in wealth that are close to b (the decline
in labor income). Now allowing y
                               ~ to be variable, the greater the probability, the more
weight the agent places on this possible outcome in her decisions. This formulation,
together with the context dynamics below, endogenizes time-varying risk aversion.
It also endogenously produces a role for emotional state in the utility function, as
suggested by Loewenstein (2000).
   As in previous examples, assume the context vector determines the agent's sub-
jective risk probability p. Assume ct = [1, 0]       corresponds to zero risk probability
ct = [0, 1] is probability 1 of risk. The matrix P representing the joint contingencies




                                            32
equals


P =
                                                                                              
 Pr(risk- , danger- , crisis- ) Pr(risk- , danger+ , crisis- ) Pr(risk- , danger+ , crisis+ )
                                                                                              ,
        +         -         -          +         +         -          +         +         +
 Pr(risk , danger , crisis ) Pr(risk , danger , crisis ) Pr(risk , danger , crisis )

                                                                                               (37)

where + denotes the presence of risk, danger, or crisis, and - denotes the absence.
Let p be the unconditional probability of danger, and q be the probability of crisis
given danger (we make the reasonable assumption that crisis is always accompanied
by danger, which can include dangers inherent in losing one's money).24 We assume,
for simplicity, that risk and danger always co-occur, so that

                                                                     
                                       1-p               0       0
                               P =                                   .                     (38)
                                         0      p(1 - q ) pq

Our results do not depend on this assumption.
   Context follows (6) and (7). Without loss of generality, label the time of the
experiment as t = 1, so t = 0 refers to the context prior to the experiment. The agent
has accurately observed and recalled a sufficiently long sample, so that:


                                          f c
                                         W0   = P,


and                                                          
                                                1-p
                                       c0 =                  .
                                                     p
  24
    This structure does have the implication that stock returns are uncorrelated with the crisis
outcome. A richer model might have two types of risk which share a common component of y ~, but
one with an additional component that correlates with stock returns.



                                                33
That is, the agent begins with the correct probabilities. However, our results do not
depend on these assumption. Our results are robust to variation in this assumption,
as all that is required is that the stimulus introduced in the experiment drives context
sufficiently far away from its pre-experimental state.
    The stimulus represents f1 = e2 , namely, danger without crisis.25 We have


                                    cin  f c
                                     1  W0
                                                   f c
                                             f1 = W0   e2


which implies                                             
                                                      0
                                           cin
                                            1 =
                                                          .
                                                      1

Therefore, the new context is:

                                                              
                                                          0
                                        c1 = c0 +             ,
                                                          


so that the subjective probability of the risky state rises from p to p +  .26
    Figure 6 shows expected utility (36) as a function of portfolio allocation  , prior
to and after the stimulus, with p equal to the second element of context. We assume
an excess return µ = 4%, a standard deviation  = 20%, a prior probability of the
negative labor market outcome p = 2%, and a percent decline b = -0.8, should the
outcome occur. As elsewhere,  = 0.65. When the agent has the correct probabilities,
   25
      One might object that a movie is not the same as actual physical danger. The model accom-
modates this difference, however, in that the movie is purely transitory, so that context (because of
the autoregressive term) does not fully shift; actual danger would presumably be more persistent.
A related objection is that, the experiment implies that neutral features co-occur with a heightened
risk context, and danger occurs when the probability of a risk context is not equal to 1. Should this
have occurred in the past, then (38) would no longer represent the features-to-context matrix. By
assuming that the agent does not exhibit neglected risk, we implicitly allow for this. While the model
does imply that viewing a horror movie sufficiently frequently de-sensitizes the agent, Guiso et al.
(2018) specifically avoid this problem by choosing a movie that is both intense and obscure.
   26
      Note that p +  > p for p < 1, because p +  is a weighted average of p and 1.



                                                 34
the portfolio allocation equals 70%, falling to 30% after the stimulus. Note that the
model would imply the same shift for a financial crisis. This accounts for the finding
of Guiso et al. (2018) that (a) viewing a horror movie and (b) exposure to a financial
crisis increases effective risk aversion.
    The horror movie changes the beliefs of the agent about the risk the agent might
face. It is as if the movie reminds the agent that the world is a risky place, and one
thus should not take risks with one's financial wealth. Our set-up could either be
interpreted as the one in which the agent is reminded of why wealth is necessary (that
is the literal interpretation above), or is reminded of how painful (through time-varying
risk aversion), low-wealth states are.
    The response of the agent to the experiment cannot be Bayesian: a movie has not
changed anything about the outside world. In that sense, the response of risk-taking
to viewing a horror movie is a good test of our theory. The experiment shows that
financial decisions in one context do not resemble financial decisions in another, even
though the financial decision in both cases is materially the same. Context "should"
be irrelevant, and yet it is not. The agent may know, intellectually, that nothing has
changed, and yet the powerful pull of context implies that choices change anyway.



7     Conclusion

Our past experiences, and our knowledge about the world, constitute a vast database
of information that potentially informs every decision we make. Does the human
memory system discard most of this information to abstract a small, and possibly
biased, subset? Modern research on human memory supports an alternative view in
which much of our past information remains in storage, to be retrieved based on a latent
dynamic context (Kahana, 2012). According to this view, context updates recursively;
features of the environment evoke past contextual states via associative memory. These


                                            35
associations then are permanently stored to be themselves evoked at later times. Thus
past contextual states drive the evolution of context itself.
   Here we introduce memory into the decision problem of an economic agent, through
a formal model of retrieved context theory. Features represent observed stock prices
or exceptionally salient news such as a large bank failure. The associative matrices
linking context to features draw out the agent's beliefs given these observations. Our
model allows for important deviations from Bayesian updating, such as the influence
of events in the distant past, the influence of irrelevant events, and slow updating to
new information. We apply retrieved-context theory to four illustrative problems in
financial economics: the effects of life experience on choices, the sudden onset of a
financial crisis, the appearance of momentum in stock returns, and time-variation in
risk aversion due to exogenous factors.




                                           36
A      Proof of a stable association matrix

We give a formal induction argument for (18), where k is the number of stock market
gains from s = 1, . . . , t. Note that (18) holds for t = 0 by definition. Assume (18)
holds for t; we show it holds for t + 1.
    In the case of a stock market gain at t + 1:

                                                                         
                                                     1               1
                             ct+1  Wtf c                                 .
                                                     0               0

In the case of a stock market loss,

                                                    
                                                0
                       ct+1  Wtf c                  
                                                1
                                                                                
                                                                          t-k
                                       1
                                      (2   -p       
                                                   )+ t
                                                          + (1 -     2p )  +t
                             =                                                  
                                                           t-k
                                              p  +
                                                 
                                                   t
                                                     + 2 p  +t
                                                                            
                                      (1 - 2p )( /2 + t - k )
                                                                            
                                             
                                           2p ( /2 + t - k )



Because the elements of ct+1 must sum to 1

                                                                 
                                                    1 - 2p
                                  ct+1 =                         .
                                                              
                                                         2p




                                                    37
Therefore
                                                                     
                                  1                            1 0
                          
                                       [1, 0]        =                  if gain
                                  0                            0 0
                          
            ct+1 ft+1 =                                  
                                                        
                            1 - 2p             0 1 - 2p
                                     [0, 1] =             if loss
                                                      
                              2p               0   2p
                          


    Then
                          c      t+             1
                      Wtf
                        +1 =          Wtf c +       ct+1 ft+1
                                t+ +1         t+ +1

The result follows.



B     Bayesian updating from rare events

Suppose a depression occurs with probability p. A Bayesian agent seeks to learn about
p from observations of whether or not a depression occurs. The agent has prior


                             p  Beta(p  + 1, (1 - p ) + 1),                       (B.1)


which has the interpretation of a pseudo-sample of length  , during which there are
p  occurrences of a depression. The mean equals

                                                   p  + 1
                                         E [p] =
                                                     +2

The case of  = 0 implies corresponds to a uniform prior on [0, 1] with a mean of 1/2.
This is an uninformative prior. The greater is  , the more informative the prior. As 
approaches infinity, the prior mean approaches p . The density function corresponding
to (B.1) equals
                                                             )
                                  f (p)  pp  (1 - p)(1-p         ,


                                                38
which approaches the uniform prior as  approaches zero.
   Assume T years of data. Conditional on knowing the probability p, the likelihood
of exactly N occurrences of a depression out of a total of T periods equals

                                                   T N
                          (N disasters | p) =        p (1 - p)T -N .             (B.2)
                                                   N

The assumption of a Beta(p  + 1, (1 - p ) + 1) prior implies the prior density function

                                                           )
                                 f (p)  pp  (1 - p)(1-p


where the constant of proportionality does not depend on p and can therefore be
disregarded in what follows. Therefore the posterior distribution equals


                   f (p | N disasters)          (N disasters|p)f (p)
                                                                        )
                                         pN +p  (1 - p)T + -(N +p


where once again we have ignored terms that do not depend on p. This is proportional
to the Beta density, so


             p | N disasters  Beta(N + p  + 1, T +  - (N + p  ) + 1).


It follows from properties of the Beta distribution that the posterior mean equals

                                                    N + p  + 1
                            E [p | N disasters] =              .
                                                     T + +2

The posterior mean depends on the sample path. Figure 3 shows the average posterior




                                              39
mean, assuming the likelihood (B.2):

                                             N + p  + 1
       E#disasters [E [p | N disasters]] =              (N disasters | p) dN
                                                T +2
                                           pT + p  + 1
                                         =
                                            T + +2

where we have used the fact that, conditional on p, N has a binomial distribution,
and therefore E [N | p] = pT . The figure corresponds to the case of  = 0, however the
results are very similar for  > 0, provided that the actual sample is large relative to
the prior sample.



C     Asset pricing with rare events

The model in this section follows that of Barro (2006). We assume a complete-markets
endowment economy similar to Lucas (1978). Assume


                         log Ct+1 = log Ct + µ + ut+1 + vt+1 ,


where ut+1 and vt+1 are independent, ut+1  N (0,  2 ) and

                               
                                     0            with prob. e-p
                      vt+1 =
                                log(1 - b) with prob. 1 - e-p


where b is a random variable with support on [0, 1). We further assume that the
dividend satisfies
                         log Dt+1 = log Dt + µ + ut+1 + vt+1                     (C.1)

with  > 1. This assumption captures the fact that dividends fall by more than
consumption during crisis (Longstaff and Piazzesi, 2004).



                                             40
   We assume that at every period, the agent maximizes utility

                                                        1-
                                                       Cs
                                      Et          s        .
                                            s=1
                                                       1-

   Note that p scales with the time interval. Thus we can make p arbitrarily small
(without changing the underlying economics) by considering smaller and smaller time
intervals (in effect approximating a Poisson process in discrete time). Note, however,
that b is a fixed quantity as the time interval shrinks. Besides the closed-form expres-
sions, we will give simpler formulas using


                                       1 - e-p  p,


and for x close to zero,
                                      log(1 + x)  x.

   Define the stochastic discount factor as

                                                               -
                                                       Ct+1
                                 Mt+1 = 
                                                        Ct

It follows from the first-order condition of the representative agent that


              1 + rf = E [Mt+1 ]-1

                      =  -1 E [exp {- (µ + ut+1 + vt+1 )}]-1
                                  1   2 2                                 -1
                      =  -1 eµ- 2            e-p + (1 - e-p )E (1 - b)-        ,


so that
                                        1
              log(1 + rf )  - log  + µ -  2  2 - pE (1 - b)- - 1 .
                                        2




                                                  41
   The price S1t of a claim to a one-period equity strip satisfies the equation


                                    S1t = Et [Mt+1 Dt+1 ] .


It is straightforward to solve for this price by using the normalization

             S1t           Dt+1
                 = Et Mt+1
             Dt             Dt
                                1       2 2
                   = e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- )         e-p + (1 - e-p )E (1 - b)-   .


It is convenient to define the notation

                                1       2 2
              (p) = e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- )          e-p + (1 - e-p )E (1 - b)-          (C.2)


as the price-dividend ratio for the one-period claim.
   Taking the log of both sides of (C.2) gives a convenient approximation

                            1
 log (p) = log  + (1 -  )µ + (1 -  )2  2 + log e-p + (1 - e-p )E (1 - b)-
                            2
                              1
          - log  + (1 -  )µ + (1 -  )2  2 - pE 1 - (1 - b)- .            (C.3)
                              2

Note that 1 - b  (0, 1]. Thus the term inside the expectation in (C.3) is positive if
and only if  >  . Under these circumstances, an increase in p lowers prices.
   Now consider the claim to a stream of dividends following process (C.1). Let St
denote the price of this claim. The condition for equilibrium, applied to this claim
implies
                              St = Et [Mt+1 (St+1 + Dt+1 )]




                                              42
which in turn implies a recursion for the price-dividend ratio

                         St           St+1 /Dt+1 + 1 Dt+1
                            = Et Mt+1                     .
                         Dt               St /Dt      Dt

The solution equals:
                                    
                             St                      (p)
                                =         (p)n =           .
                             Dt     n=1
                                                   1 - (p)

We calibrate the model using with µ = 0,  = 2%,  = e-.03 ,  = 1,  = 3, b = 0.40.




                                            43
References

Abernathy, E. M. (1940). The effect of change in environmental conditions upon the
  results of college exams. Journal of Psychology, 10:293­301.

Allen, F. and Gale, D. (2009). Understanding Financial Crises. Clarendon lectures in
  finance. Oxford University Press.

Arrow, K. J. (1971). Essays in the Theory of Risk-Bearing. Markham Publishing Co,
  Chicago.

Atkinson, R. C. and Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory: A proposed system and
  its control processes. In Spence, K. W. and Spence, J. T., editors, The Psychology
  of Learning and Motivation, volume 2, pages 89­105. Academic Press, New York.

Barberis, N., Greenwood, R., Jin, L., and Shleifer, A. (2015). X-CAPM: An extrap-
  olative capital asset pricing model. Journal of Financial Economics, 115(1):1­24.

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. (1998). A model of investor sentiment.
  Journal of Financial Economics, page 37.

Barberis, N. C. (2013). Thirty years of prospect theory in economics: A review and
  assessment. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1):173­196.

Barro, R. J. (2006). Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 121(3):823­866.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., and Shleifer, A. (2019). Memory, attention, and choice.
  NBER Working Paper No. 23256.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and Sannikov, Y. (2014). A macroeconomic model with a financial
  sector. American Economic Review, 104(2):379­421.



                                         44
Carr, H. A. (1931). The laws of association. Psychological Review, 38:212­228.

Chan, L. K. C., Jegadeesh, N., and Lakonishok, J. (1996). Momentum strategies. The
  Journal of Finance, 51(5):1681­1713.

Cohn, A., Engelmann, J., Fehr, E., and Marechal, M. A. (2015). Evidence for coun-
  tercyclical risk aversion: An experiment with financial professionals. The American
  Economic Review, 105(2):860­885.

Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., and Subrahmanyam, A. (1998). Investor psychology and
  security market under- and overreactions. The Journal of Finance, 53(6):1839­1885.

Ebbinghaus, H. (1885/1913). Memory: a contribution to experimental psychology.
  Teachers College, Columbia University, New York.

Ellsberg, D. (1961). Risk, ambiguity, and the savage axioms. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 75(4):643­669.

Epstein, L. G. and Schneider, M. (2003). Recursive multiple-priors. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory, 113(1):1­31.

Estes, W. K. (1955). Statistical theory of spontaneous recovery and regression. Psy-
  chological Review, 62:145­154.

Folkerts, S., Rutishauser, U., and Howard, M. (2018). Human episodic memory retrieval
  is accompanied by a neural contiguity effect. Journal of Neuroscience, 38(17):4200­
  4211.

French, K. R., Baily, M. N., Campbell, J. Y., Cochrane, J. H., Diamond, D. W., Duffie,
  D., Kashyap, A. K., Mishkin, F. S., Rajan, R. G., Scharfstein, D. S., Shiller, R. J.,
  Shin, H. S., Slaughter, M. J., Stein, J. C., and Stulz, R. M. (2010). The Squam Lake
  Report: Fixing the Financial System. Princeton University Press.


                                          45
Fuster, A., Laibson, D., and Mendel, B. (2010). Natural expectations and macroeco-
  nomic fluctuations. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(4):67­84.

Gabaix, X. (2019). Behavioral inattention. In Bernheim, D., DellaVigna, S., and
  Laibson, D., editors, Handbook of Behavioral Economics, volume 2. Elsevier.

Gennaioli, N. and Shleifer, A. (2018). A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and
  Financial Fragility. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Gilboa, I. and Schmeidler, D. (1989). Maxmin expected utility with non-unique prior.
  Journal of Mathematical Economics, 18(2):141­153.

Gilboa, I. and Schmeidler, D. (1995). Case-based decision theory. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 110(3):605­639.

Godden, D. R. and Baddeley, A. D. (1975). Context-dependent memory in two natural
  environments: On land and under water. British Journal of Psychology, 66:325­331.

Goetzmann, W. N., Kim, D., and Shiller, R. J. (2017). Crash beliefs from investor
  surveys. NBER Working Paper No. 22143.

Gomes, J. F., Grotteria, M., and Wachter, J. A. (2019). Cyclical dispersion in expected
  defaults. Review of Financial Studies, 32(4):1275­1308.

Gorton, G. and Metrick, A. (2012). Securitized banking and the run on repo. Journal
  of Financial Economics, 104(3):425­451.

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L. (2018). Time varying risk aversion. Journal
  of Financial Economics, 128(3):403­421.

Hansen, L. P. and Sargent, T. J. (2018). Structured uncertainty and model misspeci-
  fication. Working paper, New York University and University of Chicago.



                                          46
He, Z. and Krishnamurthy, A. (2013). Intermediary asset pricing. American Economic
  Review, 103(2):732­70.

Healey, M. K. and Kahana, M. J. (2016). A four­component model of age­related
  memory change. Psychological Review, 123(1):23­69.

Herbart, J. F. (1834). Lehrbuch zur Psychologie. In Kehrbach, K., editor, S¨
                                                                           amtliche
  Werke, volume 4, pages 376­377. August Wilhelm Unzer, K¨
                                                         onigsberg, 2nd edition.

Hong, H. and Stein, J. C. (1999). A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading,
  and overreaction in asset markets. The Journal of Finance, 54(6):2143­2184.

Howard, M. W. and Kahana, M. J. (2002). A distributed representation of temporal
  context. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 46(3):269­299.

Howard, M. W., Viskontas, I. V., Shankar, K. H., and Fried, I. (2012a). Ensembles
  of human MTL neurons "jump back in time" in response to a repeated stimulus.
  Hippocampus, 22:1833­1847.

Howard, M. W., Viskontas, I. V., Shankar, K. H., and Fried, I. (2012b). Ensembles
  of human MTL neurons "jump back in time" in response to a repeated stimulus.
  Hippocampus, 22:1833­1847.

Hume, D. (1748). An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Retrieved from
  Project Gutenberg: http://www.gutenberg.org/files/9662/9662-h/9662-h.htm.

Jegadeesh, N. and Titman, S. (1993). Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
  Implications for stock market efficiency. Journal of Finance, 48:65­91.

Jones, C. M. (2002). A century of stock market liquidity and trading costs. Working
  paper, Columbia University.




                                         47
Jost, A. (1897). Die Assoziationsfestigkeit in ihrer Abh¨
                                                        angigkeit von der Verteilung
  der Wiederholungen. Zeitschrift f¨
                                   ur Psychologie und Physiologie der Sinnesorgane,
  16:436­472.

Kahana, M. J. (1996). Associative retrieval processes in free recall. Memory & Cogni-
  tion, 24(1):103­109.

Kahana, M. J. (2012). Foundations of Human Memory. Oxford University Press, New
  York, NY.

Kahle, K. M. and Stulz, R. (2013). Access to capital, investment, and the financial
  crisis. Journal of Financial Economics, 110(2):280­299.

Ladd, G. T. and Woodworth, R. S. (1911). Elements of physiological psychology: A
  treatise of the activities and nature of the mind from the physical and experimental
  point of view. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, NY.

Loewenstein, G. (2000). Emotions in economic theory and economic behavior. The
  American Economic Review, 90(2):426­432.

Lohnas, L. J. and Kahana, M. J. (2014a). Compound cuing in free recall. Journal of
  Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 40(1):12­24.

Lohnas, L. J. and Kahana, M. J. (2014b). A retrieved context account of spacing
  and repetition effects in free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning
  Memory and Cognition, 40(3):755­764.

Longstaff, F. A. and Piazzesi, M. (2004). Corporate earnings and the equity premium.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 74:401­421.

Lucas, R. E. (1978). Asset prices in an exchange economy. Econometrica, 46:1429­1445.

Luce, R. D. (1959). Individual choice behavior. Wiley, New York.

                                         48
Malmendier, U. and Nagel, S. (2011). Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experi-
  ences affect risk taking? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1):373­416.

Malmendier, U. and Nagel, S. (2016). Learning from inflation experiences. The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 131(1):53­87.

Malmendier, U., Nagel, S., and Yan, Z. (2017). The making of hawks and doves:
  Inflation experiences on the FOMC. NBER Working Paper No. 23228.

Malmendier, U. and Shen, L. S. (2018). Scarred consumption. NBER Working Paper
  No. 24696.

Manning, J. R., Polyn, S. M., Baltuch, G., Litt, B., and Kahana, M. J. (2011a).
  Oscillatory patterns in temporal lobe reveal context reinstatement during memory
  search. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 108(31):12893­12897.

Manning, J. R., Polyn, S. M., Baltuch, G., Litt, B., and Kahana, M. J. (2011b).
  Oscillatory patterns in temporal lobe reveal context reinstatement during memory
  search. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 108(31):12893­12897.

Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance, 7(1):77­91.

McFadden, D. (2001). Economic choices. American Economic Review, 91(3):351­378.

McGeoch, J. A. (1932). Forgetting and the law of disuse. Psychological Review, 39:352­
  70.

Moreton, B. J. and Ward, G. (2010). Time scale similarity and long-term memory for
  autobiographical events. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(4):510­515.

Mullainathan, S. (2002). A memory-based model of bounded rationality. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 117(3):735­774.



                                          49
M¨
 uller, G. E. and Pilzecker, A. (1900). Experimental contributions to memory theory.
  Zeitschrift f¨
               ur Psychologie Eganzungsband, 1:1­300.

M¨
 uller, G. E. and Schumann, F. (1894). Experimentelle Beitr¨
                                                           age zur Untersuchung
  des Ged¨
         achtnisses. Zeitschrift f¨
                                  ur Psychologie und Physiologie der Sinnesorgane,
  6(80-191):257­339.

Murdock, B. B. (1974). Human memory: Theory and data. Lawrence Erlbaum and
  Associates, Potomac, MD.

Nagel, S. and Xu, Z. (2018). Asset pricing with fading memory. Working paper,
  University of Chicago and University of Michigan.

Polyn, S. M., Norman, K. A., and Kahana, M. J. (2009). A context maintenance
  and retrieval model of organizational processes in free recall. Psychological Review,
  116(1):129­156.

Pratt, J. W. (1976). Risk aversion in the small and in the large. Econometrica,
  44(2):420­420.

Raaijmakers, J. G. W. and Shiffrin, R. M. (1980). SAM: A theory of probabilistic search
  of associative memory. In Bower, G. H., editor, The Psychology of Learning and
  Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory, volume 14, pages 207­262. Academic
  Press, New York.

Savage, L. (1954). The Foundations of Statistics. Wiley, New York.

Sederberg, P. B., Gershman, S. J., Polyn, S. M., and Norman, K. A. (2011). Hu-
  man memory reconsolidation can be explained using the temporal context model.
  Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18(3):455­468.

Thorndike, E. L. (1932). The fundamentals of learning. Bureau of Publications, Teach-
  ers College, New York.

                                          50
Tsai, J. and Wachter, J. A. (2015). Disaster risk and its implications for asset pricing.
  Annual Review of Financial Economics, 7(1):219­252.

Uitvlugt, M. G. and Healey, M. K. (2019). Temporal proximity links unrelated news
  events in memory. Psychological Science, 30(1):92­104.

Underwood, B. J. (1948). 'Spontaneous recovery' of verbal associations. Journal of
  Experimental Psychology, 38:429­439.

Wachter, J. A. (2010). Asset allocation. Annual Review of Financial Economics,
  2(1):175­206.

Yaffe, R. B., Kerr, M. S., Damera, S., Sarma, S. V., Inati, S. K., and Zaghloul, K. A.
  (2014). Reinstatement of distributed cortical oscillations occurs with precise spa-
  tiotemporal dynamics during successful memory retrieval. Proceedings of the Na-
  tional Academy of Sciences, 111(52):18727­8732.




                                           51
                       0.6                                                                        0.6                                                                0.6 C.                                                                 0.6
                             L
                             A.           Inter-Item and Final Delay                                     BD.                         Age                                 F                         Gaining E xpertise                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D.                  Intellectual Ability
                                   Immediate Recall                                                            Younger Adults                                                          23 rd S ession                                                                                Top Quartile IQ
                                   Delayed Recall                                                              Older Adults                                                                                                                                                          Bottom Quartile IQ
                                                                                                                                                                                       1 st S ession
 Cond. Resp. P rob.




                                   Continual Distractor Recall




                      0.3                                                                          0.3                                                                0.3                                                                    0.3




                        0                                                                           0                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                            0                                                                                      0
                             -
                             -5
                              5                     -1
                                                     -1          1
                                                                 1       5
                                                                         5                                -5                    -1         1               5                      -5                    -1         1               5                                            -5                   -1         1             5
                                                          Lag                                                                        Lag                                                                     Lag                                                                                          Lag
                                                                                                  0.25                P aired-Associate Recall                                    Forward and Backward Probed Recall                                                      0.9 H.              Picture Recognition
                             E.                Final Free Recall                                         F.                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Prob. of 'sure old' response
                                                                                                                                                                                 G.
                      0.09                                                                         0.2                                                                                    Backward Cue                                                                    0.8
 Cond. Resp. P rob.




                                                                             Cond. Resp. P rob.




                                                                                                                                                                           0.5




                                                                                                                                                               % E rrors
                      0.08                                                                        0.15                                                                                                                                                                    0.7
                                                                                                                                                                            1

                                                                                                   0.1                                                                      1
                      0.07                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                           Forward Cue

                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                      0.06                                                                        0.05                                                                                                                                                                    0.5

                      0.05                                                                          0                                                                       0
                              -5         -3       -1      1          3   5                                -5 -4 -3 -2 -1                   1   2   3   4   5                     -5 -4      -3 -2       -1         1   2   3   4       5                                    -10 -8 -6 -4 -2                     2   4   6   8 10
                                                Across-List Lag                                                                      Lag                                                                     Lag                                                                                          Lag




Figure 1: Universality of Temporal Contiguity. A. When freely recalling a list
of studied items, people tend to successively recall items that appeared in neighbor-
ing positions. This temporal contiguity effect (TCE) appears as an in increase in the
conditional-response probability as a function of the lag, or distance, between stud-
ied items (the lag-CRP). The TCE appears invariant across conditions of immediate
recall, delayed recall, and continual-distractor recall, where subjects perform a demand-
ing distractor task between each of the studied items. B. Older adults exhibit reduced
temporal contiguity, indicating impaired contextual retrieval C. Massive practice in-
creases the TCE, as seen in the comparison of 1st and 23rd hour of recall practice. D.
Higher-IQ subjects exhibit a stronger TCE than individuals with average IQ. E. The
TCE is not due to inter-item associations as it appears in transitions across different
lists, separated by minutes, in a delayed final test given to subjects who studied and
recalled many lists. F. The TCE appears in conditional error gradients in cued recall,
where subjects tend to mistakenly recall items from pairs studied in nearby list posi-
tions. G. When probed to recall the item that either followed or preceded a cue item,
subjects occasionally commit recall errors whose distribution exhibits a TCE both for
forward and backward probes. H. The TCE also appears when subjects are asked to
recognize previously seen travel photos. When successive test items come from nearby
positions on the study list, subjects tendency to make high confidence "old" responses
exhibits a TCE when the previously tested item was also judged old with high confi-
dence. This effect is not observed for responses made with low confidence. Healey et
al (2019) provides references and descriptions of each experiment.




                                                                                                                                                           52
Figure 2: Retrieved Context and the spotlights of memory. In this illustration, memo-
ries appear as circles on the stage of life. All experiences that enter memory, as gated
by perception and attention, take their place upon the stage. Context serves as a set
of spotlights, each shining into memory and illuminating its associated features. The
prior state of context ct-1 illuminates recent memories, whereas the context retrieved
by the preceding experience, cIN , illuminates temporally and semantically contiguous
memories. Due to the recursive nature of context and the stochastic nature of retrieval,
the lamps can swing over time and illuminate different sets of prior features.




                                          53
 Figure 3: Posterior probability and asset allocation as a function of sample length

                                              Panel A: Posterior mean probability
                                             0.5                             Bayes
                                                                             Full information
                                                                             Retrieved context
                                             0.4
                     posterior probability




                                             0.3


                                             0.2


                                             0.1


                                              0
                                                   0   10    20         30         40            50
                                                             years of data

                                             Panel B: Allocation to the risky asset
                                              1


                                             0.8


                                             0.6
                     allocation




                                             0.4


                                             0.2


                                              0
                                                   0   10    20         30         40            50
                                                             years of data


Notes: The figure shows posterior mean of the probability of a depression (Panel A)
and the resulting asset allocation (Panel B) for the model presented in Section 3.




                                                               54
                                   Figure 4: A jump back in time: the price-dividend ratio




                              32
       Price-dividend ratio




                              30

                              28

                              26

                              24

                              22


                                      -2        0        2        4         6        8       10
                                                              time
Notes: The figure shows the equilibrium ratio of prices to dividends on the aggregate
market (in the model of Section 4), assuming the agent starts in the fully neutral
context and observes three periods of crisis features, followed by neutral features.




                                                             55
             Figure 5: Prices and returns in the model for momentum

                                  Panel A: Price-dividend ratios
                     26

                     25
                                                       Winners
                     24

                     23

                     22

                     21
                                                          Losers

                     20

                                  0       2       4             6          8            10
                                                   time
                                      Panel B: Net Returns
                      0.1
                                                                    Retrieved context
                                                                    Full information
                     0.08

                                                        Winners
                     0.06


                     0.04
                                                        Losers

                     0.02


                          0
                              0       2       4             6             8             10
                                                   time


Notes: The figure shows price-dividend ratios (Panel A) and returns (Panel B) for
the model presented in Section 5. We define winners as those assets with high price
appreciation between time 0 and time 1, and losers as those assets with low price
appreciation. The figure shows winners have higher returns than losers in subsequent
periods, assuming retrieved context theory. Under full information, however, prices
adjust immediately and expected returns equal the riskfree rate.




                                                  56
               Figure 6: Expected utility under context manipulation

                                  Panel A: Prior beliefs
                     -0.015



                      -0.02



                     -0.025



                      -0.03



                     -0.035
                              0   0.2     0.4       0.6    0.8   1
                                            allocation
                        Panel B: After context manipulation
                     -0.55



                      -0.6



                     -0.65



                      -0.7



                     -0.75
                             0    0.2     0.4       0.6    0.8   1
                                           allocation


Notes:Expected utility as a function of allocation to the risky asset in the model of
Section 6. Panel A shows utility prior to treatment by viewing a horror movie. Panel B
shows utility after context has been manipulated by introducing a feature suggestive
of danger (specifically, a horror movie).




                                            57
