                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE UNINTENDED IMPACTS OF AGRICULTURAL FIRES:
                          HUMAN CAPITAL IN CHINA

                                     Joshua S. Graff Zivin
                                           Tong Liu
                                        Yingquan Song
                                           Qu Tang
                                         Peng Zhang

                                     Working Paper 26205
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26205


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




We thank Tom Chang, Andrew Foster, Guojun He, Alberto Salvo, Klaus Zimmermann, and other
seminar participants at Xiamen University, Hong Kong Baptist University, Peking University,
Jinan University, Shanghai Jiaotong University, EAERE, and the National University of
Singapore for helpful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Tong Liu, Yingquan Song, Qu Tang, and Peng Zhang. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Unintended Impacts of Agricultural Fires: Human Capital in China
Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Tong Liu, Yingquan Song, Qu Tang, and Peng Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 26205
August 2019
JEL No. I20,I30,J20,O53,Q10,Q53

                                            ABSTRACT

The practice of burning agricultural waste is ubiquitous around the world, yet the external human
capital costs from those fires have been underexplored. Using data from the National College
Entrance Examination (NCEE) and agricultural fires detected by high-resolution satellites in
China during 2005 to 2011, this paper investigates the impacts of fires on cognitive performance.
To address the endogeneity of agricultural fires, we differentiate upwind fires from downwind
fires. We find that a one-standard-deviation increase in the difference between upwind and
downwind fires during the exam decreases the total exam score by 1.42 percent of a standard
deviation (or 0.6 point), and further decreases the probability of getting into first-tier universities
by 0.51 percent of a standard deviation.

Joshua S. Graff Zivin                              Qu Tang
University of California, San Diego                Jinan University
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519                         601 Huangpu Avenue West
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519                            Guangzhou
and NBER                                           China
jgraffzivin@ucsd.edu                               qutang@jnu.edu.cn

Tong Liu                                           Peng Zhang
Division of Social Science                         School of Accounting and Finance
The Hong Kong University of                        M507C Li Ka Shing Tower
Science and Technology                             The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon                           Hung Hom Kowloon, Hong Kong
Hong Kong                                          peng.af.zhang@polyu.edu.hk
tliuaj@connect.ust.hk

Yingquan Song
Peking University
No. 5 Yiheyuan Road
Haidian District
Beijing
China
songyingquan@pku.edu.cn
1. Introduction

The deliberate setting of fires as a tool for agricultural management has a long history

that remains ubiquitous around the world today (Andreae and Merlet, 2001). In

modern agriculture, the principal benefit from these fires takes the form of avoided

labor costs otherwise required to clear brush, remove crop residues, and manage

invasive plant species (Levine, 1991).         At the same time, these fires generate

considerable smoke comprised of a number of pollutants that are known to be harmful

to human health (e.g., Chay and Greenstone, 2003; Currie and Neidell, 2005;

Schlenker and Walker, 2015). Yet, the direct study of the causal relationship between

agricultural fires on human health has been greatly hampered by concerns of

endogeneity and the competing benefits and costs from local fires. One notable

exception is the recent study by Rangel and Vogl (2018), which examines the impacts

of sugarcane harvest fires in Brazil on infant health by exploiting wind direction for

empirical identification. Given the emergent literature showing that pollution can also

harm a range of other human capital outcomes (e.g., Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2012;

Sanders, 2012; Hanna and Oliva, 2015; Stafford 2015; Chang et al., 2016, 2019;

Ebenstein et al., 2016; Bharadwaj et al., 2017), the goal of this paper is to examine the

impacts of agricultural fires on one important component of human capital ­ cognitive

performance. Our analysis of impacts on young and healthy adults in a high-stakes

environment, generalizes and extends evidence from a recent working paper that

examines the impact of fires on survey-based measures of cognitive decline amongst

the elderly in China (Lai et al., 2018).

       More specifically, we exploit high-resolution satellite data on agricultural fires

in the granary regions of China and a unique geocoded dataset on test performance on

the Chinese National College Entrance Examination (NCEE) to investigate the


                                           1
impacts of fires on cognitive performance. This setting is attractive for a number of

reasons. First, the majority of agricultural fires take place in the developing world

where environmental controls are less stringent and the returns to human capital are

generally substantial. China, in particular, is the largest grain producer in the world,

with approximately one-third of all grain cropland managed through burning

practices.1

          Second, the NCEE is one of the most important institutions in China. It is

taken by all seniors in high school (around 9 million students each year) and the exam

score is almost the sole determinant of admission to institutions of higher learning in

China. As such, the NCEE serves as a critical channel for social mobility with

important implications for earnings over the lifecycle (Jia and Li, 2017). Test takers

face high-powered incentives to do as well as possible on the test and thus any impact

from agricultural fires is likely to represent an impact on cognitive performance rather

than effort.

          Finally, several features of the NCEE make it particularly well suited to causal

inference. The exam date is fixed, and thus self-selection on test dates are impossible.

Fortuitously for our research design, the exam takes place during the height of the

agricultural burning season. Moreover, students must take the exam in the county of

their household registration (hukou), rendering self-selection on exam locations

virtually impossible. Our NCEE data includes test scores for the universe of students

who were admitted into colleges and universities between 2005­2011 from the

granary regions which form the basis of our study.

          Despite the many virtues of our empirical setting, identifying the causal effect

of agricultural fires on cognitive performance is challenging for reasons alluded to


1
    China Ministry of Agriculture: http://www.moa.gov.cn/zwllm/zwdt/201605/t20160526_5151375.htm.

                                                 2
earlier. Agricultural fires are designed to reduce labor demands and improve farm

profitability, both of which could also impact test performance. For example, if some

agricultural labor is typically supplied by students, agricultural fires could improve

test performance by providing them with more time to prepare for their exams. To

address concerns of this type, we follow the approach recently pioneered by Rangel

and Vogl (2018), and leverage exogenous variation in local wind direction during the

exam period. Specifically, we compare the effect of upwind and downwind fires on

students' test scores, and interpret that difference as the causal effect of pollution

exposure on students' cognitive performance net of economic impacts. The implicit

assumption under this approach is that, ceteris parabus, students upwind and

downwind of the fire are differentially exposed to its pollution but share equally in its

economic influences.

       Our results suggest that a one-standard-deviation increase in the difference

between upwind and downwind fires during the NCEE decreases the total exam score

by 1.42 percent of a standard deviation (or 0.6 point), and further decreases the

probability of getting into first-tier universities by 0.51 percent of a standard deviation.

These impacts are entirely contemporaneous. Fires one to four weeks before the

exam have no impact on performance. Reassuringly, neither do fires one to four

weeks after the exam. The results are robust to alternative approaches for assigning

pollution to test takers as well as a number of other specification checks. While a lack

of pollution data from our study period does not allow us to utilize fires as an

instrumental variable, data from a more recent period suggests that, consistent with

evidence from Israel (Ebenstein et al., 2016) these cognitive impairments are likely

the result of exposure to fine and coarse particulate matter.




                                            3
       Together, these results suggest that agricultural fires impose non-trivial

external costs on the citizens living near them. They also contribute to ongoing

debates about the appropriate role of standardized testing in determining access to

higher education and employment opportunities (Ceci, 2000). While our analysis is

based on NCEE test performance, the impacts are likely much broader, touching all

aspects of life that rely on sharp thinking and careful calculations.       Indeed, the

impacts in lower-stakes environs may well be larger as the incentives to succumb to

the fatigue and lack of focus that also typically accompanies exposure to pollution are

greater, and thus more likely to exacerbate any impacts on cognitive decision making.

Given the importance of human capital for economic growth (Romer, 1986), these

impacts should play an important role in the calculus of developing country policy

makers when designing rules to manage the use of agricultural fires.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide more

background on the institutional setting. In Section 3 we describe each of the elements

in our merged dataset. Section 4 describes our empirical strategy followed by our

results in Section 5. Section 6 offers some concluding remarks.



2. Background

2.1 Agricultural Fire and Pollution

The practice of burning crop residues after an agricultural harvest in order to cheaply

prepare the land for the next planting is commonplace across the developing world

(e.g., Dhammapala et al., 2006; Viana et al., 2008; Gadde et al., 2009). While such

burning can greatly reduce labor costs to farmers and potentially help with pest

management, it also generates considerable particulate matter pollution (e.g., Li et al.,

2007; Wang et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2017). Particulate matter (PM) consists of

                                           4
airborne solid and liquid particles that can remain suspended in the air for extended

periods of time and travel lengthy distances. A large public health literature suggests

that exposure to PM harms health (see EPA, 2004 for a comprehensive review).

These risks arise primarily from changes in pulmonary and cardiovascular functioning

(Seaton et al., 1995), which may, in turn, impair cognitive performance due to

increased fatigue and decreased focus.

           Particles at the finer end of the spectrum are particularly important in our

empirical setting since they are small enough to be absorbed into the bloodstream and

can even become embedded deep within the brain stem (Oberdörster et al., 2004).

This can lead to inflammation of the central nervous system, cortical stress, and

cerebrovascular damage (Peters et al., 2006). As such, greater exposure to fine

particles is associated with lower intelligence and diminished performance over a

range of cognitive domains (Suglia et al., 2008; Power et al., 2010; Weuve et al.,

2012).       Consistent with this epidemiological evidence, a recent study of Israeli

teenagers found that students perform worse on high-stakes exams on days with

higher PM levels (Ebenstein et al., 2016).

2.2 Agricultural Fire in China

China is the largest grain producer in the world, accounting for 24% (0.62 billion tons)

of global production.2 Despite a legal ban on burning practices, approximately 31%

of the stubble/stalks from maize, wheat, and rice plantings are burnt in situ, largely

within China's granary regions.             These fires generally take place annually each

summer, potentially coinciding with the timing of the NCEE which takes place each

year on June 7th and 8th.




2
    Food and Agricultural Organization, United Nations: http://www.fao.org/worldfoodsituation/csdb.

                                                   5
         Figure 1 illustrates the spatial distribution of agricultural fires during the

NCEE from 2005 to 2011. Fire points are largely concentrated in four granary

regions: Henan, Shandong, Anhui, and Jiangsu Provinces.3 Due to missing NCEE

data in Jiangsu in several years, our core analyses are focused on Henan, Shandong,

and Anhui (referred to as baseline provinces hereafter). As can be seen in Figure 2,

the peak of agricultural fires in these regions generally coincides with the time of the

NCEE. In total, there are 401 counties in our baseline provinces.

2.3 NCEE

As the name suggests, the NCEE is a national exam used to determine admission into

higher education institutions at the undergraduate level in China. It is held annually

on June 7th and 8th, and is generally taken by students in their last year of high school.

In contrast to college testing in the U.S., it is almost the sole determinant for higher

education admission in China. Given the substantial returns to higher education in

this setting (Jia and Li, 2017), this is a very high stakes exam.                            Every year,

approximately 9 million students in China take the exam to compete for admission to

approximately 2,300 colleges and universities.

         The NCEE has two primary tracks: the arts track and the science track.4 All

students are tested on three compulsory subjects regardless of track: Chinese,

mathematics, and English, with each worth 150 points. Students in the arts track take

an additional combined test that includes history, politics, and geography worth 300

points, while students in the science track take an additional combined test that

includes physics, chemistry, and biology worth 300 points. Thus, regardless of track,

the maximum achievable score for each student is 750 points.

3
  A province is the largest administrative subdivision in China, followed by the prefecture, county and
town.
4
  Students choose to study either in the arts track or in the science track at the end of their first year of
high school.

                                                     6
        In our focal provinces, the Chinese and math exams are scheduled for 9­

11:30am and 3­5pm on June 7th, and the English and track test are scheduled for 9­

11:30am and 3­5pm on June 8th.5 Since provinces have some discretion in the design

of their tests, exam difficulty can vary by track, province, and year. Our core analysis

deploys province-by-year-by-track fixed effects to account for this possibility.

        The NCEE tests are graded one to two weeks after the exams are completed by

professionals (trained teachers) in hotels in each of the respective provincial capitals.

Since this grading occurs in locations that differ from test takers in terms of both

space and time, we are confident that the effect we estimate on NCEE scores is not

the result of any potential impacts on graders.



3. Data

In order to measure the causal effect of agricultural fires on NCEE test performance in

China, we require data from several broad categories. This section describes each of

those pieces as well as details on how they are linked. As noted earlier, our core

analysis is based on the test performance of students from Henan, Shandong, and

Anhui Provinces who took the NCEE between 2005 and 2011.

3.1 Test Score Data

The NCEE data were obtained from the China Institute for Educational Finance

Research at Peking University. This dataset provides a unique identifier and the total

test score for the universe of students enrolled in a Chinese institution of higher

education during our study period. The dataset also reports the subject specialization


5
  Shandong province extended the NCEE from two days to three days from June 7th to June 9th during
2007­2014. One exam on basic knowledge of technology, arts, sports, social practice, humanities and
science was added on the morning of June 9th. This exam has 60 points. The total score for the NCEE is
still 750 points because the combined test shrunk from 300 points to 240 points. To take this change
into consideration, we include fires from June 7th to June 9th in 2007­2011 for Shandong, and find
similar results, as shown in the robustness checks.

                                                  7
for each student, allowing us to explore heterogeneity across the science and art

tracks.6 Social and demographic characteristics for exam takers are not available.

         Importantly, the student ID contains a six-digit code for county of residence,

which allows us to match students to the county administrative centers. Testing

facilities are located in local schools which are universally very close to county

administrative center. 7        Therefore, we use the county administrative center to

approximate the testing facilities. The information on which testing facility a student

is assigned is unavailable. Our core analytic sample includes observations from

approximately 1.3 million students. We supplement this dataset with data on the cut-

off scores that determine admission eligibility to the elite universities in order to

separately examine the impacts at the upper-end of the performance distribution. This

data provides province-year-track specific thresholds, and is obtained from a website

specialized for the exam: gaokao.com.

3.2. Agricultural Fire Data

Data on daily agricultural fires are collected from two satellites named TERRA and

AQUA, which rely upon Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)

sensors to infer ground-level fire activity. The satellites overpass China four times a

day (around 1:30 am, 10:30 am, 1:30 pm, and 10:30 pm in local time), and report all

fire points detected with 1-km resolution (Justice et al., 2002; Kaufman et al., 1998).

The fires are detected based on thermal anomalies, surface reflectance, and land use

(Giglio et al., 2016). Since the size of a fire cannot reliably be inferred from satellite



6
  Unfortunately, the dataset does not report scores by specific subjects, thus precluding our ability to
examine the impact of fires on specific subsets of the test.
7
  While we do not have data on the precise location of testing facilities during our study period, we can
access this from more recent periods. In 2018, there were 494 testing facilities in our provinces of
interest and 94% were within 5 km from the county administrative center. The furthest testing facility
was less than 10 km from the center. Since testing occurs in high schools, and these locations are
largely fixed, we are confident in our assertion that nearly all testing occurred near the county
administrative center during our study period.

                                                   8
data (Giglio et al., 2009), we treat fires in adjacent pixels as distinct fires. We exploit

data on fire radiative power, a measure of fire intensity, to at least partially probe the

importance of this assumption.

          A fire is linked to NCEE performance within a county if it occurs within a 50-

km of the county administrative center during the two-day exam period in each year.

Alternative distances are explored as part of our robustness analyses. Since proximity

to a fire is likely correlated with the economic benefits as well as the environmental

harms from fires, we eschew distance-weighting strategies on fires in our core

analysis. These are, nonetheless, explored in our robustness checks.

3.3. Meteorological Data

Meteorological data is important for two reasons. First, as detailed in the next section,

we exploit detailed data on wind direction to contrast impacts of those upwind and

downwind of a given fire. Second, weather may also confound the interpretation of

our results since the incidence of agricultural fires may be correlated with

meteorological conditions. Our weather data are obtained from the National Oceanic

and Atmospheric Administration of the United States.

          We collect daily average weather data on temperature, precipitation, dew point,

wind speed, wind direction and atmospheric pressure from 44 local weather stations

during our sample period. Daily average wind direction is reported based on the

hourly wind direction and wind speed through vector decomposition (Gilhousen, 1987;

Grange 2014).8 Given the sensitivity of wind direction to topography and other quite

localized factors, we assign wind to test locations based on monitor data from the




8
    See http://www.webmet.com/met_monitoring/622.html and https://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/wndav.shtml.

                                                9
source closest to the county administrative center, and drop counties with no wind

stations within 50 km.9

         We extract other weather data during the exam time and then convert from

station to county using the inverse-distance weighting (IDW) method (Deschênes and

Greenstone, 2007, 2011). The basic algorithm calculates weather for a given site

based on a weighted average of all station observations within a 50-km radius of the

county center, where the weights are the inverse distance between the weather station

and the county administrative center.

3.4. Pollution Data

While the detrimental impacts of agricultural fires on air quality have been

documented in the environmental science literature, data availability does not allow us

to make this link explicitly in our setting. Ground monitoring pollution data at the

station-day level in China is not available prior to 2011, and there are infamous stories

of data manipulation of the Air Pollution Index and PM10 in China apply to the period

prior to 2013 (Ghanem and Zhang, 2014). 10 In addition, satellite data is not well

suited for ground-level measurement at fine temporal and spatial scales required for

our analyses, especially during burning seasons with smoke plumes (You et al., 2015).

Nonetheless, we provide a first-stage estimation, of sorts, by estimating the

relationship between air pollution and agricultural fires using data from a more recent

period: 2013­2016. Since NCEE data is not available for this period, we view this



9
  Given the relative sparsity of weather stations in our study areas, assigning wind direction to a given
location by using inverse distance weighting strategies from multiple monitors is not feasible
(Palomino and Martin, 1995). It is worth noting that dropping counties without a wind station within 50
km is tantamount to dropping the most rural counties in our sample. Consistent with this notion that
they are more agrarian, we see that the average number of fires during the NCEE in the dropped
counties was 14, as opposed to the 7 fires in the counties that retain for our analysis. While these
differences will not bias our estimates, they do have potentially important implications for
generalizability.
10
   Pollution measurement is unlikely to be manipulated after 2013-2014 due to automation and real-
time reporting in the provision of data from monitoring stations in China.

                                                  10
analysis as one designed to shed light on the mechanisms through which agricultural

fires might impact cognitive performance.

       Daily pollution data are obtained from the China National Environmental

Monitoring Center (CNEMC), which is affiliated with the Ministry of Environmental

Protection of China. Monitoring stations report data for the six major air pollutants ­

particulate matter less than 10 microns in diameter (PM10), particulate matter less than

2.5 microns in diameter (PM2.5), sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, and carbon

monoxide ­ that are used to construct the daily Air Quality Index (AQI) in China. For

each pollutant, we construct a two-day average concentration level, corresponding to

the length of the exam period. Fires that took place more than 50 km from a county

center are excluded from this analysis. We select all pollution monitoring stations

within 50 km from a county administrative center and calculate the pollution level at

the center using the IDW method. Our analysis relies on data from 212 distinct

pollution monitors, with an average distance of 24.5 km.

3.5 Summary Statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics from our merged dataset. We have data on nearly

1.4 million test takers from 159 counties in our baseline provinces from 2005­2011.

The average test performance over our study period was 553.3 out of 750, with

slightly higher average scores in the science track (relative to the art track). Each

county experiences an average of 7 fires during the two-day test period over the

course of our study period, although variability across testing-site-years is

considerable.   These fires are nearly equally likely to take place upwind and

downwind of testing centers, with an average of 1.5 upwind, 2.0 downwind, and the

remainder vertical fires that are neither upwind or downwind based on the 45-degree

measure of dominant wind direction (as detailed in the next section). Summary


                                          11
statistics    on   meteorological      conditions,      including temperature,          dew point,

precipitation, wind speed and atmospheric pressure, are also listed in the bottom panel

of Table 1.



4. Empirical Strategy

Our goal is to estimate the effect of agricultural fires on NCEE test performance. We

start by estimating the following equation:

                          = 0 +  +   +  +  +                                                       (1)

where  denotes the logarithm of the exam score of student i in county c in

province p in year t. We use  to denote the total number of agricultural fires in

county c on the two exam days in each year.  is a vector of the two-day averages

of our meteorological variables during exam days. As is standard in the literature

(Deschênes and Greenstone, 2007), we use a non-parametric binned approach to

flexibly control for the potential nonlinear effects of these weather variables.11 We

use county fixed effects  to control for any unobserved county-specific time

invariant characteristics.       We also include  , province-by-year-by-track fixed

effects, to control for differences in exam difficulty by major track in a province and

year. These fixed effects will also control for any other shock that is common across

cohorts studying the same subjects within a province, such as variation in instructor

quality at local high schools. The error terms  are clustered by county to allow

for autocorrelation within each county.12 Thus, the identifying variation we exploit to

estimate Equation (1) is based on comparisons of student performance in the same


11
   Specifically, we select 7 bins for temperature and dew point (5 °F for each bin), 8 bins for wind
speed (2 miles per hour for each bin), 6 bins for precipitation (0.5 inch for each bin), and 5 bins for
pressure (200 millibars for each bin).
12
   Our estimates are robust to alternative clustering by prefecture, as well as two-way clustering by
county and by year. See the robustness checks for details.

                                                 12
major track of counties within the same province who varied in their exposure to

agricultural fires within a given year.

         One limitation of the approach described above is that proximity to

agricultural fires is not randomly assigned, raising potential endogeneity concerns. In

particular, agricultural fires are meant to reduce the labor demands of the farm. If

children provide some of this labor, then the presence or absence of nearby fires may

influence the time that students have to prepare for their exams.                               Similarly,

agricultural fires may increase farm profitability and indirectly influence test

performance through a variety of income channels. To address these concerns, we

utilize data on wind direction.13

         In particular, we differentiate between upwind fires and downwind fires,

exploiting the fact that upwind fires will have a larger impact on air quality at a

county center than downwind fires, but that wind direction is irrelevant for the labor

and income channels that might threaten identification of the pollution-driven impacts

of fires in this setting. As such, the primary model specification that we deploy for

the majority of our analyses takes the following form:

             
   = 0 +   +   +   +  +  +  (2)

where  denotes the number of agricultural fires located in the upwind

direction of county c in province p in year t, and  represents fires

located in the opposite direction. The other variables are identical to those used in

Equation (1).

         Upwind fires are defined as those located within a 45-degree central angle

from the dominant daily wind direction in each county following the procedure



13
   A nascent literature exploits variations in wind directions to causally estimate pollution's effect (e.g.,
Anderson, 2015; Schlenker and Walker, 2015; Deryugina et al., 2016).

                                                    13
detailed in Rangel and Vogl (2018).14 Downwind fires are defined as those scattered

in the opposite direction to upwind fires. The remaining fires are classified as vertical

fires and should be viewed as areas that are exposed to more fire-driven pollution

exposure than those exposed to downwind fires but less than those exposed to upwind

fires. In some cases, we aggregate downwind and vertical fires into a larger category,

which we refer to as non-upwind fires. See Figure 3 for an illustration of how these

classifications are constructed.

        In our analysis, daily upwind and downwind fires within a county are

aggregated to correspond to the two-day period of the exam. The parameters of

                                            
interest are  ­ the impact of upwind fires,  ­ the impact of downwind fires,

       
and  -  , which captures the difference between upwind and downwind

effects on test scores, and therefore can be interpreted as the causal effect of

agricultural fires on test scores via air pollution.



5. Results

This section presents our empirical results. We begin by exploring the impacts of

agricultural fires on NCEE test performance. Then we conduct additional analyses

exploring the timing of those effects and several dimensions of heterogeneity. Next

we present a series of robustness checks. This is followed by an exploration of

mechanisms using available pollution data from a more recent period to examine the

relationship between agricultural fires and criteria air pollutant concentrations upwind

and downwind of the burn site.




14
  We also explore broader and narrower angles to determine upwind fires as part of our robustness
analysis. The results remain qualitatively unchanged.

                                               14
5.1 Baseline Findings

Table 2 presents our primary results on the impacts of agricultural fires on exam

scores in logarithms. As shown in column (1), combining all fires together as in

Equation (1) yields attenuated estimates that are close to zero and statistically

insignificant. Column (2) shows that upwind fires significantly reduce test scores,

whereas columns (3) and (4) reveal no significant effect for downwind and non-

upwind fires, respectively.

       Our main specification in column (5), where we put upwind and downwind

fires together, shows that a one-point increase in the difference between upwind and

downwind fires leads to a 0.0126 percent drop in scores. When we compare upwind

and non-upwind fires as an alternative, the coefficient remains negative and

significant, but is smaller in magnitude (see column 6). This diminished effect size is

consistent with the notion that students at testing locations that lie in a vertical wind

direction from the fire are exposed to more fire-related air pollution than downwind

students but less than those that are upwind. While we spend more time putting these

magnitudes in context later in the paper, it is worth noting that they are broadly

consistent with the negative impacts of extreme heat on test performance found by

others in China as well as other countries (Park, 2018; Graff Zivin et al., 2018a,

2018b).

5.2 Dynamic Effects

We next explore the temporal effects of exposure to agricultural fires. In particular,

Figure 4 depicts results by moving exposure windows up to four weeks before and

four weeks after the NCEE exam dates. The results confirm that the impacts are

entirely contemporaneous. We find no statistically significant impact of agricultural

fires in the one to four weeks prior to the NCEE. Our falsification test based on future

                                           15
fires is similarly insignificant. Whether exposure to fires has a long-run impact on

cognitive attainment, above and beyond the effects that we are finding for cognitive

performance is an open question that cannot be answered using our research design

which exploits short-run `shocks' to pollution exposure.

5.3 Heterogeneity

In this section, we explore the heterogeneity of our core results along two dimensions,

as shown in Table 3.      The first column simply reproduces the results from our

preferred specification for our primary results (column 5 in Table 2). Columns (2)

and (3) of Table 3 explore heterogeneity along another dimension: the subject track.

It appears that the impacts are negative and highly statistically significant for those in

the science track while only marginally significant for those in the arts track. This

may reflect the differential sensitivity of the prefrontal cortex ­ the part of the brain

responsible for more mathematical style reasoning, and is consistent with other

evidence on the impacts of environmental stressors on cognitive performance (Graff

Zivin et al., 2018a). This pattern of results might also, at least partly, be driven by the

gender composition of students across tracks. While we do not have individual level

gender data, the male ratio is typically much higher in science track than arts track

and other work has found the cognitive performance of males to be more sensitive to

PM pollution than females (Ebenstein et al., 2016).

       The next four columns of Table 3 examine how the impacts of agricultural

fires vary across the student ability distribution by estimating Equation (2) using a

quantile regression approach. This regression is especially important for two reasons.

First, since we only observe NCEE scores for students that were eventually admitted

to an institution of higher learning, we might be worried about sample selection

resulting from negative effects at the lower end of the ability distribution. Second,

                                            16
differences in impacts across the ability distribution could have profound long-run

impacts on income inequality given the highly nonlinear returns to scores. Our results

find no impacts among low ability students, thus minimizing concerns about selection

bias. Moreover, the impacts appear to be concentrated near the very top of the

performance distribution ­ above the 75th percentile. This can be seen most clearly in

Figure 5, which further breaks down estimates by decile.

        Column (8) offers another perspective on the higher end of the ability

distribution by focusing on the impacts of agricultural fires on the likelihood of

admission into an elite university in China based on the cutoff scores that govern that

process. The cutoff score in each province is the lowest score of students admitted to

the first-tier universities in China. It is determined by the admission quota of each

university and the ranking of student scores in each province. Upwind fires continue

to have a significant negative impact on test performance. A one percentage point (or

one standard deviation) increase in the difference between upwind and downwind

fires, decreases the probability of admission to an elite university by 0.027 percent (or

0.51 percent of a standard deviation). Given the sizable impacts of an elite education

in China on lifetime earnings (Jia and Li, 2017), these impacts should be viewed as

economically meaningful, even if they may be largely re-distributional by privileging

the admission of students from less exposed counties over those from more exposed

ones.

5.4 Robustness Checks

In this section, we provide a number of robustness checks. We begin by exploring

alternative ways to assign the exposure of test takers to agricultural fires. The first

column of Table 4 reproduces our main results, which limit our focus to fires within

50 km of a testing center. The next four columns vary that distance from 30-70 km in

                                           17
10-km increments. As can be seen in Panel A, the impact of an additional fire is

considerably larger when we focus on nearer fires, but this pattern of results no longer

holds when we standardize our outcome measure based on the variability of test

scores, as in Panel B. Unsurprisingly, the results become smaller as we include test

takers further away from the fire. At a 70-km radius, as seen in column (5) of Table 4,

the results are no longer significant. Together, these results highlight the relatively

localized impacts of agricultural fires.

       In columns (6) ­ (8) of Table 4, we explore the sensitivity of our results to

alternative central angle measures to determine whether an individual is upwind or

downwind of a fire. Recall that our baseline model specification uses the angle of 45

degrees to define upwind and downwind fires (see column 1). As we alter the angle

to 30, 60, and 90 degrees, the estimates remain significant, but become smaller as the

angles become larger. This pattern of results is consistent with standard models of

pollution dispersion, as wider angles will expand the `treated' upwind sample to

include more individuals with peripheral levels of exposure. It also further validates

that our upwind and downwind measures are doing a reasonable job of capturing the

relevant transport of pollution from fires to test centers.

       Table 5 experiments with alternative ways to define a fire.           Column (1)

reproduces our core results from Table 2, while column (2) takes a more aggressive

approach to classifying fires as exogenous by limiting our attention to those fires

within the 50-km radius of a county administrative center but that take place in a

different county. While our use of wind direction is meant to capture the economic

effects from agricultural fires, the enforcement of any policies designed to limit

agricultural fires or protect air quality occurs primarily at the county level (He et al.,

2018). Thus, our focus on non-local fires should help address any potential concerns


                                            18
about the endogeneity of local policies vis-à-vis testing outcomes. The results using

this specification are largely unchanged.15

         In column (3), we inverse-distance weight fires to better reflect the distance of

the fire from the county administrative center. In column (4), we account for the

intensity of the fire by weighting by the fire radiative power (FRP) in Watts of each

event.    The estimates remain statistically significant, but are slightly smaller in

magnitude than those under our preferred specification. Finally, we use reliability

measures from the fire dataset to adjust for the probability that a hotspot is genuinely

a fire (see Rangel and Vogl, 2018 for more details). The results after this adjustment

are statistically significant and slightly larger in magnitude.

         In Table 6, we explore a final set of robustness checks. As before, the first

column reproduces our core results for ease of comparability. We report the estimates

using alternative ways of clustering standard errors either by prefecture in column (2),

or by county and by year (two-way clustering) in column (3). The estimates are

robust to these different clustering approaches, suggesting that spatial and temporal

autocorrelation is not a big concern in our setting. In column (4), we add controls for

visibility. These controls are important as impaired visibility may trigger avoidance

behavior in the lead up to the exam.16 In addition, gray skies can impair one's sense

of psychological well-being, particularly if worried that diminished air quality might

affect their test performance. In column (5), we expand our focus in Shandong to the

third day, which only takes place in this province. In column (6), we add the data we

have from Jiangsu Province, which only covers part of our study period.                             The

15
  On average, 6 of the 7 fires within 50 km of the county center occur in another county. That said,
they are typically further from testing locations ­ 35.2 km versus 19.5 km away on average ­ which
may explain their diminished significance.

16
  Since visibility is significantly correlated with PM (the Pearson coefficient between visibility and
PM2.5 is -0.24, and is -0.38 after controlling for temperature and dew point), we model it using 3 miles-
of-visibility bins (a total of 5 bins).

                                                  19
coefficients barely budge across the first three checks. The results are slightly smaller

and now only significant at the 10-percent level under the final one.

          In the end, our results appear quite robust to alternative methods of measuring

fires, assigning exposure, clustering standard errors, and defining our sample

population. That the magnitudes of results change in expected directions as we

tighten or liberalize the approach we use to assign fires to testing facilities is

particularly reassuring.

5.5 Mechanisms: The Effect of Agricultural Fires on Air Pollution

In this section, we estimate the effect of agricultural fires on air pollution, to confirm

that air pollution is the channel through which agricultural fires affect students' exam

scores and to place our results in a broader context. As described earlier, we do so by

using data from the 2013­2016 period for which daily air pollution measurements,

even in more rural areas, are available. The ideal design for this analysis would focus

exclusively on the two-day exam period, but this leaves us with limited statistical

power.     Instead, we construct a panel of two-day moving averages of pollutant

concentrations in June and link them with proximate agricultural fires during the same

period.     The empirical model for this estimation is nearly identical to the one

described in Equation (2), except that the dependent variable is now one of the six

criteria air pollutants. Weather variables are now measured as two-day averages of

the corresponding to each moving two-day period in June for which we have pollution

measures.

          The results are shown in Table 7. The first two rows list the two-day averages

and standard deviations of each pollutant in June during 2013­2016. The PM10

concentration is approximately 78 µg/m3 and the PM2.5 concentration is

approximately 46 µg/m3, both of which greatly exceed World Health Organization

                                            20
guidelines. The other pollutant levels are more modest, although still higher than

those typically found in developed countries. Turning to our estimates, we find a

significant and substantial effect of upwind agricultural fires on PM10 and PM2.5. A

one-point increase in upwind agricultural fires increases PM10 and PM2.5

concentrations by 0.476 µg/m3 and 0.262 µg/m3, respectively. We also detect a weak

effect of downwind fires on PM10, and the coefficient of upwind-downwind difference

becomes insignificant compared with that of PM2.5. This may be due to the fact that

PM10 is heavier than PM2.5 and thus less responsive to wind direction. The impacts on

PM2.5 are non-trivial: a one-standard-deviation change in the upwind-downwind

difference is associated with a 5.6 percent standard-deviation change in PM2.5.

       In contrast, downwind fires have no impacts on air quality, providing further

validation for our empirical strategy to uncover the pollution-driven impacts of

agricultural fires on NCEE test performance. We find no effect of agricultural fires

on other pollutants, including SO2, NO2, CO, and O3. In general, these estimates are

consistent with those found in the scientific literature (Li et al., 2007) and recent

empirical analysis done by Rangel and Vogl (2018) in Brazil, both of which find that

agricultural fires primarily emits PM.

       Given that the samples are different for our estimates of the impacts of fires on

pollution and the impacts of fires on test performance, we are unable to provide an

instrumental variable estimate of the effect of PM on student scores. We provide a

rough estimate akin to Wald estimator as an alternative. Using the ratio of the

reduced-form estimates over the first-stage estimates based on the differences in

upwind and downwind fires, we find that a one-standard-deviation elevation in PM2.5

(29.6 µg/m3) will lower average student scores by 13.6 percent of a standard deviation

(5.8 points). While these magnitudes are quite modest, they are roughly three times


                                          21
as large as those found for the impact of PM on Israeli test takers (3.9 percent for

PM2.5, see Ebenstein et al., 2016). A simple transformation further shows that a 10

µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 reduces test scores by 4.6 percent of a standard deviation,

which is larger than the 1.7 percent estimated from Ebenstein et al. (2016). This

likely reflects the higher levels of pollution in our setting, but may also be the result

of our empirical strategy which relies on wind direction rather than an approach that

assigns pollution equally to all of those within a certain distance of a pollution

monitor.    In addition, our estimates are also larger than those estimated for

temperature (e.g., Graff Zivin et al., 2018a, 2018b; Goodman et al., forthcoming).

That said, our estimates here should be treated with some caution, as our `two-stage

approach' relies on data from adjacent but distinct time periods.



6 Conclusions

In this paper, we analyze the relationship between agricultural fires and cognitive

performance on high-stakes exams in China.           We find that fires decrease the

performance of students, with effects concentrated amongst the highest ability test

takers. A one-standard-deviation increase in the difference between upwind and

downwind fires during the NCEE decreases the total exam score by 1.42 percent of a

standard deviation (or 0.6 point), and further decreases the probability of getting into

first-tier universities by 0.51 percent of a standard deviation. The effects are entirely

contemporaneous and generally quite localized. To our knowledge, this is the first

evidence that the negative impacts of agricultural fires extend beyond health to

include impacts on human cognition among otherwise unimpaired young adults.

       Given the substantial returns to higher education in China, these results

suggest that agricultural fires may exacerbate the challenges associate with rural-


                                           22
urban inequality that pervades the Chinese economy. At the same time, they help

bolster the case for the enforcement of new regulations that limit agricultural fires in

China and provide additional evidence on the need for interventions in much of the

less developed world where these practices are largely ungoverned. Moreover, the

impacts almost certainly extend beyond agricultural fires to include forest and other

forms of wildfires, which are expected to intensify in the coming decades under

climate change. Since these types of fires tend to be large and far more harmful to

human health (e.g., Frankenberg et al. 2005; Jayachandran 2009; Borgschulte et al.,

2018), it seems likely that their impacts on human capital endpoints like cognition are

also likely to be substantial.

         The implications beyond fires are also profound. Our analysis suggests that

the principal driver of these cognitive impairments is particulate matter pollution. A

simple back of the envelope calculation suggests that a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM2.5

reduces test scores by 4.6 percent of a standard deviation. These results are larger

than those found for performance on high school exit exam performance in Israel

(Ebenstein et al., 2016). They may also help explain the emerging evidence on the

detrimental effects of particulate matter on labor productivity in cognitively

demanding occupations (Heyes et al., 2016; Chang et al., 2019; Archsmith et al.,

2018).

         While performance on high-stakes exams is clearly cognitively demanding, it

remains an open question how these impacts translate to the cognitive tasks that are

more typical of everyday living. Our results are also silent on how exposure to fires,

or the pollution they emit, may impact learning and thus cognitive attainment. Should

such impacts exist, they pose particular challenges for communities that experience




                                          23
repeated and prolonged exposure to fires of this sort. Together, they comprise a

fruitful area for future research.




                                      24
References

Anderson, M. L. (2015). As the wind blows: The effects of long-term exposure to air

    pollution on mortality (No. w21578). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Andreae, M. O., & Merlet, P. (2001). Emission of trace gases and aerosols from

    biomass burning. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 15(4), 955­966.

Archsmith, J., Heyes, A., & Saberian, S. (2018). Air quality and error quantity:

    Pollution and performance in a high-skilled, quality-focused occupation. Journal

    of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 5(4), 827-863.

Bharadwaj, P., Gibson, M., Graff Zivin, J., & Neilson, C. (2017). Gray matters: fetal

    pollution exposure and human capital formation. Journal of the Association of

    Environmental and Resource Economists, 4(2), 505-542.

Borgschulte, M., Molitor, D., & Zou, E. (2018). Air pollution and the labor market:

    Evidence from wildfire smoke. Working Paper.

Calderon-Garciduenas, L., Azzarelli, B., Acuna, H., Garcia, R., Gambling, T.M.,

    Osnaya, N., Monroy, S., Del Rosario Tizapantzi, M., Carson, J.L., Villarreal-

    Calderon,    A.   &    Rewcastle,    B.    (2002).   Air    pollution   and   brain

    damage. Toxicologic Pathology, 30(3), 373-389.


Ceci, S. J. (2000). So near and yet so far: Lingering questions about the use of

    measures of general intelligence for college admission and employment

    screening. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 6(1), 233.


Chang, T., Graff Zivin, J., Gross, T., & Neidell, M. (2019). The effect of pollution on

    worker productivity: evidence from call center workers in China. American

    Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(1), 151-72.




                                          25
Chang, T., Graff Zivin, J., Gross, T., & Neidell, M. (2016). Particulate pollution and

    the productivity of pear packers. American Economic Journal: Economic

    Policy, 8(3), 141-69.

Chay, K. Y., & Greenstone, M. (2003). The impact of air pollution on infant mortality:

    evidence from geographic variation in pollution shocks induced by a

    recession. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1121-1167.

Chen, J., Li, C., Ristovski, Z., Milic, A., Gu, Y., Islam, M. S., Wang, S., Hao, J.,

    Zhang, H., He, C. & Guo, H. (2017). A review of biomass burning: emissions

    and impacts on air quality, health and climate in China. Science of the Total

    Environment, 579, 1000-1034.

Currie, J., & Neidell, M. (2005). Air pollution and infant health: what can we learn

    from California's recent experience?. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3),

    1003-1030.

Deryugina, T., Heutel, G., Miller, N. H., Molitor, D., & Reif, J. (2016). The mortality

    and medical costs of air pollution: Evidence from changes in wind direction (No.

    w22796). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Deschênes, O., & Greenstone, M. (2007). The economic impacts of climate change:

    evidence from agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather. American

    Economic Review, 97(1), 354-385.

Deschênes, O., & Greenstone, M. (2011). Climate change, mortality, and adaptation:

    Evidence from annual fluctuations in weather in the US. American Economic

    Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4), 152-85.

Dhammapala, R., Claiborn, C., Corkill, J., & Gullett, B. (2006). Particulate emissions

    from wheat and Kentucky bluegrass stubble burning in eastern Washington and

    northern Idaho. Atmospheric Environment, 40(6), 1007-1015.


                                          26
Ebenstein, A., Lavy, V., & Roth, S. (2016). The long-run economic consequences of

    high-stakes      examinations:   evidence     from     transitory   variation    in

    pollution. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(4), 36-65.

Environmental Protection Agency, U. S. (2004). Air quality criteria for particulate

    matter. National Center for Environmental Assessment. Research Triangle Park.

Frankenberg, Elizabeth, Douglas McKee, and Duncan Thomas. (2005). Health

    consequences of forest fires in Indonesia. Demography 42(1): 109-129.

Gadde, B., Bonnet, S., Menke, C., & Garivait, S. (2009). Air pollutant emissions from

    rice     straw    open   field   burning     in   India,    Thailand    and     the

    Philippines. Environmental Pollution, 157(5), 1554-1558.

Giglio, L., Loboda, T., Roy, D. P., Quayle, B., & Justice, C. O. (2009). An active-fire

    based burned area mapping algorithm for the MODIS sensor. Remote Sensing of

    Environment, 113(2), 408-420.

Giglio, L., Schroeder, W., & Justice, C. O. (2016). The collection 6 MODIS active

    fire detection algorithm and fire products. Remote Sensing of Environment, 178,

    31-41.

Gilhousen, D. B. (1987). A field evaluation of NDBC moored buoy winds. Journal of

    Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, 4(1), 94-104.

Goodman, J., Hurwitz, M., Park, J., & Smith, J. (forthcoming). Heat and learning.

    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Graff Zivin, J., & Neidell, M. (2012). The impact of pollution on worker

    productivity. American Economic Review, 102(7), 3652-73.

Graff Zivin, J., Hsiang, S. M., & Neidell, M. (2018a). Temperature and human capital

    in the short and long run. Journal of the Association of Environmental and

    Resource Economists, 5(1), 77-105.


                                          27
Graff Zivin, J., Song, Y., Tang, Q., & Zhang, P. (2018b). Temperature and High-

    Stakes Cognitive Performance: Evidence from the National College Entrance

    Examination in China. National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper.

Grange, S. K. (2014). Technical note: Averaging wind speeds and directions. DOI:

    10.13140/RG.2.1.3349.2006.

Hanna, R., & Oliva, P. (2015). The effect of pollution on labor supply: Evidence from

    a natural experiment in Mexico City. Journal of Public Economics, 122, 68-79.

He, G., Liu, T., & Zhou, M. (2018). Straw Burning, PM2.5 and Death: Evidence from

    China. Working Paper.

Heyes, A., Neidell, M., & Saberian, S. (2016). The effect of air pollution on investor

    behavior: Evidence from the S&P 500 (No. w22753). National Bureau of

    Economic Research.

Jayachandran, S. (2009). Air quality and early-life mortality evidence from

    Indonesia's wildfires. Journal of Human Resources, 44(4), 916-954.

Jia, R. X., & Li, H. B. (2017). The value of elite education in China. Working paper.

Justice, C. O., Giglio, L., Korontzi, S., et al. (2002). The MODIS fire

    products. Remote Sensing of Environment, 83(1), 244-262.

Kaufman, Y. J., Justice, C. O., Flynn, L. P., et al. (1998). Potential global fire

    monitoring     from     EOSMODIS. Journal         of    Geophysical        Research:

    Atmospheres, 103(D24), 32215-32238.

Lai, W., Li, Y., Tian, X., & Li, S. (2018). Agricultural Fires and Cognitive Function:

    Evidence     from     Crop     Production    Cycles.    Available     at     SSRN:

    https://ssrn.com/abstract=3039935.

Levine, J. S. (1991). Global biomass burning: atmospheric, climatic, and biospheric

    implications. MIT press.


                                          28
Li, X., Wang, S., Duan, L., Hao, J., Li, C., Chen, Y., & Yang, L. (2007). Particulate

    and trace gas emissions from open burning of wheat straw and corn stover in

    China. Environmental Science & Technology, 41(17), 6052­6058.

Oberdörster, G., Sharp, Z., Atudorei, V., Elder, A., Gelein, R., Kreyling, W., & Cox,

    C. (2004). Translocation of inhaled ultrafine particles to the brain. Inhalation

    Toxicology, 16(6-7), 437-445.

Palomino, I., & Martin, F. (1995). A simple method for spatial interpolation of the

    wind in complex terrain. Journal of Applied Meteorology, 34(7), 1678-1693.

Park, J. (2018). Hot temperature and high stakes exams: Evidence from NYC public

    schools. Working paper.

Peters, A., Veronesi, B., Calderón-Garcidueñas, L., Gehr, P., Chen, L.C., Geiser, M.,

    Reed, W., Rothen-Rutishauser, B., Schürch, S., & Schulz, H. (2006).

    Translocation and potential neurological effects of fine and ultrafine particles a

    critical update. Particle and Fibre Toxicology, 3(1), p.13.

Power, M. C., Weisskopf, M. G., Alexeeff, S. E., Coull, B. A., Spiro III, A., &

    Schwartz, J. (2010). Traffic-related air pollution and cognitive function in a

    cohort of older men. Environmental Health Perspectives, 119(5), 682-687.

Rangel, M. A., & Vogl, T. (2018). Agricultural fires and health at birth. Review of

    Economics and Statistics. https://doi.org/10.1162/rest_a_00806.

Romer, Paul M. 1986. Increasing returns and long-run growth. Journal of Political

    Economy, 94:1002­37.

Sanders, N. J. (2012). What doesn't kill you makes you weaker prenatal pollution

    exposure and educational outcomes. Journal of Human Resources, 47(3), 826-

    850.




                                          29
Schlenker, W., & Walker, W. R. (2015). Airports, air pollution, and contemporaneous

    health. Review of Economic Studies, 83(2), 768-809.

Seaton, A., Godden, D., MacNee, W., & Donaldson, K. (1995). Particulate air

    pollution and acute health effects. The Lancet, 345(8943), 176-178.

Stafford, T. M. (2015). Indoor air quality and academic performance. Journal of

    Environmental Economics and Management, 70, 34-50.

Suglia, S. F., Gryparis, A., Wright, R. O., Schwartz, J., & Wright, R. J. (2007).

    Association of black carbon with cognition among children in a prospective birth

    cohort study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 167(3), 280-286.

Viana, M., López, J. M., Querol, X., Alastuey, A., García-Gacio, D., Blanco-Heras,

    G., López-Mahía, P., Piñeiro-Iglesias, M., Sanz, M.J., Sanz, F., & Chi, X. (2008).

    Tracers and impact of open burning of rice straw residues on PM in Eastern

    Spain. Atmospheric Environment, 42(8), 1941-1957.

Wang, G., Kawamura, K., Xie, M., Hu, S., Cao, J., An, Z., Waston, J.G., & Chow, J.

    C. (2009). Organic molecular compositions and size distributions of Chinese

    summer and autumn aerosols from Nanjing: Characteristic haze event caused by

    wheat straw burning. Environmental Science & Technology, 43(17), 6493-6499.

Weuve, J., Puett, R. C., Schwartz, J., Yanosky, J. D., Laden, F., & Grodstein, F.

    (2012). Exposure to particulate air pollution and cognitive decline in older

    women. Archives of Internal Medicine, 172(3), 219-227.

You, W., Zang, Z., Zhang, L., Li, Z., Chen, D., & Zhang, G. (2015). Estimating

    ground-level PM10 concentration in northwestern China using geographically

    weighted regression based on satellite AOD combined with CALIPSO and

    MODIS fire count. Remote Sensing of Environment, 168, 276-285.




                                         30
        Figure 1. Agricultural Fires During NCEE in China in 2005­2011

Notes: Red dots indicate agricultural fires detected by satellites during June 7th­8th
(NCEE) in 2005­2011 in China.




                                         31
Figure 2. Daily Agricultural Fires in Anhui, Henan and Shandong in 2005­2011

Notes: This figure plots daily number of agricultural fires in Henan, Shandong and
Anhui Provinces during 2005­2011. Red dash lines indicate the NCEE period each
year.




                                       32
            Figure 3. Definition of Upwind and Non-Upwind Agricultural Fires

Notes: Definitions of upwind, downwind and vertical agricultural fires within 50 km
from the center of a county is illustrated using northwest wind as an example. Non-
upwind fires include fires in the downwind and vertical directions.




                                        33
          Figure 4. Dynamic Effects of Agricultural Fires on Score (%)

Notes: This figure plots the dynamic effects of agricultural fires on NCEE scores in
percentage. Dashed lines indicate the 95% confidence intervals.




                                        34
            Figure 5. Effects of Agricultural Fires on Scores by Decile
Note: The estimates of upwind-downwind differences in agricultural fires' impact on
percentage point changes in NCEE scores are plotted in the solid connected line. The
dashed lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.




                                        35
                           Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                        Obs.       Mean       SD      Min    Max
Variable                                (1)          (2)       (3)    (4)    (5)
Score (0-750)                        1,387,974     553.3      42.4    102    708
 Science                              873,851      555.9      43.4    129    708
 Arts                                 311,744      545.7      39.4    102    684

Agricultural Fires                     1,087         7.0      26.3     0      345
 Upwind: 45º                           1,087         1.5       8.8     0      177
 Downwind: 45º                         1,087         2.0       8.6     0      155
 Vertical: 45º                         1,087         3.4      14.2     0      257
 Non-Upwind: 45º                       1,087         5.4      20.2     0      298

Meteorological Conditions
 Temperature (ºF)                      1,087        75.8      5.7      57      90
 Dew Point (ºF)                        1,087        60.6      5.7      40      73
 Precipitation (inch)                  1,087         0.1      0.3       0       2
 Wind Speed (mile/hour)                1,087         5.4      2.0       1      15
 Atmospheric Pressure (millibar)       1,087       599.0    356.9       0     1010
Note: Summary statistics of key variables, including scores, agricultural fires and
meteorological conditions, during NCEE in Anhui, Henan and Shandong in 2005-
2011 are listed. Upwind fires are defined fires within 45 degrees from the daily
dominant wind direction in a county.




                                        36
                 Table 2. Effects of Agricultural Fires on Score in Baseline Provinces (%)
VARIABLES                         (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)
(per 1 fire)
All                            -0.0005
                              (0.0012)
Upwind                                    -0.0054***                             -0.0070***   -0.0072***
                                            (0.0018)                               (0.0021)     (0.0019)
Downwind                                                  0.0038                    0.0056
                                                         (0.0035)                  (0.0036)
Nonupwind                                                             0.0000                    0.0015
                                                                     (0.0014)                  (0.0015)


Upwind-Downwind                                                                   -0.0126**
                                                                                   (0.0051)
Upwind-Nonupwind                                                                              -0.0087***
                                                                                                (0.0031)

Observations                  1,188,933 1,188,933 1,188,933 1,188,933            1,188,933     1,188,933
R-squared                       0.317        0.317        0.317       0.317        0.317         0.317
County FE                          Y           Y            Y           Y            Y             Y
Prov-Year-Track FE                 Y           Y            Y           Y            Y             Y
Weather                            Y           Y            Y           Y            Y             Y
Note: Each column represents a separate regression with different fixed effects and controls. Weather
conditions, include temperature, dew point, wind speed, precipitation and atmospheric pressure, are
controlled nonlinearly using bins. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by county. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                                    37
                                                         Table 3. Heterogeneity (%)
VARIABLES                       (1)               (2)         (3)               (4)            (5)           (6)         (7)              (8)
                                                       Track                                         Score                             Admission
                             Baseline             Arts     Science             25%             50%           75%        95%            First-Tier
(per 1 fire)
Upwind                      -0.0070***          -0.0104*    -0.0058***           -0.0013      -0.0022    -0.0064*    -0.0109***         -0.0198**
                              (0.0021)          (0.0053)      (0.0017)          (0.0018)     (0.0022)    (0.0034)      (0.0026)          (0.0089)
Downwind                       0.0056            0.0142        0.0024            -0.0039      -0.0046     0.0011     0.0204***            0.0070
                              (0.0036)          (0.0105)      (0.0023)          (0.0032)     (0.0036)    (0.0034)      (0.0071)          (0.0111)


Upwind-Downwind              -0.0126**           -0.0246    -0.0083***           0.0026       0.0024      -0.0075    -0.0313**          -0.0269*
                              (0.0051)          (0.0153)      (0.0030)          (0.0038)     (0.0058)    (0.0057)     (0.0048)          (0.0159)

Observations                 1,188,933         311,744     873,851            1,188,933 1,188,933 1,188,933 1,188,933                     1,185,595
R-squared                     0.3171            0.3987      0.2426              0.0001       0.0001       0.0000         0.0000            0.0464
Note: Each column represents a separate regression. Column (2) ­ (3) differentiate the effects of agricultural fires on scores by track. Column (4)
­ (7) list the estimates by student score quantile. Column (8) reports the effects on admission likelihood to first-tier universities. Weather
conditions, include temperature, dew point, wind speed, precipitation and atmospheric pressure, are controlled nonlinearly using bins. County
and province-by-year-by-track fixed effects are always controlled. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by county. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                        38
                               Table 4. Robustness Checks with Alternative Distances and Angles
                                                   Distances                                               Angles
                             50km        40km        30km       60km        70km           30º              60º           90º
  VARIABLES                   (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)
Panel A: per 1 fire
Score (%)
  Upwind - Downwind       -0.0126** -0.0201** -0.0219**         -0.0070*      -0.0024      -0.0140** -0.0101***       -0.0079***
                           (0.0051)  (0.0086)  (0.0107)         (0.0040)     (0.0033)       (0.0064)   (0.0037)         (0.0023)
Panel B: per 1 S.D.
Score (% S.D.)
  Upwind - Downwind          -1.42       -1.43        -0.97         -1.13      -0.49          -1.18        -1.47         -1.51

   Observations              1,188,933 1,188,933 1,188,933 1,188,933 1,188,933               1,188,933 1,188,933         1,188,933
Note: Columns (1) ­ (5) report the effects of agricultural fires on NCEE score in provinces of Anhui, Shandong and Henan using
different distances from a county center with 45 degrees for wind directions. Columns (6) ­ (8) list the estimates using different
definitions of upwind and non-upwind direction, namely 30, 60 and 90 degrees. Panel A lists the percentage change in scores in
response to an increase of one agricultural fire. Panel B lists the percentage changes in standard deviation (S.D.) of scores when
agricultural fires increase by one S.D. Weather conditions, including temperature, dew point, wind, precipitation and atmospheric
pressure, are controlled nonlinearly using bins. County and province-by-year-by-track fixed effects are always controlled.
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by county. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                               39
                                        Table 5. Alternative Measures of Fires
                                                                    Distance-           FRP-              Probability-
                             Baseline          Non-Local            Weighted           Weighted            Weighted
  VARIABLES                    (1)                (2)                  (3)               (4)                  (5)
Panel A: per 1 fire
Score (%)
  Upwind-Downwind           -0.0126**           -0.0139*           -0.0086**           -0.0081**           -0.0193**
                             (0.0051)           (0.0079)            (0.0040)            (0.0039)            (0.0077)
Panel B: per 1 S.D.
Score (% S.D.)
  Upwind-Downwind             -1.42               -1.25               -1.17               -1.46               -1.55

   Observations             1,188,933           1,188,933           1,188,933            1,188,933          1,188,933
Note: Column (1) repeats the baseline estimates on the effects of upwind-downwind difference in agricultural fires on
score. Column (2) reports the effects of non-local upwind-downwind difference on score. Column (3) lists the
estimate from distance-weighted fires. Column (4) weights the fires by intensity measured by fire radiative power
(FRP). Column (5) lists the estimates using probability-weighted agricultural fires. Panel A lists the percentage
change in scores in response to an increase of 1 fire point. Panel B lists the percentage changes in standard deviation
(S.D.) of scores when agricultural fires increase by 1 S.D. Weather conditions, including temperature, dew point,
wind, precipitation and atmospheric pressure, are controlled nonlinearly using bins. County and province-by-year-by-
track fixed effects are always controlled. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by county. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                           40
                                                    Table 6. Robustness Checks
                                             Cluster by      Cluster by County        Controlling       Shandong-           Four
                             Baseline        Prefecture         and by Year          for Visibility      3 Days           Provinces
    VARIABLES                  (1)              (2)                  (3)                  (4)              (5)               (6)
Panel A: per 1 fire
Score (%)
    Upwind-Downwind         -0.0126**        -0.0126**            -0.0126*             -0.0130**         -0.0138**        -0.0088*
                             (0.0051)         (0.0054)            (0.0057)              (0.0051)          (0.0054)        (0.0045)
Panel B: per 1 S.D.
Score (% S.D.)
    Upwind-Downwind            -1.42           -1.42                -1.42                -1.47             -1.56            -0.99

     Observations            1,188,933        1,188,933            1,188,933            1,188,933        1,188,933        1,372,466
Note: Column (1) repeats the baseline estimates on the effects of upwind-downwind difference in agricultural fires on score.
Column (2) clusters the standard errors by prefecture. Column (3) two-way clusters the standard errors by county and by year.
Column (4) controls for visibility using 3-miles-of-visibility bins. Column (5) considers the changes in NCEE dates in Shandong
since 2007. Column (6) shows estimates using 4 provinces (Jiangsu added). Panel A lists the percentage change in scores in
response to an increase of 1 fire point. Panel B lists the percentage changes in standard deviation (S.D.) of scores when agricultural
fires increases by 1 S.D. Weather conditions, including temperature, dew point, wind, precipitation and atmospheric pressure, are
controlled nonlinearly using bins. County and province-by-year-by-track fixed effects are always controlled. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by county. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                 41
      Table 7. Two-Day Moving Averages of Agricultural Fires and Air Pollution in June During 2013-2016
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)       (6)
                                    PM10          PM2.5          SO2         NO2           CO          O3
(per 1 fire)                          (µg/m3)       (µg/m3)       (ppb)       (ppm)          (ppb)       (ppb)
Mean                                    78.1          45.5         9.1         13.3           0.7         39.3
                                       (50.7)        (29.6)       (7.6)        (8.0)         (0.4)       (19.2)

Upwind                               0.476***       0.262**       -0.005        0.012        0.000       0.012
                                      (0.179)       (0.108)      (0.019)      (0.022)       (0.001)     (0.037)
Downwind                              0.221*         -0.052        0.008       -0.009      -0.001**      -0.011
                                      (0.122)       (0.045)      (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.000)     (0.022)


Upwind-Downwind                        0.254        0.314**       -0.013       0.022         0.001       0.022
                                      (0.261)       (0.134)      (0.024)      (0.027)       (0.002)     (0.051)

Observations                             18,408      18,450       18,676       18,678       18,442       18,434
R-squared                                 0.498       0.426        0.493        0.459        0.557        0.533
County FE                                   Y           Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
Prov-Year FE                                Y           Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
Weather                                     Y           Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
Note: Each column represents a separate regression at the county level. Columns (1) ­ (6) regress the two-day
moving average concentrations of each pollutant on the number of upwind and downwind agricultural fires within
50km from a county during June in Anhui, Henan and Shandong. County and province-by-year fixed effects,
weather (temperature, dew point, precipitation, atmospheric pressure, wind speed) are always controlled. Standard
errors in parentheses are clustered by county. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                                       42
