                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     HOW DO PRIVATE DIGITAL CURRENCIES AFFECT GOVERNMENT POLICY?

                                         Max Raskin
                                         Fahad Saleh
                                        David Yermack

                                      Working Paper 26219
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26219


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




We thank Franz Hinzen, Gur Huberman, Gloria Yu and conference participants at the ABFER/
NUS/MAS Workshop on Digital Currency Economics for comments. Part of this paper was
written while David Yermack was a visiting professor at Erasmus University Rotterdam. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Max Raskin, Fahad Saleh, and David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Private Digital Currencies Affect Government Policy?
Max Raskin, Fahad Saleh, and David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 26219
September 2019
JEL No. E42,E5,E58

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper provides a systematic evaluation of the different types of digital currencies. We
express skepticism regarding centralized digital currencies and therefore focus our economic
analysis on private digital currencies. Specifically, we highlight the potential for private digital
currencies to improve welfare within an emerging market with a selfish government. In that
setting, we demonstrate that a private digital currency not only improves citizen welfare but also
encourages local investment and enhances government welfare.


Max Raskin                                       David Yermack
New York University                              Stern School of Business
School of Law                                    New York University
New York, NY 10012                               44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
maxraskin@nyu.edu                                New York, NY 10012
                                                 and NBER
Fahad Saleh                                      dyermack@stern.nyu.edu
McGill University
1001 Sherbrooke Street West
Office 517
Montreal, Quebec H3A 1G5
Canada
fahad.saleh@mcgill.ca
1      Introduction

    Currency crises are nothing new. As long as governments have maintained monopoly power
over the printing presses, there has existed a temptation to devalue a country's sovereign
currency.1 From the ancient Roman Empire to Robert Mugabe's Zimbabwe, a citizenry's loss
of faith in its government's money often portends economic collapse. In order to mitigate
or at least function through such a collapse, individuals throughout history have turned to
alternatives to state-backed money. These alternatives have included more stable sovereign
currencies like the U.S. dollar and commodities like gold and silver. This paper explores a
new alternative to state-backed money: private digital currencies.
     Bitcoin, the first and most successful of the private cryptocurrencies, was self-consciously
birthed in response to the Financial Crisis of 2007-2008. Text containing The Times of Lon-
don's headline, "Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks," was encoded in the first
block of the Bitcoin blockchain, mined on January 3, 2009. This text gave a hint of the
creator's skepticism of the government-run banking system. The pseudonymous creator of
bitcoin, Satoshi Nakamoto, was very explicit in his belief that, "[t]he central bank must be
trusted not to debase the currency, but the history of fiat currencies is full of breaches of that
trust. Banks must be trusted to hold our money and transfer it electronically, but they lend
it out in waves of credit bubbles with barely a fraction in reserve."2 Nakamoto's vision for
bitcoin was as an "e-currency based on cryptographic proof, without the need to trust a third
party middleman" making money "secure and transactions effortless."3 In other words, the
idea was to decentralize and privatize the issuance of digital money.
     Nakamoto's analogy of the decentralization of money was to the decentralization of data
security. Before strong encryption, users had to rely on central third parties to store and
secure their data.4 The use of encryption has allowed individuals to store their data securely
   1
     Hanke and Krus (2013) provide an authoritative study of hyperinflation, and Hanke and Bushnell (2017)
provide a methodology to measure extreme devaluations.
   2
     http://p2pfoundation.ning.com/forum/topics/bitcoin-open-source
   3
     Id.
   4
     Id.



                                                    1
without the need of a trusted third party. This is analogous to the Bitcoin blockchain by
which individuals can transfer value without the need of a centralized party, but instead in
reliance on a network that is trust-minimized.
      The analogy is instructive because while it is now technically possible for individuals to
secure their data themselves, the growth and success of social media companies has shown
that this is a decision many choose not to make. Extending the analogy, in the developed
world, the overwhelming majority choose to continue to participate in the government-run
banking system and to use government-backed money. Individuals did not rush to bitcoin
or another digital currency in the wake of the Financial Crisis of 2007-2008, and the dollar
strengthened.
      At first blush, Nakamoto's vision did not pan out, except insofar as a new option was
created that a majority of people choose not to use. When one investigates the developing
world, however, the story is a little different. Following the financial crisis, a number of devel-
oping countries have experienced significant declines in the value of their sovereign currencies,
bordering on crisis levels. Two examples are the Turkish lira and the Argentine peso. The lira
lost about a third of its value in 2018 amid Turkey's high current account deficit and massive
amounts of U.S. dollar-denominated debt. The Argentine peso lost about half of its value in
2018 as that country struggled with fiscal and trade deficits.5
      These are the first currency crises since the creation of bitcoin, and therefore they offer
an opportunity to investigate the impact that alternative digital currencies have on unstable
sovereign currencies. Extrapolating out, this may show that Nakamoto's vision has come to
fruition. Although private digital currencies have not replaced the dollar, their mere existence
may have a counterfactual impact in that they exist as a check on both fiscal and regulatory
policy. This paper formalizes that assertion.
      This paper highlights that a private digital currency has significant implications for a
corrupt emerging market. We define a corrupt emerging market as an economy with high
volatility and a government that sets policy based on selfish interests rather than considering
  5
      https://ftalphaville.ft.com/2019/05/14/1557806416000/Currency-crisis-redux-/


                                                 2
the welfare of citizens. We model the interaction of the government and citizenry within that
setting. We allow for endogenous fiscal, monetary and regulatory policy. We establish three
main findings.
   Our first finding establishes that citizens gain from the existence of the private digital
currency. Citizens accrue those gains through two channels. First, as documented by Dyhrberg
(2016) and Chan, Le, and Wu (2019), private digital currencies offer diversification. We
demonstrate that this diversification generates welfare gains for citizens. Second, the private
digital currency serves as competition for local investment so that the existence of the private
digital currency restrains monetary policy, thereby generating lower inflation.
   Our second finding highlights that private digital currencies encourage local investment.
This finding also operates through two channels. First, we show that a private digital currency
generally serves as a complement rather than as a substitute for local investment so that
citizens, when given access to a private digital currency, not only invest in that currency but
also expand investment in the local economy. Second, the existence of the private digital
currency disciplines monetary policy by creating an alternative to local fiat. That monetary
policy discipline reduces inflation and results in higher returns from investment which in turn
encourages higher local investment.
   Our third finding demonstrates that the government may gain from permitting the private
digital currency within the local economy. This finding arises because the government extracts
revenue gains from citizens through taxation. Higher local investment generates higher tax
revenues for the government. The government permits the private digital currency because of
the additional revenue without regard to citizen welfare. This finding is particularly important
because it implies that the previously discussed citizen welfare gains arise in equilibrium.
   Our paper contributes to a growing literature that studies blockchain economics and cryp-
tocurrencies. That literature dates back to Yermack (2015) which provides the first study of
bitcoin's return properties. Since then, the literature has exploded into several rich sub-fields.
Harvey (2016) and Yermack (2017) provide overviews of blockchain as it relates to finance.



                                                3
Biais, Bisi`
           ere, Bouvard, and Casamatta (2019) and Saleh (2019a) analyze the game-theoretic
aspects of prominent consensus protocols. Easley, O'Hara, and Basu (2019) and Huberman,
Leshno, and Moallemi (2019) investigate the role that fees play within Bitcoin. Biais, Bisi`
                                                                                           ere,
Bouvard, Casamatta, and Menkveld (2018) study cryptocurrency pricing. Hinzen, John, and
Saleh (2019) study and explain the limited adoption of some cryptocurrencies. Makarov and
Schoar (2019) study arbitrage and price formation within cryptocurrency markets. Cong and
He (2019) and Cong, Li, and Wang (2018) examine economic implications of smart contracts.
Howell, Niessner, and Yermack (2019) empirically analyze ICOs whereas Chod and Lyandres
(2018) and Li and Mann (2018) develop underlying economic theory to understand ICOs.
Griffin and Shams (2018) and Li, Shin, and Wang (2019) highlight price manipulation within
cryptocurrency markets. Foley, Karlsen, and Putnins (2019) establish that a significant pro-
portion of Bitcoin transactions pertain to illegal activity.
   Our paper relates most closely to Dyhrberg (2016), Chan, Le, and Wu (2019),Yu and
Zhang (2018) and Saleh (2019b). Dyhrberg (2016) and Chan, Le, and Wu (2019) empirically
establish the hedging value of a cryptocurrency. We theoretically highlight that such value has
important welfare implications within emerging markets. Yu and Zhang (2018) empirically
document demand shifts towards cryptocurrencies during times of local economic distress. Our
theory provides an explanation for such shifts. Saleh (2019b) examines welfare implications
of cryptocurrencies in a different setting but also finds evidence that cryptocurrencies may
enhance welfare. Our paper also relates closely to Raskin and Yermack (2016), which discusses
digital currencies in the context of central banking.
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a typology for
classifying the various digital currencies that exist. There is no systematic evaluation of the
different types of digital currencies and such a typology will be helpful not only for the purposes
of this paper but also for future research. This paper's focus is on private decentralized digital
currencies. These are the unique innovation that has sprung forth from the creation of bitcoin
and blockchain. There will be a brief discussion of centralized public digital currencies, also



                                                4
known as central bank digital currencies. The paper expresses skepticism over the novelty
of central bank digital currencies, which in many ways simply mimic the existing financial
structure of many governments. Section 3 provides a formal economic analysis of the effect of a
private digital currency on a corrupt emerging market. We find that a private digital currency
enhances citizen welfare, encourages local investment, and induces a permissive regulatory
policy. Section 4 concludes.



2      Typology

    Before analyzing the impact digital currencies have in unstable monetary regimes, it is
necessary to lay out a classification of these instruments. This paper offers a typology of
digital currency along two axes: state-sponsorship and centralization.
     With respect to state-sponsorship, digital currencies can be either public or private. Public
digital currencies have some relationship to a sovereign state. Private digital currencies do
not have a relationship to a sovereign state, but are instead governed by private individuals or
entities. The key distinction here, which will be discussed later, comes with respect to legal
enforcement. State-sponsored currencies have the backing of an entity that is able to enforce
laws that privilege the currency. There are a number of ways to privilege the sovereign's
money, such as legal tender laws or taxation of competing currency. Whatever the method,
public currencies possess some legal privilege relative to other currencies.
     The second factor in our typology is centralization. A digital currency can either be cen-
tralized or decentralized. A number of definitions exist for centralization. For instance, some
make a mathematical calculation of centralization based on the number of market participants,
nodes, miners, or other metrics. This paper adopts a different definition.
     A digital currency is centralized if it has formal barriers to entry that prevent participation
in the software writing and validation process of the network. This definition asks whether
the code can be changed through some kind of consensus mechanism. If a party is not
prevented from participating in the network or there is no one there to prevent that party

                                                  5
from participating, then the network is decentralized. This is a qualitative understanding of
centralization that has a parallel in antitrust theory. In evaluating barriers to entry to a given
industry, there are both formal and economic barriers to entry. A formal barrier would be legal
prohibitions or requirements that prevent a new entrant from challenging an incumbent. An
economic barrier would be phenomena like economies of scale or upfront capital investments
that create costs for a new entrant who wishes to challenge an incumbent.
   This analysis equally applies to digital currencies. Formal barriers to entry indicate a cen-
tralized currency. Such barriers may prevent a node from validating a transaction or prevent
an individual from accessing and proposing alterations to the codebase. This paper focuses on
formal barriers because in the context of emerging markets with unstable monetary regimes,
what is relevant is the ability to offer competing alternatives. Whether those alternatives are
economically viable ­ especially as compared with the domestic fiat currency ­ is one of the
topics of this paper.
   Finally, it is worth noting that these distinctions are confirmed by the Securities and
Exchange Commission's ("SEC") "Framework for `Investment Contract' Analysis of Digital
Assets." The jurisdiction of the SEC is bounded by statutory language that gives it the abil-
ity to take enforcement actions against securities and the catchall "investment contracts." In
defining which digital assets are securities and which are currencies, the SEC had to articulate
some principles. Hinman (2018) and Henderson and Raskin (2019) have pointed to decen-
tralization as one of the important principles for classifying digital assets as digital currencies
and this decentralization is a formal, not an economic one.


2.1    Application of Typology

  In applying this typology, the first category that exists is private decentralized digital cur-
rencies. The canonical example is bitcoin. Bitcoin has no privileges or legal protections
granted to it by the government. It is decentralized because it is written and maintained in an
open source manner and there are no formal barriers to participation in the Bitcoin blockchain


                                                6
network. Anyone with computing power is able to act as both a node and a miner.6 Litecoin
and ether are other examples of private decentralized digital currencies. This category has an
analog in precious metals used as currency. Gold and silver are no longer backed or privileged
by any government, and anyone can mine these precious metals.
    The second category is private centralized digital currencies. These are currencies that are
typically run by a closely held company or consortium that exercises control over the protocol
that issues and maintains the currency. The networks that create and manage these currencies
give formal privileges to certain participants and not others. Those who participate in the
currency place trust in a third party for a number of features, including supply, security, and
fungibility. Examples of this kind of currency include custodial stablecoins, Libra, and e-gold.
    The third category is public centralized digital currencies. A number of sovereign states
have announced plans to issue their own digital currencies. These proposals are discussed
in-depth below, but the common feature is that the sovereign itself controls the protocol,
codebase, and interactions with the network. Essentially all sovereign currencies today are
public centralized digital currencies. They are digital because most of the money that exists
in the world does not exist in physical form. Their backing and management is achieved
by sovereign states with legal protections and privileges. For instance, only the U.S. federal
government through its instrumentalities like the Federal Reserve can issue U.S. dollars; no
other entities are able to participate formally in monetary policy.
    The fourth are public decentralized digital currencies. These are currencies that have the
backing of a sovereign, but the sovereign does not seek to exercise control over the currency.
In the digital realm, such a currency does not currently exist. The closest analog would
be gold, silver, or commodity standards that governments have adopted at certain points in
history. One of the rationales behind the gold standard, for instance, is that the state would
give primacy to a currency that was out of its control, which was another way of saying that
they would commit themselves to a non-discretionary monetary policy. The amount of gold
   6
     Indeed, it is technically possible, although practically not feasible, to validate transactions without com-
puting power.



                                                       7
in circulation and its features could not be controlled by a central authority. That the central
authority still gave privileges to gold is akin to a developing country adopting the U.S. dollar
as its standard. A gold standard or any public decentralized currency is the government
accepting the position that the market or some external entity can produce a better money
than it can.
      This article focuses on public centralized and private decentralized currencies for our eco-
nomic analyses. We will begin with a discussion of various central banks' proposals for digital
currencies.


2.2      Central Bank Digital Currencies

  At first glance, the idea of a central bank digital currency sounds antithetical to the mo-
tivating political force behind the creation of bitcoin and other digital currencies, namely,
to compete with sovereign-backed banking systems. As mentioned above, the genesis block
of the Bitcoin blockchain makes reference to the instability of the fractional reserve banking
system and the state-sponsorship of banking institutions.
      A number of countries have announced plans to issue or investigate the use of digital
currencies. Some examples include Sweden, China, Russia, Venezuela, and the Marshall
Islands.7
      It is clear that the proposals for central bank digital currencies are public, centralized
proposals. These proposals very closely resemble the "Chicago Plan" of narrowing the bank-
ing system by allowing individuals and smaller institutions to hold deposits directly at the
central bank. Such a plan is currently being revived by the Federal Reserve.8 There are both
advantages and disadvantages of this proposal, but they are not the advantages that under-
gird the rationale of decentralized private digital currencies. A blockchain is almost certainly
  7
     See https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/payments--cash/e-krona/, https://www.npr.org/2019/07/
31/742223881/facebooks-digital-money-plan-raises-stakes-for-china-s-cryptocurrency-ambitions,
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/03/technology/russia-venezuela-virtual-currencies.html and
http://time.com/money/5186316/this-is-the-first-country-to-adopt-a-cryptocurrency-as-its-official-curre
   8
     https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/other20190805a2.pdf



                                                 8
not needed to have such a narrowing of the banking system. More traditional databases and
technical solutions can be used by the government to keep track of its digital money. This
could be similar to the technology used by existing centralized financial services companies
like PayPal and Visa.
      For a particular case study, in 2016 Sweden's Riksbansk said that research would be done
towards launching an e-krona, which would be issued by the central bank. As with all of
these programs, details were scarce, but the thrust of the proposal was to hasten Sweden's
move away from cash. According to the Riksbank, "[s]ix out of ten people in Sweden have
used cash as a means of payment in the last month. The corresponding figure for 2016 was
eight out of ten."9 There are a number of reasons that governments wish to move away from
cash, including combating tax evasion, as well as monitoring the financial activity of their
citizenry. Privacy advocates are skeptical of such an enforced move away from cash and think
such transitions should happen naturally if there is a market demand for it.10
      The innovation of cryptocurrencies has never been their digital nature ­ digital money has
existed almost as long as computers have. The innovation of this new crop of private currencies
is the fact that they do not need a central party to verify transactions and maintain the security
and reliability of the system. The key question that must be asked when looking at central
bank digital currencies is who maintains the codebase that undergirds central bank's digital
currency. If it is the central bank itself, then issuance is no different from the existing system
except that individuals can hold accounts with the central bank. If private nodes maintain
the codebase, then the monetary rules are not governed by the central bank and therefore the
currency cannot be considered a central bank digital currency. For the purposes of analyzing
digital assets as competing currencies, central bank digital currencies are not different from
central bank currencies generally.
  9
     https://www.riksbank.se/globalassets/media/statistik/betalningsstatistik/2018/
payments-patterns-in-sweden-2018.pdf
  10
     https://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/review/2018/07/16/
payment-systems-and-privacy




                                                9
2.3    Private Digital Currency Competition

  There are a number of legal barriers to private digital currencies. These barriers demonstrate
why they have the potential to impact the sovereign's monetary policy. Like all monopoly
privileges, the rationale behind barriers to entry is to protect incumbents' rates of return. With
respect to monetary policy, barriers to competitive currencies prop up the central bank's own
currency.
   Raskin and Yermack (2016) discuss legal tender laws as one of these barriers. Legal tender
laws, however, only explain how a public currency initially can come to displace private
currencies. Gresham's Law, which is popularly articulated as "bad money driving out the
good," explains how debtors would prefer to pay and transact in depreciating currency and
if they are able to do so, will. This has been described by Selgin (1996) as "placing buyers
and sellers in a Prisoner's Dilemma in which the use of `bad' money represents a unique
noncooperative equilibrium." Once the state-backed currency takes hold, the network effects
of money come into play and it will become a generally accepted medium of exchange, barring
any major failure of the central bank. Were legal tender laws to be repealed, there is some
skepticism that there would be a great deal of competition from other currencies.
   Without taking a view on the relative potency of each of these barriers, this paper addresses
two more barriers to competing private currencies: tax treatment and banking regulation.
   With respect to tax treatment, we will look to the United States as an example of how the
taxing power can disadvantage private currencies. When an individual's dollars appreciate,
he does not have to pay either a capital gain or income tax. This is not the case with
other competing forms of currency. When an individual's bitcoins, gold, or euros are sold at
an appreciated value, this is a taxable event. The Internal Revenue Service has ruled that
bitcoin is treated for federal tax purposes as property. Any disposition must be reported
on Form 1040's Schedule D. The gains are taxed as either short- or long-term capital gains
depending on whether the asset was held for over a year.
   This discourages the use of private currencies as mediums of exchange in two primary ways.


                                               10
First, it raises the actual cost of transactions and second, it increases reporting requirements
such that there is greater friction in using alternatives to the U.S. dollar.
     One additional legal barrier to the adoption of private digital currencies is the banking
regulatory system. There are a number of laws and regulations that make it costly for a new
entrant to establish a banking institution that can issue either its own private digital currency
or service accounts in a decentralized private digital currency. One such barrier is the ability to
obtain a banking charter from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Another aspect
of banking regulation is money transmission laws. In the United States, these state-level laws
impose certain requirements upon entities that transmit money on behalf of others. These
requirements include surety bonds, reporting requirements, and compliance regimes. Finally,
at the federal level, the Bank Secrecy Act and other national security considerations require
financial institutions to register as Money Service Businesses and establish and maintain anti-
money laundering and know-your-customer programs that add additional cost. For established
players, these regulatory hurdles are costs that have been integrated and in some cases, larger
incumbents have welcomed such regulations and helped to draft them in order to protect
themselves from competition.
     It is beyond the scope of this paper to evaluate whether such barriers are normatively
good or bad. The Modern Free Banking School has questioned many of these barriers. In the
following section of the paper, we make a more narrow claim, which is that competing private
digital currencies serve as a disciplining mechanism for government monetary policy.



3      Theoretical Analysis

    This section models the interaction of a citizen and a government within a corrupt emerging
market economy. Our analysis reveals that a private digital currency improves citizen welfare
and encourages local investment. Moreover, the government finds permitting the private
digital currency incentive compatible.
     Our results arise because the private digital currency enables the citizen to achieve gains

                                                11
from diversification and because the existence of the private digital currency disciplines mone-
tary policy. In turn, that diversification and disciplined monetary policy encourages the citizen
to increase local investment. The increased local investment then benefits the government via
taxation so that even a selfish government prefers permitting rather than prohibiting the pri-
vate digital currency. The remainder of this section formalizes the aforementioned discussion.


3.1    Model

  We focus on the first two dates, t       0, 1, of an infinite horizon economy.   The economy
consists of a short-lived citizen and a short-lived government. At the initial date, t    0, the
government sets fiscal and regulatory policy while the citizen, cognizant of government policy
decisions, makes an investment decision. Subsequently, uncertainty resolves, the government
sets monetary policy and both the government and the citizen consume.


                                            Errs ¡ Varrrs
                                                  
                                max
                             wk ,wu ,wdc ¥0       2
                             s.t.

                                    r 0pwk pp1 ¡  qrk ¡  q   wdcrdcq                         (1)

                                    wk   wu   wdc  1

                                    wdc Inp  0

   Problem 1 states the citizen's problem. The citizen possesses mean-variance preferences
with risk-aversion    ¡ 0.   She must distribute her wealth, 0   ¡ 0, across no more than three
assets: productive capital, an unproductive asset, and a digital currency. We denote pre-tax
productive capital real net returns by rk so that p1 ¡  qrk ¡   gives the post-tax productive
capital real net returns with  denoting the tax rate on nominal profits and  denoting
the inflation rate. We denote pre-tax digital currency real net returns by rdc and assume that
digital currency holdings face no taxation so that rdc also denotes the post-tax digital currency
real net return. We assume no taxation of digital currencies to capture the relative difficulty
of enforcing taxation of a private digital asset. We assume that the unproductive asset earns

                                                  12
no real net return with probability one.
   The citizen may always invest in productive capital and/ or the unproductive asset. How-
ever, the citizen may invest in the digital currency only if the government permits digital
currency holdings. Inp denotes an indicator equaling one if the government does not permit
the citizenry to hold the digital currency.


                                 max Er 0 wk rk   S p, , Inp qs
                                 ,,Inp


                                 s.t.

                                         0¤    ¤1                                           (2)

                                           ¥0
                                         Inp  t0, 1u

   Problem 2 states the government problem. The government selects a tax rate,  , and
whether to allow trading in the digital currency, Inp , at the initial date, t  0. Subsequent to
resolution of uncertainty, at t  1, the government selects an inflation rate,    ¥ 0.

                             S p, , Inp q  0 wk p1   rk qe¡pInp q                           (3)

   The government selfishly maximizes real revenues with no regard to citizen welfare. Gov-
ernment revenues arise from two sources: taxation and seigniorage.  0 wk rk denotes real
tax revenue whereas S p, , Inp q denotes real seigniorage revenue. Akin to Cagan (1956), we
invoke the exchange equation and assume exponential form for velocity of money so that
Equation 3 holds. pInp q denotes a function that specifies the sensitivity of the velocity of
money to inflation. We assume p1q   p0q to reflect the relative ease of transacting with an
additional currency available.




                                                 13
3.2    Model Solution

  As previously noted, our model consists of two dates: t       0, 1.   At t    0, the government
selects a tax rate,  , and a regulatory policy, Inp . Then, taking  and Inp as given and antic-
ipating an inflation rate,  , the citizen selects a portfolio that solves Problem 1. Uncertainty
resolves at the beginning of t    1.   Subsequently, the government selects an inflation rate,  ,
and pay-offs realize. We solve the model by backward induction.
   At t  1, the government sets an inflation rate to maximize seigniorage revenues. Increas-
ing the inflation rate yields the government more units of currency but devalues each unit of
the currency. Following Cagan (1956), we find an interior optimum for the government that
depends upon the sensitivity of the velocity of money to inflation. When Inp        0, consumers
may use the digital currency to facilitate an increased transaction frequency and thus the ve-
locity of money becomes more sensitive to the inflation rate. The government internalizes that
incremental sensitivity so that a permissive regulatory policy entails a credible commitment
to restrained monetary policy.
   At t      0, the government sets fiscal and regulatory policy. Fiscal policy equates with
selecting a tax rate for capital gains. Regulatory policy equates with selecting whether to
permit private digital currency holdings.
   With respect to fiscal policy, a lower tax rate translates to lower tax revenue holding
capital investment constant. However, a lower tax rate also increases capital investment
returns, thereby endogenously increasing capital investment, which in turn raises tax revenue.
The government trades off these effects to select an optimal tax rate.
   With respect to regulatory policy, permitting private digital currency holdings enables
citizens to evade taxation by permitting investment in a non-taxed asset. This permissive
regulatory policy also restrains the government's monetary policy for previously discussed
reasons. Nonetheless, private digital currency investment provides diversification from capital
investment (see, for example, Chan, Le, and Wu (2019)), so that a permissive regulatory
policy may increase capital investment, which in turn increases government tax revenues.


                                                 14
3.3      Results

  We begin by contrasting outcomes that arise under a permissive regulatory policy (i.e.,
Inp      0) with those that arise from a restrictive regulatory policy (i.e., Inp       1). This
contrast enables us to deduce the effect of a private digital currency upon citizen welfare.
Subsequently, we endogenously determine whether the government permits trading of the
digital currency.




Figure 1: This figure depicts the difference between citizen utility under a permissive regu-
latory regime and citizen utility under a restrictive regulatory regime as Corrprk , rdc q varies.
Positive differences imply that citizens earn higher utility under a permissive regulatory
regime.


      Figure 1 establishes our first finding, that a private digital currency facilitates higher
welfare for citizens. The welfare gains are especially pronounced for economies in which local
investment correlates negatively with the private digital currency return. This finding arises
because lower correlations facilitate more diversification which in turn induces higher citizen
welfare. Nonetheless, irrespective of that correlation, the existence of the private digital

                                                15
Figure 2: This figure depicts the difference between local investment under a permissive reg-
ulatory regime and that under a restrictive regulatory regime as Corrprk , rdc q varies. Positive
differences imply that citizens earn higher investment levels under a permissive regulatory
regime.


currency imposes discipline upon monetary policy and thereby generates welfare gains for
citizens.
   Figure 2 establishes our second finding, that a private digital currency increases local
investment within an emerging market economy. This finding arises because the private
digital currency serves as a hedge asset (see, for example, Dyhrberg (2016) and Chan, Le,
and Wu (2019)) and therefore complements investment in the local economy. The increased
investment effects are more pronounced when local investment returns correlate negatively
with the private digital currency return.
   Figure 3 highlights that governments generally benefit from a permissive regulatory policy.
That benefit is especially large when correlation between local investment returns and the
private digital currency return is negative in sign and large in absolute magnitude. The



                                               16
Figure 3: This figure depicts the difference between government revenues under a permis-
sive regulatory regime and that under a restrictive regulatory regime as Corrprk , rdc q varies.
Positive differences imply that citizens earn higher government revenues under a permissive
regulatory regime.


increased citizen welfare from permitting digital currencies enables the government to raise
tax rates, which in turn increases government revenue. Thus, the government gains from
permitting digital currencies by extracting some of the citizen welfare gains.
   Our results highlight that a corrupt emerging market government generally finds permit-
ting private digital currencies optimal. This result is particularly important because it implies
that private digital currencies increase welfare in equilibrium within an emerging market set-
ting despite selfish incentives of a corrupt government. In equilibrium, the government permits
trading of private digital currencies. That permissive policy raises both citizen welfare and
government welfare. As we have shown, the former arises through diversification gains and
a credible commitment to restrained monetary policy, whereas the latter arises because the
government exploits such gains to impose higher taxation.



                                               17
4      Conclusion

    This paper establishes a typology for digital currencies classified along the two axes of state-
sponsorship and centralization. We conclude that private decentralized digital currencies are
a novel invention with important welfare implications for emerging markets. We demonstrate
that the existence of private digital currencies disciplines government policy, thereby generat-
ing welfare gains. Our work highlights that private digital currencies should not be analyzed
as a replacement for traditional money but rather as an important alternative asset.
     Whether private decentralized digital currencies will continue to proliferate is beyond the
scope of this paper. The history of money, however, suggests that there will always be a
demand for a non-state currency that serves as a check on the inflationary monetary tendencies
of the sovereign. Should that demand persist, it is likely that some private decentralized digital
currency will continue to exist. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that such a currency
may improve welfare for both citizens and the government within an emerging market with a
selfish government.




                                                 18
References

                  `re, M. Bouvard, and C. Casamatta (2019): "The Blockchain Folk
Biais, B., C. Bisie
  Theorem," Review of Financial Studies, 32(5), 1662­1715.

                  `re, M. Bouvard, C. Casamatta, and A. J. Menkveld (2018):
Biais, B., C. Bisie
  "Equilibrium Bitcoin Pricing," Working Paper.

Cagan, P. (1956): "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation," in Studies in the Quantity
  Theory of Money, ed. by M. Friedman, pp. 25­117. University of Chicago Press.

Chan, W. H., M. Le, and Y. W. Wu (2019): "Holding Bitcoin longer: The dynamic
  hedging abilities of Bitcoin," The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 71, 107 ­
  113.

Chod, J., and E. Lyandres (2018): "A Theory of ICOs: Diversification, Agency, and
  Information Asymmetry," Working Paper.

Cong, L. W., and Z. He (2019): "Blockchain Disruption and Smart Contracts," Review of
  Financial Studies, 32(5), 1754­1797.

Cong, L. W., Y. Li, and N. Wang (2018): "Tokenomics: Dynamic Adoption and Valua-
  tion," Working Paper.

Dyhrberg, A. (2016): "Hedging Capabilities of Bitcoin. Is it the virtual gold?," Finance
  Research Letters, 16, 139 ­ 144.

Easley, D., M. O'Hara, and S. Basu (2019): "From Mining to Markets: The Evolution
  of Bitcoin Transaction Fees," Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.

Foley, S., J. R. Karlsen, and T. J. Putnins (2019): "Sex, Drugs, and Bitcoin: How
  Much Illegal Activity Is Financed Through Cryptocurrencies?," Review of Financial Studies,
  32(5), 1798­1853.


                                            19
Griffin, J. M., and A. Shams (2018): "Is Bitcoin Really Un-Tethered?," Working Paper.

Hanke, S. H., and C. Bushnell (2017): "On Measuring Hyperinflation," World Eco-
  nomics, 18(3), 1­18.

Hanke, S. H., and N. Krus (2013): "World Hyperinflations," in Routledge Handbook of
  Major Events in Economic History, ed. by R. E. Parker, and R. Whaples, chap. 30. Rout-
  ledge.

Harvey, C. (2016): "Cryptofinance," Working Paper.

Henderson, M. T., and M. Raskin (2019): "A Regulatory Classification of Digital Assets:
  Toward an Operational Howey Test for Cryptocurrencies, ICOs, and Other Digital Assets,"
  Columbia Law School Review, 44.

Hinman, W. (2018): "Remarks at the Yahoo Finance All Markets Summit: Crypto," Re-
  marks by SEC Director, Division of Corporation Finance. Available at https://perma.cc/
  W7N4-RN8N.

Hinzen, F. J., K. John, and F. Saleh (2019): "Bitcoin's Fatal Flaw: The Limited
  Adoption Problem," NYU Stern Working Paper.

Howell, S. T., M. Niessner, and D. Yermack (2019): "Initial Coin Offerings: Financing
  Growth with Cryptocurrency Token Sales," NBER Working Paper.

Huberman, G., J. D. Leshno, and C. Moallemi (2019): "An Economic Analysis of the
  Bitcoin Payment System," Working Paper.

Li, J., and W. Mann (2018): "Initial Coin Offerings and Platform Building," Working
  Paper.

Li, T., D. Shin, and B. Wang (2019): "Cryptocurrency Pump-and-Dump Schemes," Work-
  ing Paper.


                                           20
Makarov, I., and A. Schoar (2019): "Trading and Arbitrage in Cryptocurrency Markets,"
  Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.

Raskin, M., and D. Yermack (2016): "Digital Currencies, Decentralized Ledgers, and the
  Future of Central Banking," .

Saleh, F. (2019a): "Blockchain Without Waste: Proof-of-Stake," Working Paper.

         (2019b): "Volatility and Welfare in a Crypto Economy," Working Paper.

Selgin, G. (1996): "Salvaging Gresham's Law: The Good, the Bad, and the Illegal," Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking, 28(4), 637­649.

Yermack, D. (2015): "Is Bitcoin a Real Currency? An economic appraisal," Handbook of
  Digital Currency, pp. 31­43.

         (2017): "Corporate Governance and Blockchains," Review of Finance, 21, 7­31.

Yu, G., and J. Zhang (2018): "Flight to Bitcoin," Working Paper.




                                           21
