                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ENTRY, TRADE, AND EXPORTING OVER THE CYCLE

                                    George A. Alessandria
                                        Horag Choi

                                      Working Paper 26212
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26212


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




This is a revised version of an earlier paper, "The Role Exporting and Trade for Entry over the
Business Cycle." We have benefitted from conversations with Aubhik Khan and Satyajit
Chatterjee and seminar participants at numerous conferences and universities. We thank
Yoonsoon Lee and Ippei Fujiwara for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by George A. Alessandria and Horag Choi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Entry, Trade, and Exporting over the Cycle
George A. Alessandria and Horag Choi
NBER Working Paper No. 26212
August 2019
JEL No. E32,F41

                                         ABSTRACT

We study how international trade and the exporting decisions of establishments affect
establishment creation over the business cycle in a general equilibrium model. The model
captures two key features of establishment and exporter dynamics: i) new establishments start
small and grow over time and ii) exporters tend to be bigger and more productive than non-
exporters and remain so for some time. When the cost of creating establishments fluctuates with
aggregate productivity, we find the model can generate procyclical fluctuations in the stock of
domestic establishments and importers similar to the data. Without international trade, entry is
weakly countercyclical and too smooth. The model also generates fluctuations in the stock of
importers, exporters, and domestic establishments of similar magnitude to those in the data. With
an entry margin, we also find that output is hump-shaped following a productivity shock since
investments in creating establishments and exporters generate an incentive to delay accumulating
physical capital. This hump is stronger in an open economy model and strongly increases the
value of creating new establishments in a boom.


George A. Alessandria
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Harkness 204
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
george.alessandria@rochester.edu

Horag Choi
Department of Economics
Monash University
900 Dandenong Road
Caulfield East, VIC 3145
Australia
horag.choi@monash.edu
1. Introduction
         Recent research in international trade identi...es an important theoretical link between the
export decisions of establishments and the number of active establishments (Melitz, 2003). In this
framework, reductions in marginal trade costs, such as tari¤s and transportation costs, generate a
large increase in the share of establishments exporting (Ruhl, 2003) and reduce the incentive to create
new establishments (Baldwin and Forslid, 2010; and Alessandria and Choi, 2014a). For instance,
Alessandria and Choi (2014) ...nd an 8 percent reduction in tari¤s increases export participation by
92 percent but reduces the stock of domestic establishments by two percent. While the e¤ect of
trade on entry is well understood, the e¤ect of trade for the dynamics of entry over the business
cycle is less understood. Indeed, much of the recent literature on establishment creation over the
cycle, inspired by the large reduction in ...rm creation since the Great Recession, abstracts entirely
from international trade.1 In this paper, we study the relationship between international trade and
establishment creation over the business cycle in a general equilibrium model of endogenous entry
into production and exporting.
         We begin by documenting some salient features about the dynamics of the number of estab-
lishments, exporters, and importers over the business cycle. Our focus on more margins of market
participation than in the closed economy literature permits a more nuanced view of the drivers
of establishment creation and market participation. Moreover, as new producers tend to be much
smaller than exporters, this sheds light on the di¤erent incentives of small and large producers to
expand over the cycle. Consistent with previous research (see Chatterjee and Cooper, 2014; and
Lee and Mukoyama, 2015), we ...nd that both the number of new establishments and the stock of
current establishments is procyclical in the U.S. We also ...nd that when the number of domestic
establishments is expanding so is the number of products being imported into the U.S. but even
more strongly. In contrast, we ...nd that the number of U.S. establishment exporting tends to be
mildly countercyclical and negatively correlated with the stock of active domestic establishments.
Finally, we ...nd that uctuations in the stock of establishments are about half as big as uctuations
in GDP, while uctuations in the number of importers and exporters are about 1.5 times those of
GDP, but half as volatile as trade ows. Thus, trade participation decisions are much more elastic

  1
      See Pugsley and Sahin (2015), Clementi and Palazzo (2016) and Alon, Berger, Dent, and Pugsley (2017).




                                                         1
over the cycle than the producer creation decisions.
       To address the pattern of establishment creation and entry over the business cycle requires a
model that captures key features of establishment-level heterogeneity. For our purposes, we extend
the general equilibrium model of endogenous export participation of Alessandria and Choi (2007) to
include an entry decision. In that model, which captures the key di¤erences between exporters and
non-exporters documented by Bernard and Jensen (1999), establishments di¤er in their productivity,
capital stock, and export status. To become exporters, consistent with the model of Dixit (1989) and
Baldwin and Krugman (1989) and the evidence in Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007), non-exporters
incur a large, up-front sunk cost. To remain as exporters, establishments incur a smaller ...xed cost.
With heterogeneity in individual labor productivity and capital holdings, only the most productive
non-exporters start exporting. Similarly, given the ...xed cost of continuing in the export market,
the least productive exporters exit the market. Over time, idiosyncratic productivity shocks lead
establishments to enter and exit the export market. Thus, the model generates exporter hysteresis
in that exporters continue to export even after they have become relatively unproductive or the
aggregate conditions have changed in a way that they would not enter if they were not already in
the market. We augment this model by allowing free entry so that new establishments are created
with a one-period delay by incurring another sunk entry costs. With the structure of export cost in
the model, new plants start small and grow through time as in the data.
       To capture the cyclical features about entry, we consider two types of shocks: shocks to pro-
ductivity and shocks to ...xed costs of creating establishments and exporters. When the productivity
of creating establishments and exporters moves with aggregate productivity, we ...nd the model does
well at matching a number of features about the cyclical uctuations in the number of establishment.
The model generates procyclical uctuations in the number of establishments and importers and a
positive correlation between domestic establishments and importers as in the data. The model also
generates uctuations in the number of exporters and importers that are about 1.5 times output
and larger uctuations in the stock of establishments. Holding the technology for exporting and
creating establishments constant leads to much smaller uctuations in exporters, importers, and
domestic establishments.
       Armed with a model that captures producer and exporter characteristics and dynamics and
their evolution over the cycle, we consider some counterfactuals to show that international trade


                                                  2
and the export decision of establishments play an important role in the dynamics of establishment
creation. When we eliminate international borrowing and lending, the volatility in the stock of
establishments falls by 44 percent relative to the benchmark model while uctuations in participation
by exporters and importers are cut by 65 percent. Eliminating the ability to borrow from abroad
implies that when the home country receives a positive productivity shock, it will devote relatively
more resources towards physical capital accumulation and less towards the creation of establishments
or exporters. When we further eliminate intratemporal trade and the potential to export, the model
now predicts acyclical uctuations in the stock of establishments.
       International trade in goods and ...nancial assets helps to match the cyclical patterns of
participation along these three margins because it generates uctuations in output that are more
persistent. The standard real business cycle model lacks a strong internal propagation mechanism
from productivity shocks leading to output uctuations that are mean reverting rather than hump-
shaped as in the data (Cogley and Nason, 1995). Others have shown that entry can help generate
these hump-shaped dynamics if entry responds enough over the cycle (see Clementi and Palazzo,
2016). International trade in goods and assets further helps on this account for two reasons. First, it
allows a country to borrow from abroad increasing the domestic capital stock faster and increasing
future exports. A longer and larger boom increases the value of entry, pulling more new domestic
producers and importers into the market. Importers soon retrench and exporters expand into foreign
markets. Moreover, the greater investment is sustained because the interest rate does not rise by
as much as in the closed economy which implies future pro...ts from entry are discounted by less.
Second, if entry costs are denominated in e¢ ciency units of domestic labor then in a productivity
driven expansion entry costs will fall relative to the price of capital which is a composite of imported
and domestic goods leading to greater investment in new establishments.
       Our analysis also sheds light on the nature of ...xed trade costs. We ...nd that abstracting
from the export decision yields a stock of establishments that is much too procyclical. In this case
as all producers engage in the foreign market without any ...xed costs in exporting, there is greater
incentive to create new establishments and export when there is a positive productivity shock. Thus
the model predicts very strong procyclical uctuations in the stock of establishment (0.92), and the
stock of establishments becomes negatively related to importers (-0.08). Modelling exporting as a
static decision makes entry strongly positively correlated with exporting and negatively correlated


                                                   3
with importing, quite opposite from the data.
       This paper is related to three lines of research. First, there is a closed economy literature that
studies entry and exit of establishments over the business cycle.2 These papers abstract from plant
heterogeneity. More recent work3 consider aggregate uctuations in models with heterogeneous es-
tablishments but abstract from international trade. Second, the international real business cycle
model of Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994) has been extended to include exporting4 by Ghironi
and Melitz (2005) and Alessandria and Choi (2007). Our approach di¤ers from that in Ghironi and
Melitz (2005), which also consider entry, in that we allow the underlying structure of establishment
heterogeneity to di¤er and we allow for physical capital accumulation. We ...nd including physical
capital to be important for the propagation of shocks, since the durability of investments in estab-
lishments and exporters di¤er from that of physical capital. Moreover, physical capital is important
to match the cyclicality of trade ows by creating a reason for productive economies to increase
imports more strongly than exports in the early stages of a boom. Finally, there is a third, partial
equilibrium literature that studies the export decisions of establishments. Baldwin (1988), Baldwin
and Krugman (1989) and Dixit (1989) develop models of export decisions with an exogenous ex-
change rate process.5 Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007) develop these models further and use them
to estimate the sunk costs of exporting. As partial equilibrium studies these papers cannot address
the cyclical features of exporting or entry. Alessandria and Choi (2014a) and Alessandria, Choi and
Ruhl (2014) extend these models to capture the lifecycle of producers and exporters, and study the
transition from reductions in tari¤s in general equilibrium. The sunk cost of exporting is important
to capture the scale and timing of uctuations in export participation since it becomes harder for
this extensive margin to respond as sharply to aggregate conditions.
       The paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses evidence on the dynamics
of exporter participation and establishments over the business cycle. Section 3 develops a two-

  2
     See Chatterjee and Cooper (2014); Devereux, Head and Lapham (1999); Cook (2001); Comin and Gertler (2006),
Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz (2012).
   3
     See Campbell (1998), Samaniego (2008), Veracierto (2008), Lee and Mukoyama (2015), Pugsley and Sahin (2015),
Clementi, Khan, Palazzo and Thomas (2015), Clementi and Palozzo (2016) and Alon, Berger, Dent and Pugsley
(2017).
   4
     Cook (2002) and Head (2002) study entry in an international business cycle model but abstract from plant
heterogeneity or the decision to export.
   5
     Other papers that study the export decision include Roberts and Tybout (1997), Aw, Chung and Roberts (1998)
and Clerides, Lach and Tybout (1998).




                                                       4
country dynamic general equilibrium model with establishment and exporter dynamics. In section
4, we subject the model to country-speci...c shocks to productivity and examine the quantitative
implications of the model for the exporter participation and establishment creation over the business
cycle. Section 5 explores the sensitivity of the model to changes in the structure of trade, trade
costs, ...xed costs, the elasticity of substitutions, and the durability of investments in establishments.
Section 6 concludes.

2. Evidence
        We now discuss the long-run and cyclical movements in the number of establishments,6
importers, and exporters7 active in the U.S. from 1977 to 2015. Perhaps not surprisingly, given this
is a period of substantial trade integration with the trade share of GDP nearly tripling,8 the number
of producers active internationally (exporting and importing/foreign exporting) grows more than the
number of active domestic establishments, particularly in manufacturing. Removing these long-run
changes, over the cycle we ...nd that the stocks of establishments and foreign exporters are strongly
procyclical while exporting by US producers is largely acyclical, and international participation is
more volatile than domestic participation. Consequently, we ...nd the number of domestic producers
and foreign exporters comove strongly while domestic producers do not comove much with exporters.
        We focus on the number of active private establishments in the US economy and manufactur-
ing from the Census's Business Dynamics Statistics. This is a measure of the stock of establishments
active as of March 12 of a particular year. Their cyclical behavior has been studied in a number
of recent papers (see for instance Tian, 2018; and Woo, 2015). Unlike this work which places a
greater focus on the entry and exit margins we focus on the stock of establishments and bring in
more information on trade participation.
        Our measures of importers and exporters are based on counts of the number of goods imported
and exported (see the data appendix for more details) over the course of a year. While these
measures of changes in the number of goods imported or exported need not correspond to changes
in the number of foreign establishments active in the U.S. market or U.S. establishments active

   6
     For other studies of the cyclicality of producers, including entrants and exiters, see work by Koellinger and Thurik
(2012), Woo (2015), Gourio, Messer and Siemer (2016), and Tian (2018).
   7
     Ghironi and Melitz (2007) discuss     uctuations in these margins in the US from 1989 to 2001 using similar measures
to ours. Alessandria and Choi (2007) study       uctuations in exporting to a panel of countries from 1996 to 2003.
   8
     In 1977 the trade share of GDP in nominal terms was 10.7 percent while in 2015 it had risen to 29.1 percent.



                                                           5
overseas, we do ...nd that they are highly correlated with the participation by establishments, at
least for U.S. exporters.9
        Figure 1 plots the growth in establishments, exporters, importers, and private employment
since 1977. Panel A shows that the stock of establishments has grown about as much as private
employment while the number of products imported has grown nearly twice as much, consistent
with growing trade integration. The number of products exported has grown slightly less than the
number of private establishments but this primarily reects a decline in exporters from 1977 to
1986, followed by a very robust expansion at about the same pace as importers. Panel b contrasts
the dynamics of importers, and exporters against manufacturing establishments, perhaps a more
natural measure given trade is primarily in manufactured goods. Here we see that the number
of manufacturing establishments grew through the late 1990s before declining substantially. By
2015 there are about 15 percent fewer manufacturing establishments than in 1977 and a third fewer
workers.10 By this measure there has been a robust expansion in exporters relative to domestic
producers.11
        Figure 2 plots the cyclical behavior of establishments, exporters, and importers and Table 1
reports some key business cycle statistics.12 Panel A plots the stock of establishments and real GDP.
Importers and domestic establishments are procyclical (0.61 and 0.47) while exporting is essentially
acyclical (-0.08). Establishments are more correlated with GDP than imports or exports (0.47 vs.
0.44 vs 0.31).13 Panel B and C show exporters and importers are half as volatile and strongly posi-
tively correlated with the appropriate trade ow (0.37 for exports and 0.70 for imports) suggesting
there are many marginal exporters and importers. Panel D plots the ratio of nominal exports to im-
ports along with the di¤erence between exporters and importers and exporters and domestic ...rms.

   9
      This measure of the number of goods exported is highly correlated (0.80) and of similar magnitude (percent
standard deviation of 3.4 vs 4.6) as a measure based on the number of exporters from 1984 to 1992 in Bernard and
Jensen (1999) and from the Exporter Database from 1996 to 2006. Based on this we conclude that our goods based
measures are also likely to re ect participation decisions by establishments.
   10
      Over this period manufacturing's labor share has declined so that the decline in employment overstates the decline
in value added.
   11
      In Alessandria and Choi (2014b) we document that export participation in manufacturing has grown nearly 40
log points among plants with 100+ employees and has nearly doubled among all plants from 1987 to 2007 in the US.
   12
      The detailed description of data are reported in Appendix. All the data are H-P ...ltered with the smoothing
parameter of 6.25 after taking logarithm.
   13
      We found that adjusting the timing of the measure of economic activity has a modest e¤ect on the cyclicality of
the stock of establishments. Using Q1 data on economic activity (since this lines up better with the March 12 measure
of the stock establishments) rather than annual data makes the stock slightly more procyclical (+6 percentage points),
more correlated with imports (+12 percentage points) and less correlated with exports (-5 percentage points).



                                                           6
Here we see that net trade is strongly positively correlated with net export participation.
        Relative to trade participation, the stock of establishments is about one-third less volatile,
although of course trade is about 3 times as volatile as GDP. We also ...nd that the stock of domestic
establishments is less procyclical than importers (0.47 vs. 0.61) but much more procyclical than
exporters (0.47 vs. -0.08). The data thus suggests that participation margin of foreign suppliers is
more responsive to U.S. booms than either the domestic participation or exporting margins.
        Focusing on manufacturing plants yields somewhat similar results as the number of manufac-
turing plants has about the same volatility (50 vs. 45 percent) and procyclicality.14 The correlation
between the stock of establishments and GDP is 0.47, and the correlation between number of man-
ufacturing plants and GDP is 0.41.
        We also ...nd that when the stock of establishments rises, so does the stock of importers15
(correlation of 0.31), while the stock of exporters tends to fall (correlation is -0.28 for private
establishments). The negative comovement between establishments and exporters is only possible
if not all establishments export and the incentive to export varies relative to the incentive to enter.
        The bottom panel reports the correlations between some variables at a one-year lag and
lead.16 One thing that stands out is that GDP leads the stock of private establishments with a
correlation of 0.57 between lagged GDP and current stock of establishment compared to a contem-
poraneous correlation of 0.47. The gap is larger for manufacturing establishments: 0.79 vs. 0.41.
The correlation between establishments and lagged importers and exporters is a bit stronger now
(0.57 vs. 0.31 for importers) and (-0.09 vs. -0.28 for exporters). When focusing on manufactur-
ers, the correlation rises from -0.1 to 0.14 for exporter and 0.26 to 0.54 for importers. Our theory
will explicitly allow for these types of timing issues in the measurement of active exporters and
establishment.

  14
     For manufacturers, the procyclicality with respect to value added in manufacturing is lower at 0.27 although it is
more strongly correlated lagged manufacturing value added (0.81).
  15
     We focus on the comovement between private establishments rather than manufacturing establishments since this
will be consistent with the model we develop in the next section; however, we present statistics for manufacturing
establishments for completeness.
  16
     These dynamic correlations have been studied in Koellinger and Thurik (2012), Gourio, Messer and Siemer (2016),
and Tian (2018).




                                                          7
3. The Model
        We now develop a model with in...nitely lived consumers and heterogeneous establishments
to study the role of trade and exporting on the entry decisions of establishments over the business
cycle. The model combines elements of the Ghironi and Melitz (2005) framework of entry and
exporting with the model of establishment exporter dynamics with capital of Alessandria and Choi
(2007). Each period there is a mass of existing establishments distributed over productivity, coun-
tries, and export status. Establishment level productivity is stochastic and generates movements
of establishments into and out of exporting. Each period, some establishments shutdown, and new
establishments are created by incurring a sunk cost. Aggregate productivity uctuates over time
yielding aggregate uctuations that inuence entry and exporting decisions.
        There are two countries, home and foreign. Each country is populated by a continuum of
identical, in...nitely lived consumers of mass one. Each period, the economy experiences an event st .
Let st = (s0 ; s1 ;      ; st ) denote the history of events from period 0 up to and including period
t. The probability of a history st , conditional on the information available at period 0, is given as
   st js0 : The initial realization of an event at period 0, s0 , is given.
        In each country there is a large number of monopolistically competitive intermediate good
producers each producing a distinct di¤erentiated good. The many intermediate good producers
are indexed i 2 0; N st , where N st is the mass of intermediate good producers in st .17 An
intermediate good producer uses capital and labor inputs to produce its variety. Producers di¤er
in terms of total factor productivity, capital, location of production, and destination markets of
sales. All establishments sell in their own country but only some establishments export. As in
Dixit (1989), Baldwin and Krugman (1989), and Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007), to export, an
establishment incurs a ...xed cost that depends on its export status in the previous period. There is
a (relatively) high up-front sunk cost f0 st > 0 that must be borne to gain entry into the export
market. In subsequent periods, to continue exporting, establishments incur a lower but nonzero
period-by-period ...xed continuation cost f1 st < f0 st . If an establishment does not pay this
continuation cost, then it ceases to export. In future periods, the establishment can begin exporting
only by incurring the entry cost f0 st again. The cost of exporting implies that the set of goods

  17
    To be precise, the index is reassigned each period based on shutdown producers and new producers so that all the
establishments are indexed within the mass of producers.


                                                         8
available to consumers di¤ers across countries and is changing over time. We assume that the ...xed
costs must be incurred in the period of exporting. We consider alternative ways in which these costs
may move in each country over the cycle.
        In each period some establishments die and new ones are created. We follow Lee and
Mukoyama (2008) and assume all establishments face a constant death probability nd . New es-
tablishments can be created by incurring a sunk cost of fE st . An entrant can actively produce
goods and sell their products from the following period on. The timing of producer decisions is
presented in Figure 3.
        The cyclicality of entry costs will matter for the cyclicality and volatility of participation. In
the literature, this is either explicitly assumed to be countercyclical (Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz,
2012) or implicitly by making the ...xed costs denominated in ...nal goods (Clementi and Palazzo,
2016). We follow the approach of making the entry costs explicitly countercyclical by letting produc-
tivity in a market a¤ect the costs of entering that market. We prefer this approach to denominating
entry costs in goods since international trade will be changing the composition of goods.
        In each country, competitive ...nal goods producers purchase intermediate inputs from those
establishments actively selling in that country.18 The cost of exporting implies that the set of
goods available to competitive ...nal goods producers di¤ers across countries. The entry and exit
of exporting establishments implies that the set of intermediate goods available in a country is
changing over time. The ...nal goods are used for both domestic consumption and investment.
        In this economy, there exists a complete set of one-period state-contingent nominal bond
denominated in the home currency. Let B st+1 jst denote the home consumer'
                                                                         s holding of the
bonds purchased in state st with payo¤ in state st+1 . Let B           st+1 jst denotes the foreign consumer's
holding of this bond. The state-contingent bond B st pays 1 unit of home currency if st occurs,
and 0 otherwise. Let Q st+1 jst denote the nominal price of the bond B st+1 . All the intermediate
and ...nal good producers are owned by domestic consumers. It is assumed that these ownership
claims cannot be traded.

  18
    There is no value added in this stage of production. The ...nal good production technology regulates a country's
preferences over local and imported varieties.




                                                         9
Consumers
         Home consumers choose consumption, labor, and bond holdings to maximize their utility:

              1 Z
              X
                             t
(1)     max                          st js0 U C st ; L st     dst ;
                  t=0   st



subject to the sequence of budget constraints,

                                 Z
              t          t
(2)     P s C s +                         Q st+1 jst B st+1 dst+1        P st W st L st + B st + P st             st ;
                                 st+1



where        is the subjective time discount factor with 0 <                    < 1; P st is the price of the ...nal
good; C st is the consumption of ...nal goods; W st is the real wage rate; and                           st is the sum
of real pro...ts from the home country producers. The instantaneous utility function is given as
              h            i1
U (C; L) = C (1 L)1            = (1   ), where 1= is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution,
and      is the share parameter for consumption in the composite commodity.
         The problem of foreign consumers is analogous to this problem. Prices and allocations in the
foreign country are represented with an asterisk. Money has no role in this economy and is only a
unit of account. The foreign budget constraint is expressed as

                                      Z
                                               Q st+1 jst
(3)      P        st C       st +                         B   st dst+1      P     st W   st L      st
                                        st+1     e (st )
                                                                                B st
                                                                            +            +P   st        st ;
                                                                                 e (st )

where        denotes the foreign variables and e st is the nominal exchange rate with home currency
as numeraire.19

Final Good Producers
         In the home country, ...nal goods are produced using home and foreign intermediate goods.
A ...nal good producer can purchase from any of the home intermediate good producers but can
purchase only from those foreign intermediate good producers actively selling in the home market.
The set of foreign intermediate good producers actively selling in the home country is denoted by

 19
      An increase in e st means a depreciation of domestic currency.



                                                                 10
X     st ; where i 2 X                  st if the ith producer is a foreign exporter in st .
        The production technology of a ...nal good producer is given by a constant elasticity of sub-
stitution (CES) function

                    8 "                                          #                            "Z                                 # 91
                    < Z             N (st )                                                                                        =
(4)    D(st ) =                                d
                                              yh (i; st ) di               + (1           )                         d
                                                                                                                   yf (i; st ) di     ;
                    :           0                                                                     i2 X   (st )                 ;


where D(st ) is the output of ...nal goods and yh
                                                d (i; st ) and y d (i; st ) are inputs of intermediate goods
                                                                f

purchased from home establishment i and foreign establishment i, respectively. The parameter
determines the weight of home goods in ...nal good consumption. The elasticity of substitution
between intermediate goods that are produced in the same country is 1=(1                                                                           ), and the elasticity
of substitution between home and foreign aggregate inputs is 1=(1                                                                    ). With the two entry margins
of the model, the measure of varieties available for use in production of the composite home and
foreign good changes over time. With a typical Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator there is a bene...t to using
smaller amounts of a greater number of varieties.
        The ...nal goods market is perfectly competitive. In each period t, given the ...nal good price
at home P (st ), the ith home intermediate good price at home Ph (i; st ) for i 2 0; N st , and the
ith foreign intermediate good price at home Pf (i; st ) for i 2 X (st ), a home ...nal good producer
                d (i; st ) for i 2 0; N st , and y d (i; st ) for i 2 X (st ) to maximize pro...ts,
chooses inputs yh                                 f


                            (                                   Z                                                              Z                                            )
                                                                         N (st )
(5)    F   st = max P st D st                                                                 d
                                                                                    Ph i; st yh i; st di                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                 Pf i; st yf i; st di ;
                                                                     0                                                               i2X (st )



subject to the production technology (4). Solving the problem in (5) gives the input demand
functions,

                                                                 1                            1
         d
                                        1     Ph (i; st )            1      Ph (st )              1
(6)     yh (i; st )     =           1                                                                 D(st ); i 2 0; N st                     ;
                                               Ph (st )                     P (st )
                                                                                1                        1

         d
                                                   1    Pf (i; st )                 1   Pf (s t )            1
(7)     yf (i; st )     = (1                  )1                                                                 D(st ); i 2 X (st );
                                                         Pf (st )                       P (st )


                        R N ( st )
                                                                            1
                                                                                                                 hR                                         i   1

where Ph   (s t )   =       0               Ph   (i; st )   1   di              , and Pf (st ) =                      i2 X   (st )   Pf (i; st )   1   di           . The zero-


                                                                                         11
pro...t condition in the perfectly competitive market determines the price level of the ...nal good
as

                   h        1                                    1
                                                                                     i   1

(8)    P (st ) =        1       Ph (st )   1   + (1         )1       Pf (st )    1           :



        We focus on these ideal price indices rather than the average price proposed by Ghironi and
Melitz (2005) as Alessandria and Choi (2007) show that empirically the movements in and out of
exporting are not su¢ cient to lead to a large gap between these two measures in the data. Moreover,
we are more focused on counts of participation over the cycle which are not inuenced much by
these measurement concerns.

Intermediate Good Producers
        An intermediate good producer can sell its product costlessly in its own market. However, it
is costly to sell its product abroad. Intermediate good producers that export to the foreign country
face two types of international trading costs. To enter the foreign market, an intermediate good
producer has to pay a (relatively) high initial entry cost f0 st . This permits the producer to
export in the current period. From the following period on, to continue exporting, the producer has
to pay a lower but nonzero continuation costs f1 st (< f0 st ). In our current speci...cation, we
will assume these costs are measured in foreign labor units augmented by foreign country-speci...c
productivity A          st .20 Thus, an intermediate good producer faces the ...xed costs of exporting as

                                   "              #                                              "              #
                                       W st                                                          W st
(9)    f0 st = f0 e st                                ;                   f1 st = f1 e st                           ;
                                       A (s t )                                                      A (s t )


where f0 and f1 are positive constants. Since the trade costs depend on the export status of the
producers last period, the total amount of export costs paid by domestic exporters equals

                    Z
            t
(10) G s        =                    f0 st        1       m i; st     1
                                                                            + f1 st m i; st           1
                                                                                                          di;
                       i2X (st )


  20
    Paying ...xed exporting costs in home labor units instead of foreign labor units does not change the results quali-
tatively. In the sensitivity analysis, we will consider this case and the case without the shocks to ...xed costs.




                                                                            12
where m(i; st ) is an indicator function denoting the export status of the ith intermediate good
producer in st . Here m(i; st ) = 1 if the ith foreign intermediate good producer is an exporter in st ,
0 otherwise. These trade costs imply that only some,

                  Z    N   (st )
            t
(11) NX (s ) =                     m (i; st )di;
                   0



of foreign intermediate goods are available to home ...nal good producers in state st .
        An intermediate good establishment produces its di¤erentiated good with a Cobb-Douglas
production technology,



(12) F (i; st ) = A st a(i; st )k (i; st             1
                                                         ) l(i; st )1      = yh (i; st ) + yh (i; st );



where yh (i; st ) and yh (i; st ) are the amounts of good i sold in the home and foreign intermediate goods
markets, respectively, and k (i; st             1)   and l(i; st ) are the capital and labor inputs of the establishment
i. Capital used in production is augmented by investment of ...nal goods, v (i; st ). The law of motion
for capital is given by



(13) k (i; st ) = (1        )k (i; st   1
                                            ) + v (i; st );



where    is the depreciation rate.
        The term a(i; st ) denotes the establishment-speci...c productivity of the ith establishment.
The establishment-speci...c productivity is independently, identically distributed across countries,
                                                     iid
establishments, and time, ln a(i; st )                     N (0;    2 ).
                                                                    a      While the iid assumption is restrictive relative to
recent work on the cyclical movements in entry (Lee and Mukoyama, 2015; or Clementi and Palazzo,
2016) it makes the distribution of capital, productivity, and exporting a ...nite dimensional object.
Alessandria and Choi (2007) show that the iid model behaves similar to a model with producers
with a persistent idiosyncratic component. In our sensitivity section we consider how the properties
of the model vary with a persistent component to productivity.
        The country-speci...c productivity A(st ) may be correlated across countries and evolves ac-
cording to a vector autoregressive process (VAR) with the foreign country-speci...c productivity,


                                                                           13
A (st ),


                                                              iid
(14) Z (st ) = M Z (st           1
                                     ) + "(st ); "(st )             N (0; );



where M is a coe¢ cient matrix; Z (st ) = [ln A(st ); ln A (st )]0 and "(st ) = [ (st );                                             (st )]0 .
       Consider the problem of a home intermediate good producer with the establishment-speci...c
productivity a i; st = a; capital stock k i; st                                  1    = k; and the export status m i; st                         1   = m in
state st . The intermediate good producer chooses current prices Ph i; st ; Ph i; st ; inputs of labor
l i; st ; investment v i; st and the export decision m i; st = m0 to solve

                                               n
(15)   V a; k; m; st              = max              h (a; k; m; s
                                                                           t
                                                                               ) + m0    h (a; k; m; s
                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                )
                                                          Z         Z
                                        + (1       nd )                    Q st+1 jst           a0 V a0 ; k 0 ; m0 ; st+1 da0 dst+1
                                                            st+1      a0
                                               Z
                                         +nd            Q st+1 jst k 0 dst+1 ;
                                                 st+1




                        t
(16)       h (a; k; m; s )        = Ph (i; st )yh (i; st )                 P (st )W (st )l(i; st )              P (st )v (i; st );
                           t
(17)       h (a; k; m; s       ) = e(st )Ph (i; st )yh (i; st )                       mf1 st + (1                   m)f0 st      ;


subject to the production technology (12), the law of motion for capital (13), and the constraints
that supplies to home and foreign intermediate goods market yh (i; st ) and yh (i; st ) are equal to
                                                   d (i; st ) and y d (i; st ) from (6) and its foreign
demands by home and foreign ...nal good producers yh               h

analogue. Here,        (a0 ) denotes the probability of an idiosyncratic shock a0 . If a producer receives
the death shock, it sells its capital stock k and shuts down without any production but the capital
is not re-allocated within the period.
       Let the value of the ith producer if it exports in st be

                                                 n
(18)   V 1 a; k; m; st               = max                         t
                                                      h (a; k; m; s )            +      h (a; k; m; s
                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                            )
                                                            Z         Z
                                          + (1       nd )                      Q st+1 jst        a0 V a0 ; k 0 ; 1; st+1 da0 dst+1
                                                               st+1     a0
                                                 Z
                                          +nd             Q st+1 jst k 0 dst+1 ;
                                                   st+1



                                                                                 14
and let the value of the ith producer if it does not export in st be

                                        n
(19)    V 0 a; k; m; st     = max                         t
                                             h (a; k; m; s )
                                                   Z      Z
                                 + (1       nd )               Q st+1 jst   a0 V a0 ; k 0 ; 0; st+1 da0 dst+1
                                                   st+1   a0
                                        Z
                                 +nd           Q st+1 jst k 0 dst+1 ;
                                        st+1


Then, the actual value of ith producer can be de...ned as



(20) V a; k; m; st = max V 1 a; k; m; st ; V 0 a; k; m; st                  :



Clearly the value of a producer depends on its export status, and is monotonically increasing and
continuous in a: Moreover V 1 intersects V 0 from below only once.21 Hence, it is possible to solve
for the establishment-speci...c productivity at which a establishment is indi¤erent between exporting
or not exporting; that is, the increase in establishment value from exporting equals the cost of
exporting. This level of technology di¤ers by the establishments current export status. The critical
level of technology for exporters and nonexporters, a1 st and a0 st , satisfy


(21)    V 1 a1 st ; k; 1; st      = V 0 a1 st ; k; 1; st ;

(22)    V 1 a0 st ; k; 0; st      = V 0 a0 st ; k; 0; st :


Among last period exporters, only those with productivity greater than a1 (st ) will continue to export
in state st . Likewise, the critical technology of a nonexporter is denoted by a0 st : The decision
to export will also depend on the capital stock. However, owing to the iid idiosyncractic shocks a
producer'
        s capital stocks only depend on its lagged export status, thus there is only one cuto¤ per
type.

  21
    If the di¤erence between f0 and f1 is very large, V 1 > V 0 for all ln a 2 ( 1; 1) for some st . Since the data show
that some of the previous exporters exit from foreign markets each period, it is assumed throughout that the shocks
are small enough that this does not occur.




                                                                15
Entrants
       In each period, new intermediate good producers can be created by incurring a ...xed cost
fE st : Similar to the export costs, the entry cost is measured in domestic labor units augmented
with country-speci...c productivity,

                       "             #
            t              W st
(23) fE s       = fE                     :
                           A (st )


An establishment incurs the entry cost one period before its production. Once the entry cost
is incurred, establishments newly accumulate capital before the realization of the establishment-
speci...c productivity. In the beginning of the next period, establishments receive an idiosyncratic
productivity shock from the distribution which is the same as incumbents,             (a). All the entrants
face the same probability of death as incumbents. As the entrants did not export last period, the
entry condition is given as

                                                              Z
(24)   V E st     = max               fE st   P st kE st + nd         Q st+1 jst kE st dst+1
                            kE                                 s t +1
                                          Z Z
                           + (1      nd )      Q st+1 jst a0 V a0 ; kE st ; 0; st+1 da0 dst+1        0;
                                                 st+1   a0


where kE st is the capital stock chosen by new establishments. As an entrant starts the next
period as a non-exporter it will choose a capital stock equal to that of incumbent non exporter,
k0 st :
       This equation makes clear what is needed to for entry to be procyclical. Following a positive
shock, at the old level of entry we either need the cost of entry (the ...rst term) to fall or the expected
value net of investment to rise. Obviously, in an equilibrium with entry this equation will hold with
equality. International trade will generate more procyclical entry by allowing the entry cost to fall
by more and the expected value of entering to rise by more.
       Let the mass of entrants who pay the entry cost in st be NE st , while the mass of incumbents
be N st : As only (1             nd ) fraction of incumbents and entrants survives the next period, the mass
of producers evolves as



(25) N st = (1         nd ) N s t            1
                                                  + NE st    1
                                                                 :


                                                                     16
Let the mass of nonexporters be



(26) NN st = N st                              NX st :



The trade costs imply that only a fraction nX st = NX st =N st of home intermediate goods
are available in the foreign country in st .
       From (21), (22), and the independence of the establishment-speci...c productivity, the fraction
of exporters in st among survived exporters in st                                    1   and the fraction of exporters in st among survived
nonexporters in st                 1,   n1 (st ) and n0 (st ), respectively, can be de...ned as

                                                    R1                          Z
                                NX st           1
                                                    a1 (st )       (a) da            1
                t
(27)   n1 (s ) =                                                            =                      (a) da;
                                             NX     (st 1 )                         a1 (st )
                                               R1                               Z
                                NN         t
                                          s 1 a0 (st ) (a) da                        1
                t
(28)   n0 (s ) =                                                            =                      (a) da:
                                               NN (st    1)
                                                                                a0 (st )


The law of motion for the masses of exporters and nonexporters are given as


(29)   NX (st ) = (1                       nd ) n1 (st )NX (st          1
                                                                            ) + n0 (st )[NN (st                      1
                                                                                                                         ) + NE st   1
                                                                                                                                          ] ;

(30)   NN (st ) = (1                       nd )     1     n1 (st ) NX (st                1
                                                                                             )+ 1           n0 (st ) [NN (st         1
                                                                                                                                         ) + NE st    1
                                                                                                                                                          ] ;:


A. Aggregate Variables
       The aggregate capital available in st at home is de...ned as

                        Z    N ( st )
            t
(31) K (s ) =                           k (i; st )di:
                         0



The investment, It , is given by the sum of individual investment less the capital stock received from
dying establishments,



(32)
                    Z                                                                        "Z                                                                    #
                        N ( st )                                                                   N ( st    1
                                                                                                                 )
        t                                  t                   t            t                                                t 1                t 1          t 1
    I s     =                      v (i; s )di + NE s kE s                          nd                               k i; s        di + NE s          kE s             :
                    0                                                                          0




                                                                                    17
       Nominal exports and imports are given as

                               Z
            N    t
(33)   EX       s        =                     e st Ph i; st yh i; st di;
                                   i2X (st )
                               Z
            N    t
(34)   IM       s        =                        Pf i; st yf i; st di:
                                   i2 X   (st )


Real exports and real imports are de...ned as, EX st = EX N st = e st Ph st                                         and IM st =
IM N st =Pf st , respectively. Nominal GDP of the home country is de...ned as the sum of value
added from producers,



(35) Y N st = P st D st + EX N st                               IM N st :



Real GDP is de...ned as Y st = Y N st =Ph st :
       The total labor used for production, LP st is given by

                     Z   N (st )
            t
(36) LP s       =                  l(i; st )di:
                     0



Home labor hired by foreign exporters, LX st ; is given by

                               Z                                             Z
            t      f1                                   t 1         f0
(37) LX s       =                                 m i; s      di +                          1   m i; st   1
                                                                                                              di;
                  A (st )          i2 X   (st )                    A (st )   i2 X   (st )



and home labor hired by new establishments, LE st ; is given by


                     fE NE st
(38) LE st =                   :
                       A (st )


       Aggregate pro...ts are measured as the sum of pro...ts of operating establishments and capital




                                                                    18
resale revenue of shutdown establishments less the costs of creating new establishments,

                                                Z   N ( st )
              t         t               t                             t
(39)    P s         s       =      F   s +                     h (i; s )   + m i; st   h (i; s
                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                     ) di
                                              0
                                       "Z                                                                              #
                                          N (st 1 )
                                 +nd                    P st k i; st        1
                                                                                di + NE st   1
                                                                                                      P st kE st   1
                                            0

                                   NE st        fE st + P st kE st                 :


B. Equilibrium De...nition
        In an equilibrium, variables satisfy several resource constraints. Market clearing in ...nal
goods requires C (st ) + I st = D(st ), and C (st ) + I                         st = D (st ). Intermediate goods market
                              d (i; st ) = y (i; st ) for i 2 0; N st , y d (i; st ) = y (i; st ) for i 2 X (st ),
clearing conditions requires yh             h                            f              f

 d (i; st ) = y (i; st ) for i 2 0; N st , and y d (i; st ) = y (i; st ) for i 2 X (st ). Labor market
yf             f                                h              h

clearing requires L(st ) = LP st + LE st + LX st , and L (st ) = LP st + LE st + LX st .
The pro...ts of establishments are distributed to the shareholders,                          st , and the foreign analogue.
International bond market clearing implies B (st+1 ) + B (st+1 ) = 0. Finally, writing the budget
constraints in units of the local currency permits us to normalize the price of consumption in each
country as P (st ) = P (st ) = 1.
        An equilibrium of the economy is a collection of allocations for home consumers C (st ), L(st ),
B (st+1 ); allocations for foreign consumers C (st ), L (st ), B (st+1 ); allocations for home ...nal goods
                   d (i; st ) for i 2 0; N st , and y d (i; st ) for i 2 X (st ); allocations for foreign ...nal
producers D(st ), yh                                 f
                         d (i; st ) for i 2 0; N
good producers D (st ), yf                                                   d (i; st ) for i 2 X (st ); allocations and
                                                                   st , and yh
prices for home intermediate good producers l(i; st ), v (i; st ), yh (i; st ); and Ph (i; st ) for i 2 0; N st ,
yh (i; st ) and Ph (i; st ) for i 2 X (st ); allocations and prices for foreign intermediate good producers
l (i; st ),v (i; st ), yf (i; st ) and Pf (i; st ) for i 2 X (st ), yf (i; st ) and Pf (i; st ) for i 2 0; N               st ; the
export statuses of home and foreign intermediate good producers m(i; st ) for i 2 0; N st                                      and
m (i; st ) for i 2 0; N         st ; allocations of home and foreign new establishments, kE st and kE st ;
labor used for exporting costs LX st and LX st at home and foreign; labor used for creation
of new establishments LE st and LE st at home and foreign; real wages W (st ) and W (st ),
nominal exchange rates e st ; and bond prices Q(st+1 jst ) that satisfy the following conditions: (i)
the consumer allocations solve the consumer's problem; (ii) the ...nal good producers' allocations
solve their pro...t maximization problems; (iii) the intermediate good producers'allocations, prices,

                                                                  19
and export statuses solve their pro...t maximization problems; (iv) the entrants' allocations solve
their pro...t maximization problems; (v) the establishment entry conditions hold; and (vi) the market
clearing conditions hold.


4. Calibration
         We now describe the parameter values considered for our benchmark economy. The parameter
values used in simulation exercises are reported in Table 2. The choice of the time discount factor, ,
the rate of depreciation, , capital'
                                   s share parameter in production, , and risk-aversion parameter,
 , is standard in the literature,         = 0:96;    = 0:10;     = 0:36; and      = 2: The share parameter for
consumption in the composite commodity, ; is set to be equal to 0:383 so that people allocate 1=3
of total available time to work.
         The ...nal good production parameters            and    determines the elasticity of substitution be-
tween composite domestic and foreign goods and the elasticity between varieties within a composite,
respectively. We set        = 5=6 which gives an establishment's markup of 20 percent. This value of
is consistent with the elasticity estimated by Broda and Weinstein (2006). In the benchmark model,
we set     = 0:75 which gives the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign composite goods
of 4. In the sensitivity analysis, we consider         2 [0:8; 0:96] and      2 [0; 0:8].
         The country-speci...c productivity process is an annualized version of that in Kehoe and Perri
(2002). The shocks are persistent with an autocorrelation of 0:815 and there are no cross-country
spillover. The volatility of the shock is set to be 0:013. The correlation between home and foreign
shocks are set to be 0:25.
         Establishments and capital are durable assets with di¤erent attributes. Lee and Mukoyama
(2008) ...nd the exit rate in the ASM from 1972 to 1997 is approximately 5:4 percent. Davis,
Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996) ...nd an employment weighted exit rate of 2:3 percent per year.
Since our emphasis is on the dynamics of entry and exporting over the business cycle, we would
like a general equilibrium model that can reasonably replicate features of exit and entry in stocks
of establishments. Thus, we set the exogenous exit rate, nd , to be 5:4 percent. In the sensitivity
analysis, we consider a wide range of the exit rate, nd 2 [0:01; 0:10]. We set the sunk cost parameter,
fE , to be 0:751 to normalize the mass of producers in a country to 1, N = 1 in the steady state.22

 22
      We could scale this down to match any level of producers. This would then scale the ...xed export costs down as



                                                          20
        The parameters f0 ; f1 ; ; and           a   jointly determine the amount of trade, characteristics of
exporters and nonexporters, the dynamics of export status and producer growth. To set these
parameters, we use the following four pieces of evidence: i) a stopper rate, the fraction of non-
exporters among survived last period exporters, of 17 percent as in Bernard and Jensen (1999)
based on the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) of the Bureau of the Census 1984-1992; ii)
an exporter rate, the fraction of exporters among all establishments, of 21 percent based on the
1992 Census of Manufactures; iii) trade to GDP ratio, exports plus imports divided by two times
of GDP, of 15 percent; and iv) exporter output premium, average output of exporters relative to
average output of nonexporters in logarithm, of 103 percent based on Bernard and Jensen (1999).
Choosing these parameters jointly to match these statistics yields values of f0 = 0:116; f1 = 0:036;
  = 0:566; and      a   = 0:450: The calibration suggests that previous nonexporters pay about 3:2 times
more than continuing exporters to export their products in the foreign market in the steady state.
With these parameter values together with the sunk cost of entry, about 13 percent of labor is used
for creating new variety and about 3 percent for exporting.23
        In the sensitivity analysis, we vary the parameter values to match these features in the model.
For instance if we set the sunk and ...xed costs equal we recover a version of the static exporting
model in Ghironi and Melitz (2005) in which there is no overlap in the productivity of exporters and
non-exporters which thus requires a less dispersion in productivity (                   a   = 0:295 vs.     a   = 0:385 in
benchmark) to generate the same exporter premium. The long run implications of shocks in these
models are di¤erent. For instance, following a cut in tari¤s the sunk cost model has an increasing
and larger trade elasticity while the other model has a constant trade elasticity. The sunk cost
model generates about 25 percent larger increase in trade in the long run.24
        We focus on the e¤ects of international trade on the dynamics of entry and exporting over
the business cycle. To isolate the role of international trade on the business cycles, we also consider
three alternative cases where there is no international borrowing and lending (...nancial autarky),

well since these are determined by shares of total producers. This would a¤ect no moments of the model.
   23
      The cost of creating ...rms is almost 7 times the cost of starting to export. This reects the relatively closed nature
of the economy as domestic sales are almost six times foreign sales and the fact the pro...ts from these sales are a
return on these investments in producer and exporter creation.
   24
      The trade elasticity measures the change in the ratio of expenditures on imports to domestic goods to the change
in a trade barrier. The sunk cost model generates a trade elasticity of 8.11 while with only a ...xed cost this elasticity
is 6.42 while with no extensive margin of trade it is 4.




                                                            21
no trade across countries (closed economy), and no ...xed costs in exporting.
        In general, keeping track of distributions over productivity and capital of producers is com-
putationally di¢ cult. However, the iid assumption in ...rm-speci...c productivity shocks greatly sim-
pli...es the analysis. As producers are either exporters or nonexporters with the same expectation
about their next period ...rm-speci...c productivity, at any point in time producers will choose either
a relatively low capital stock for the next period if they do not export today, or a relatively high
capital stock for the next period if they do export today. Consequently, the distribution of the
capital stock at home is completely summarized by the capital stock of exporters and nonexporters,
K1 st   1    and K0 st   1   , and the masses of exporters and nonexporters, NX st    1   and NN st     1   .
Similarly the foreign capital stock distribution is completely described by K1 st         1   , K0 st   1   ,
NX st    1   and NN st       1   . With these summary statistics for the distributions of capital stocks
together with the properties of lognormality for the integration over establishments, we solve the
model by log-linearization. The models are simulated for 1000 times with 100 periods.


5. Results
        In this section, we examine the properties of the benchmark model. We ...rst examine the
properties of establishment dynamics. Then, we investigate the predictions of business cycles in the
benchmark model. Lastly, we study the impulse response of major variables following a country-
speci...c productivity shock at home.

Establishment employment dynamics
        The model captures some salient features on the evolution of employment at the establishment-
level. Namely, establishments start out small and grow over time and exporters tend to be relatively
big, but over time their employment growth lags that at non-exporters (Bernard and Jensen 2004).
        Figure 4 plots the steady state average employment relative to overall employment by export
status and entry at the initial period. Entrants start out with 6:9 percent fewer workers than the
average producer. Among these entrants, over time productive establishments become exporters and
unproductive establishments remain as nonexporters. As time progresses more establishments from
a cohort start exporting and the average employment level and capital stock increases toward that
of the average incumbents by year 5. While qualitatively consistent with the dynamics of entrants,
our entrant is larger than the typical US entrant in the US which starts about half as large as an


                                                      22
incumbent but also takes about 5 years to reach the average scale (Clementi and Palazzo, 2016). In
our sensitivity section we consider an extension that more closely matches the scale and growth of
entrants.
          Initially nonexporters have a very low level of employment on average since they are un-
productive and many of them have a low level of capital. The average employment of the initial
nonexporters is about 27:7 percent lower than the overall average. From the following period, estab-
lishments that stop exporting due to low productivity receive a new productivity level drawn from
the same distribution as other types of establishments. Thus, average employment becomes very
close to that of entrants, although the average employment is slightly lower than that of the initial
entrants as the exporter ratio of initial nonexporters is lower than that of initial entrants. Similar
to the entrants, the average employment of the initial nonexporters increases toward the average
level of incumbents.
          The initial continuing exporters have about 48:8 percent higher level of employment relative
to the average employment since continuing exporters have a high level of capital, access more
markets and have higher average productivity from selection. In the following period, some of these
initial exporters receive bad productivity shocks and stop exporting. With this exit from the foreign
market, the establishments reduce their capital stock and their average size drops. From then on,
the exporter ratio within this group converges toward the exporter ratio of incumbents, and the
employment level diminishes toward the average employment level of incumbents.
          The dashed line denoted Initial Exporters shows that the model generates a large but tem-
porary selection e¤ect on exporting. Initially, the employment level of entrants into exporting is
higher than that of continuing exporters. In the following period, the productivity level of this
group becomes the same as that of initial continuing exporters. Also, the exporter ratios of these
two groups are the same with iid productivity.

Business cycles
          We now consider the aggregate properties of entry, importing, and exporting over the business
cycle. The column dubbed Benchmark in Table 3 shows the benchmark model captures some of
the key business cycle properties of the stock of establishments, importers, and exporters.25 In

 25
      All the variables are H-P ...ltered with the smoothing parameter of 6.25 after taking logarithm.



                                                           23
terms of volatility, the model generates uctuations in exporters and importers relative to output
of 1.46, similar to the data, where they are 1.48 and 1.30, respectively. The stock of establishments
uctuates slightly more in the model than the data (0.77 vs. 0.50). The model also qualitatively
matches the cyclicality of establishments and traders. The stock of establishment is procyclical
(correlation with output of 0.25 in the model and 0.47 in the data). Importers are more procyclical,
with a correlation with output of 0.59 (0.61 in the data). However, in the model, the exporters are
procyclical while in the data they are countercyclical (0.13 vs. -0.08). The model understates the
volatility and procyclicality of trade.26
       One key feature of the data is that the stock of establishments is positively correlated with
importers whereas it is negatively correlated with exporters. The model also predicts positive
relationship between the stock of establishments and importers with the correlation of 0.07 (0.31
in the data), although the model predicts no correlation between the stock of establishments and
exporters. The correlation in the model is -0.00 (-0.28 in the data). Overall, from productivity
shocks alone, the benchmark model generates uctuations in the stock of establishments, exporters,
and importers that are similar to those in the data.

Impulse-responses
       To examine the dynamics of the economy, we plot the responses of key variables to a one-time
one standard deviation positive country-speci...c productivity shock at home in Figures 5 and 6. The
...rst ...gure plots the dynamics of entry and the stock of establishments in home and foreign. When
there is a positive shock at home, there is a large increase in the creation of new establishments of
14.6 percent at the initial period. Over time, the incentive to create new establishment falls. After
4 years, entry falls below the initial steady state level. From the 8th year following the shock, the
mass of entrants rises toward the steady state level. With the rise and fall in entrants, the stock
of producers in the domestic country rises for 4 years and then gradually falls toward its long run
level. The stock of importers also rises initially by more than the stock of domestic establishments.
The rise in importers is less persistent and falls below the steady state level after three periods.
These dynamics of entry suggest that initially entry by importers is complementary to entry by

  26
    The model inherits both the successes and failures of the international RBC model of Backus, Kehoe and Kydland
(1994). In particular, the model fails to generate relative price uctuations of the appropriate magnitudes.




                                                       24
domestic establishments, while in the long-run, entry by domestic establishments substitutes for
that by importers. In contrast to the dynamics of entry, the stock of exporters rises gradually from
the initial period for 7 years. These increases in exporting reect both the greater value of exporting
of domestic establishments from being more productive and reduced competition overseas from a
contraction in the stock of establishments.
       The second ...gure depicts the typical macroeconomic aggregates studied in international
business cycle models. As is normal, risk-sharing leads consumption to rise in both countries and
a shift in production and investment towards the relatively more productive country. However,
unlike a model without entry, the dynamics of investment and output are hump-shaped, peaking
in the fourth year.27 These hump-shaped dynamics reect hump-shaped dynamics of labor used in
production and is evident in other models with endogenous entry (Cook, 2001; and Clementi and
Palazzo, 2016). Initially, labor is more productively used in the creation of establishments and the
stock of exporters. Once these forms of organizational capital are accumulated, labor can be more
e¤ectively used in the production of goods. Thus, we see that investment in organizational capital
precedes investment in physical capital.


6. Sensitivity
       To clarify the source of dynamics in the stock of establishments we now consider a series of
alternate models. First, we examine the importance of international trade by imposing restrictions
on intertemporal and intratemporal international trade. Second, we study how the structure of ...xed
costs, both in terms of the size and market of export costs are incurred and their cyclicality, inuence
the cyclicality in the stock of domestic establishments. Third, we bring the cyclicality of trade closer
to the data by allowing variable trade costs to vary over the cycle with the aggregate productivity
shocks. Fourth, we vary the exit rate to examine the inuence of the durability of investment in entry
relative to exporting or physical capital accumulation for the model's properties. Fifth, we examine
the sensitivity of the model to the substitutability of goods within and across countries. Finally,
we show our results are robust to extensions that better capture the lifecycle of new producers and
importance of new exporters.

  27
   Cogley and Nason (1995) emphasize that standard real business cycle models lack a strong internal propogation
mechanism compared to the data.




                                                      25
International Trade
       To isolate the role of international trade on the dynamics of the stock of establishments,
we consider two ways international trade can matter. Speci...cally, we ...rst consider a world with
no international trade (closed economy) and then one with no international borrowing and lending
(...nancial autarky). The results are reported in columns Closed economy and Financial autarky of
Table 3.
       Without international trade, the stock of establishments is less volatile (0.55 vs. 0.77 ) and
acyclical (-0.01 vs. 0.25) compared to the benchmark model. This acyclical entry in the closed
economy occurs despite the shocks to entry cost. Without trade when the domestic economy has
a positive productivity innovation, it can not use foreign varieties to build up its capital stock and
thus must devote more resources itself to physical investment. This bids the wage rate up by more,
increasing the cost of creating establishments. Additionally, since domestic establishments only sell
at home, the expected value of entering rises by less.
       Figure 7 compares the dynamics of output in the closed economy against the open economy.
Here we see that the open economy generates a much larger hump in output than the closed economy.
The larger and more delayed expansion increases the expected value of entering. Taken together,
entry becomes both smoother and countercyclical.
       With ...nancial autarky, the current account always equals zero. Thus, when a country experi-
ences a positive productivity shocks and wants to accumulate capital, it can not do so by borrowing
from abroad. This dampens the output expansion as shown in Figure 7 and also pushes up the
interest rate. Both features reduce the bene...t of entering in a boom making the stock of establish-
ment acyclical. Additionally, international trade is less volatile compared to the benchmark model.
With this limitation, the number of exporters becomes about 35 percent as volatile as that under
benchmark case and the stock of establishment uctuates by 44 percent less. The stock of domestic
establishments is more stable because, with the limited intertemporal trade, the expected gains from
creating a new establishment becomes less variable as the expansion of sales through entering foreign
markets are more limited. Limiting asset trade makes exporters and importers overly procyclical
and too smooth.




                                                 26
Nature and Types of Fixed Costs
       We now consider some variations in the nature and types of ...xed costs. First we show that
having a sunk export cost, as is common in structural trade models, leads the model to more closely
match the data on export, import, and domestic activities over the cycle. Second, we show that
allowing the ...xed costs to vary over the cycle generates substantially more volatility in domestic
establishments. Third, we show that establishment volatility and cyclicality is more in line with
the data and smaller shocks to entry costs are necessary when we introduce a cost of serving the
domestic market.
       We ...rst consider an open economy with no ...xed export costs. In this case, all producers
also export making all varieties available in both countries. The decision to export is bundled
with the decision to create a product. The results are shown in the column No ...xed export costs.
The stock of establishment is slightly less volatile (0.61 vs. 0.77 in the benchmark) and strongly
procyclical (0.92 vs. 0.25 in the benchmark), whereas the importers are less volatile (0.61 vs. 1.46
in the benchmark) and acyclical (0.02 vs. 0.59 in the benchmark). The stock of establishments
and importers become negatively related (-0.08). With no separate export decision, a newly created
establishment automatically enters the foreign market without incurring any costs. Thus, there is a
strong incentive to create new establishments when there is a positive shock at home. On the other
hand, the foreign country reduces the stock of establishments as the demand for goods fall in the
foreign country following a positive home country shock. With this strong procyclicality, the stock
of establishments is negatively related to importers.
       In the column No sunk export cost we consider a variation in which exporting is a static
decision by making the entry export cost equal the continuation cost.28 This lowers the volatility
of domestic establishment about 5 percent below our benchmark. Moreover, counter to the data
exporters are strongly procyclical and positively correlated with domestic establishments while im-
porters are negatively correlated with domestic establishments. Moreover, the extensive margin of
trade responds too much. These features reect the ease in which exporters and importers can
quickly enter and exit the market unlike as in the sunk cost model.
       Next we consider the assumption that ...xed export costs vary with the entry costs and

  28
     The static exporting model has been studied by Ghironi and Melitz (2005) without capital and Fattal-Jaef and
Ignacio-Lopez (2014) with capital.



                                                       27
productivity. Speci...cally, we assume that a continuing exporter and new exporter have to hire f0
and f1 units of foreign workers, respectively, all the time. Thus, the productivity level does not
a¤ect the required labor for exporting. The simulation results are reported in the column No shocks
to export costs. Eliminating the shocks to export costs primarily a¤ects the volatility and cyclicality
of establishments actively trading and trade. The volatility of exporters relative to that of output
falls from 1.46 to 0.69 and trade becomes much smoother, falling from 2.00 to 1.08. The volatility of
the establishment stock falls to a level similar to our closed economy case (0.55) . Without shocks
to export costs, a rise in productivity raises the wage rate of the country, raising the cost of entry by
foreign exporters, making the mass of foreign exporters (home importers) countercyclical (-0.41 vs.
0.59 in the benchmark model) and less correlated with the stock of domestic establishment (-0.21
vs. 0.07 in the benchmark model)
       Now we assume that there are no shocks to neither the ...xed export or entry costs (No
shocks to all costs ). Without any shocks to ...xed costs, the volatility of exporters rises to 0.96,
and the stock of establishments becomes very stable (0.10). Without the shocks, it becomes more
costly to create establishments in good times as the wage rate rises but the establishment creation
technology remains the same with a positive shock at home. With less investment in the creation of
establishments in the foreign country, the foreign wage rate does not rise as much as the case with
shocks to sunk costs of entry. Thus, more establishments in the home country ...nd it pro...table to
enter the foreign market following a positive shock at home, making the mass of exporters procyclical
with the correlation between exporters and output of 0.25. At the same time, more foreign producers
enter the home country as the home wage rate does not rise by as much with less use of workers
in creating establishments. Thus, importers also becomes procyclical with the correlation of 0.32.
Due to these dynamics, the stock of establishments and exporters are negatively correlated (-0.16),
and the stock of establishments and importers are essentially uncorrelated (-0.02). If we eliminate
the shocks to just entry costs (No shocks to entry costs ) but keep the shocks to export costs we still
have procyclical entry but the stock does not change much. As shown in Figure 7, the immediate
response to the home productivity shock is smilar to the open economy real business cycle model
without entry, but it is less persistent due to the dynamcis of stock of establishments, exporters and
importers.
       We now alter the denomination of export costs so they now depend on e¢ ciency units in the


                                                   28
source market (Export costs in home labor ). These shocks lead the costs of exporting to fall with
the cost of producer entry following a good shock. This encourages more entry following a good
shock increasing the volatility and procyclicality of entry to 0.29. With the larger increase in entry,
exporting and importing become slightly less procyclical.
        Our ...nal variation of ...xed costs is to introduce a per-period cost of domestic production,
fC < fE . These types of overhead costs are common in heterogeneous producer models based on
Hopenhayn (1992). This overhead cost lowers the period net pro...t but does not generate any exit
owing to its small size and the iid nature of productivity shocks.29 By lowering the net pro...ts from
domestic sales this makes entry substantially more volatile. We set fC =fE to equal 10 percent and
scale down the e¤ect of the domestic productivity shock on entry costs by 1/3 so that entry is about
as volatile as in our benchmark model. The results are reported in the column Overhead Costs.
Overhead costs make entry more procyclical (0.41 vs. 0.25 in the benchmark) and exporting and
importing slightly less procyclical (0.10 vs. 0.13 and 0.53 vs. 0.59). The comovement of foreign
market participation with domestic participation is now closer to the data as exporting is now
negatively correlated with establishments and importing is positively correlated.

Cyclicality of International Trade
        The current model misses out on some aspects of trade ows in that they are neither volatile
nor procyclical enough. Thus, in good times home entrants face too little competition from foreign
...rms and existing home ...rms don'
                                   t expand strongly enough into foreign markets. We show that by
bringing these trade ows in line with the data we reduce the procyclicality and volatility of entry
but increase the procyclicality of importing and exporting.
        We now introduce a variable cost of importing that moves countercyclically as documented
by Levchenko, Lewis and Tesar (2010) and Alessandria, Kaboski and Midrigan (2011, 2013).30
Speci...cally, we allow the cost of importing to the home (foreign) country,                  t   ( t ), to depend on

    29
       With fC < fE and iid shocks no producer would exit since it is cheaper to remain active than create a new
producer who would start the next period with the same expected productivity. With persistent productivity shocks
a producer might exit if its expected productivity was su¢ ciently below that of an entrant.
    30
       These papers show that imports tend to fall too much in recessions given the movements in relative prices and
...nal spending on tradables or foreign goods. They denote this gap as being a trade wedge and attribute it to either a
rise in the costs of importing or a fall in the taste for foreign goods. As these are isomorphic in the models, we focus
on cyclical changes in trade costs.




                                                          29
foreign productivity and vice versa,


                      zt                   zt
           t   = e         and   t   = e



where          is the average trade cost.31
          The scale parameter, , is set to match the cyclicality of trade ows. Setting                to move 1/4
as much as foreign productivity boosts the volatility of trade ows to slightly above that observed
in the data and makes both imports and exports more procyclical with a gap close to that in the
data. Now more output growth comes through foreign expansion. Since new producers discount the
bene...t of foreign markets strongly owing to the sunk cost they mostly face more import competition,
which now is more persistent than in the benchmark model. These changes reduce the correlation
of producers with GDP from 0.25 to 0.22 but raises the procyclicality of importing and exporting.

Durability of entry
          We now consider how the properties of establishments inuence the properties of the model.
We start by examining the inuence of establishment durability for the model properties. To do
so, we allow the annual exit rate (probability of death) to vary from 1 percent to 10 percent. The
results are summarized in the panel of Figure 8. Panel A shows how the steady state labor allocated
to creation of establishments and exporters varies with the exit rate. The use of labor for exporting
is not sensitive to the exit rate. However, the use of labor in creating a new establishment is quite
sensitive to the exit rate. As we increase the exit rate from 1 percent to 10 percent, the labor used
by new exporters increases by 0.9 percentage points and the labor used by continuing exporters falls
by 0.6 percentage points. However, the labor used for creating new establishments rises by 10.8
percentage points. In the steady state, the ratio of new establishments relative to all establishments
is given as nd = (1         nd ) : Thus, as we increase the exit rate, more establishments should be created
in the steady state, and more of labor should be used for creating new establishments. However,
since we maintain the same exporter ratio and the fraction of exporters that stop exporting next
period, total labor used for exporting remains quite stable across a wide range of exit rates.
          Panel B shows that the volatility of exporters and establishments rises with the exit rate.

  31
       Given our the taste parameter from our Armington demand structure this is e¤ectively a normalization.



                                                          30
With a high exit rate, investments in establishments or exporters are less durable, so the ratio of
entrants to incumbents is quite high. Thus, when there are shocks to the economy, an increase in
new exporters or establishments will have a greater e¤ect on stock of exporters or establishments.
         The exit rate also inuences the correlation of the stock of domestic establishments with
importers, exporters, and output (Panel C). As we raise the exit rate, the stock of domestic es-
tablishments becomes strongly procyclical and importers become strongly correlated with domestic
entry. Thus, with high exit rates, the gain from the low costs of creating establishments or im-
porters spurs substantial entry in the same market. With a very low exit rate, importers become
negatively correlated with domestic establishments since there is very little incentive to increase
variety through a persistent investment in the stock of less productive establishment when the same
resources can be used to persistently raise the stock of relatively more productive establishments.
Similarly, with the low exit rate, the stock of domestic establishments is positively correlated with
exporters, since investments in exporting will be more durable.

Armington elasticity
         Here we examine the role of the substitutability of goods within and across countries. These
elasticities a¤ect our model in two ways. First, the elasticity of substitution between goods that
are produced in a same country, 1= (1            ), is directly linked to the markup of producers and hence
the incentive to export and create establishments. Second, the elasticity of substitution indirectly
a¤ects the economy through its e¤ect on the marginal value of an additional variety, since with the
same amount of resources you can produce more goods (see Benassy, 1996). The variety e¤ect is
determined by the elasticity of substitution in the CES ...nal good production function and decreases
with the elasticity of substitution.32
         Consider ...rst the e¤ect of the elasticity of substitution between goods within a country. Fig-
ure 9 summarizes the results for         2 [0:80; 0:96]. The volatility of stock of domestic establishments
is not sensitive to the elasticity of substitution while the stock of exporters becomes less volatile as
we raise the elasticity. When the elasticity is low, the variety e¤ect is large as an additional variety
is highly valued. Thus, when the mass of exporters rises, it increases the market share of their
composite products in the foreign country by more. This results in a large uctuation of mass of

 32
      Feenstra (1994) and Broda and Weinstein (2006) emphasize these gains to increased variety.



                                                         31
exporters. Moreover, since with low ; the gains to additional domestic and imported establishments
are relatively high, it is worthwhile to invest in creating more variety at home following a positive
productivity shock. Hence the correlations of output and importers with domestic establishments
are relatively high with low , and the correlation of exporters becomes quite negative (Panel B of
Figure 9).
       Figure 10 shows how the model'
                                    s properties vary with a wide range of the Armington elas-
ticity, the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign aggregates, 1= (1    ) 2 [1; 5]. The
volatility of the stock of establishments rises with the Armington elasticity but the increase is not
large. With a low elasticity, the expenditure shares on home and foreign aggregates do not vary
much over the business cycle. Thus, the value of new establishments are not sensitive to the aggre-
gate shocks. With a high elasticity, however, the expenditure shares on imports vary more over the
cycle resulting in greater uctuations in the stock of establishments. The comovement of exporters,
importers and entry with domestic establishments also varies with the elasticity of substitution
(Panel B). As we make foreign and domestic goods more substitutable, the stock of domestic estab-
lishments become more strongly procyclical. The correlation of importers and exporters with the
stock of domestic establishments are U-shaped and hump-shaped, respectively, in the Armington
elasticity. These non-monotonic responses are due to two o¤setting e¤ects. First, increasing the
Armington elasticity leads to greater reallocation from foreign to home goods following a positive
productive shock. Second, the elasticity also a¤ects the relative importance of the variety e¤ect. As
we have already seen, increasing the variety e¤ect raises the comovement of importers and domestic
establishments and lowers the comovement of exporters and domestic establishments. Thus, for
relatively low values of the Armington elasticity the cost e¤ect dominates while for relatively high
values, the variety e¤ect dominates.

Exporter and Producer Lifecycle
       The model captures the qualitative features of entrants and exporters in terms of their size
and persistence, but misses out quantitatively on some aspects of their size and growth. We now
discuss how modifying the model to capture these elements does not noticeably a¤ect the role of
trade in increasing the procyclicality of the stock of producers.
       On the export side, it is well known from Ruhl and Willis (2017), the sunk cost model of



                                                 32
exporting captures the high persistence of exporting and relatively low exporter sales premium, but
generates new exporters that are too large and survive too long in the export market. We explore
the impact of missing out on this aspect of trade in two variations.33 First, we consider a variation
with a higher sunk cost so that new exporters account for a smaller share of exports (denoted High
Sunk ). Second, we assume exporters in their ...rst period of exporting face a temporarily high cost
of shipping their goods,          1; which lowers their exports relative to domestic sales (denoted New
Exporter Intensity )
          With a higher sunk cost such that one-seventh as many exporters exit per period, we ...nd a
slightly lower procyclicality and volatility of establishments. With lower initial sales in the export
market, we ...nd slightly more procyclical and volatile establishments. We also ...nd slightly more
(less) procyclical exporters (importers) as trade ows become less procyclical.
          We next describe a modi...cation of the model that allows us to match the size discount of
new producers and growth34 and show that matching these producer lifecycle moments does not
substantially alter the cyclical behavior of entry. New producers now draw their productivity from
a distribution with lower mean productivity zE < 1 and face an annual transition probability of

 E     to draw from the higher mean productivity level which is then an absorbing state. This leaves
us with two types of ...rms, mature and immature producers. We choose (zE ;                 E)   so new producers
start out 50 percent smaller and take 5 years to get to a stable size. The bottom panel of Figure
4B plots establishment dynamics in this richer model.
          The results for the closed and open economy versions of the model are reported in the
columns Entrant's Disadvantage. Relative to the benchmark model with a simple life-cycle only
from exporting, this ...rm-level growth process makes producers slightly more countercyclical in the
closed economy (-0.16 vs. -0.01) and less procyclical in the open economy (0.14 vs. 0.25). The stock
of establishments becomes more volatile (0.90 vs. 0.77). Thus, trade has an even stronger e¤ect on
the dynamics of entry when we more closely model the lifecycle of producers. As new producers
are persistently small, a boom in economic activity encourages more entry by new producers and
foreign exporters. This e¤ect is larger in the open economy than the closed economy. The model

  33
     Alessandria, Choi and Ruhl (2014) build a rich heterogeneous producer model that matches the producer life-cycle
and new exporter dynamics along both margins. They show that the stock of producers in that model behaves quite
similarly following a trade liberalization to a sunk cost model with a much higher sunk cost.
  34
     The model is described in more detail in the appendix.



                                                         33
generates exporting that is too procyclical and importing that is not procyclical enough and thus
the moments related to the cyclicality of traders should be viewed as only suggestive.


7. Conclusion
       This paper studies the dynamics of entry, importing, and exporting over the business cycle.
These three margins provide some useful evidence on the determinants of entry over the cycle and
the propagation of shocks at home and abroad. Empirically, we document that the stock of domestic
establishments and importers tend to move together over the business cycle, with importers more
procyclical than producers. We ...nd the stock of establishments and exporters tend to not move
too closely together. We also ...nd that uctuations in the number of exporters and importers are
considerably larger than those of domestic establishments over the cycle.
       To study the source of these uctuations in entry, importing, and exporting, we develop a
two-country general equilibrium model with ...xed and sunk costs of exporting and establishment
creation that are subject to destination-speci...c aggregate productivity shocks. In this framework,
exporters and establishments are durable assets but with di¤erent attributes than physical capital.
Our model captures the salient features of establishment heterogeneity relating to the size of both
exporters and entrants. With sunk and ...xed costs of exporting and entry, the model generates
uctuations in entry, exporting, and importing similar to the data.
       We ...nd an important role of international trade for the dynamics in the stock of domestic
establishments. Without international borrowing and lending, international trade is too smooth and
entry by importers is much too procyclical. Without international trade, we ...nd that the stock of
establishments becomes acyclical and is much less volatile. Without ...xed export costs, we ...nd that
the stock of establishments is highly procyclical and entry by importers is countercyclical. These
results worsen if we ignore the dynamics of exporting from a sunk export cost. While these results
are somewhat sensitive to the Armington elasticity and durability of investment in establishment
creation, they do seem to hold for a range of parameters consistent with the data suggesting that
...ndings on the source of the dynamics of ...rm entry in closed economy models may not be robust
to the open economy.
       Finally, our paper is a ...rst attempt to study the interactions between producer entry along
three important margins of importing, exporting, and producer creation. As such, we have focused



                                                 34
on a fairly simple model of producer dynamics that captures the salient features of these key pro-
ducers and their cyclical behavior but abstracts from the cyclical uctuations in the characteristics
of marginal entrants and exiters emphasized elsewhere. For instance, Lee and Mukoyama (2015)
...nd marginal entrants are of better quality in recessions. It would be interesting to study how the
characteristics of marginal entrants along all six margins vary over the cycle, but this would require
more data and a richer model.


References
 Alessandria, G., and H. Choi. (2007). "Do Sunk Costs of Exporting Matter for Net Export Dy-
 namics?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 289-336.

                    . (2014a). "Establishment Heterogeneity, Exporter Dynamics, and the E¤ects
 of Trade Liberalization," Journal of International Economics, 94(2), 207-223.

                    . (2014b ). "Do Falling Iceberg Costs Explain Recent U.S. Export Growth?,"
 Journal of International Economics, 94(2), 311-325.

 Alessandria,G., H. Choi, and K. Ruhl. (2014). "Trade Adjustment Dynamics and the Welfare Gains
 from Trade," NBER Working Paper 20663, National Bureau of Economic Research.

 Alessandria, G., J. Kaboski, and V. Midrigan. (2011). "U.S. Trade and Inventory Dynamics,"
 American Economic Review, 101(3), 303-307.

                   . (2013). "Trade Wedges, Inventories, and International Business Cycles," Jour-
 nal of Monetary Economics, 60(1), 1-20.

 Alon, T., D. Berger, R. Dent, and B. Pugsley. (2017). "Older and Slower: The Startup De...cit's
 Lasting E¤ects on Aggregate Productivity Growth,"Journal of Monetary Economics, 93(C), 86-88.

 Aw, B., S. Chung, and M. Roberts. (1998). "Productivity and the Decision to Export: Micro Evi-
 dence from Taiwan and South Korea," NBER Working Paper 6558, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

 Backus, D., P. Kehoe, and F. Kydland. (1994). "Dynamics of the Trade Balance and the Terms of
 Trade: The J-Curve?" American Economic Review, 84(1), 84-103.

 Baldwin, R. (1988). "Hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead E¤ect," American Economic
 Review, 78(4), 773-785.

 Baldwin, R., and R. Forslid. (2010). "Trade Liberalization with Heterogeneous Firms," Review of
 Development Economics, 14(2), 161­   176.

 Baldwin, R., and P. Krugman. (1989). "Persistent Trade E¤ects of Large Exchange Rate Shocks,"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4), 635-654.

 Benassy, J. (1996). "Taste for Variety and Optimum Production Patterns in Monopolistic Compe-
 tition," Economics Letters, 52(1), 41-47.



                                                 35
Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen. (1999). "Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, E¤ect, or
Both?" Journal of International of Economics, 47(1), 1-25.

                   . (2004). "Why Some Firms Export,"Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(2),
561-569.

Bilbiie, F., F. Ghironi, and M. Melitz. (2012). "Endogenous Entry, Product Variety, and Business
Cycles." Journal of Political Economy, 120(2), 304­ 45.

Broda, C., and D. Weinstein. (2006). "Globalization and the Gains from Variety," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 121(2), 541-585.

Campbell, J. R. (1998). "Entry, Exit Embodied Technology, and Business Cycles," Review of
Economic Dynamics, 1(2), 371-408.

Chatterjee, S., and R. Cooper. (2014). "Entry and Exit, Product Variety and the Business Cycle."
Economic Inquiry, 52(4), 1466-1484.

Clementi, G., and D. Palazzo. (2016). "Entry, Exit, Firm Dynamics, and Aggregate Fluctuations,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(3), 1-41.

Clementi, G., A. Khan, B. Palazzo, and J. Thomas. (2015). "Entry, Exit and the Shape of Aggregate
Fluctuations in a General Equilibrium Model with Capital Heterogeneity," mimeo

Clerides, S. K., S. Lach, and J. Tybout. (1998). "Is Learning by Exporting Important? Micro-
dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(3),
903-947.

Cogley, T., and J. Nason. (1995). "Output Dynamics in Real Business Cycle Models," American
Economic Review, 85(3), 492­ 511.

Comin, D., and M. Gertler. (2006). "Medium-Term Business Cycles," American Economic Review,
96(3), 523-551.

Cook, D. (2001). "Time to Enter and Business Cycles," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Con-
trol, 25(8), 1241-1261.

Cook, D. (2002). "Market Entry and International Propagation of Business Cycles," Journal of
International Economics, 56(1), 155-175.

Das, S., M. Roberts, and J. Tybout. (2007). "Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity, and
Export Dynamics," Econometrica, 75(3), 837-873.

Davis, S. J., J. C. Haltiwanger, and S. Schuh. (1996). Job creation and destruction, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Devereux, M., A. Head, and B. Lapham. (1999). "Aggregate Fluctuations with Increasing Returns
to Specialization and Scale," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 20(4), 627-656.

Dixit, A. K. (1989). "Hysteresis, Import Penetration, and Exchange Rate Pass-Through,"Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 104(2), 205-228.

Fattal Jaef, R, and J. Ignacio Lopez. (2014). "Entry, trade costs, and international business cycles,"
Journal of International Economics, 94(2), 224-38.

                                                36
Feenstra, R. (1994). "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices", Amer-
ican Economic Review, 84(1), 157-75.

Ghironi, F. and M. Melitz. (2005). "International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Het-
erogenous Firms," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 865-915.

Ghironi, F. and M. Melitz. (2007). "Trade Flow Dynamics with Heterogenous Firms," American
Economic Review, 97(2), 356-361.

Gourio, F., T., Messer, and M. Siemer. (2016). "Firm Entry and Macroeconomic Dynamics: A
State-Level Analysis," American Economic Review, 106(5), 214-218.

Head, A. (2002). "Aggregate Fluctuations with National and International Returns to Scale,"
International Economic Review, 43(4), 1101-1125.

Hopenhayn, H. (1992). "Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,"Econometrica,
60(5), 1127­1150.

Kehoe, P., and F. Perri. (2002). "International Business Cycles with Endogenous Incomplete Mar-
kets," Econometrica, 70(3), 907-928.

Koellinger, P. and A. Thurik. (2012). "Entrepreneurship and the Business Cycle," The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 94(4), 1143­1156.

Levchenko, A., L. Lewis, and L. Tesar. (2010). "The Collapse of International Trade During the
2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun," IMF Economic Review, 58(2), 214-53.

Lee,Y., and T. Mukoyama. (2008). "Entry Exit and Plant-level Dynamics over the Business Cycle,"
mimeo, University of Virginia.

                . (2015). "Entry and Exit of Manufacturing Plants over the Business Cycle,"
European Economic Review, 77(C), 20-27,

Melitz, M. J. (2003). "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity," Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.

Pugsley, B., and A. Sahin. (2015). "Grown-Up Business Cycles," Working Paper 15-33, Center for
Economic Studies, Census Bureau.

Roberts, M., and J. Tybout. (1997). "The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical Model
of Entry with Sunk Costs," American Economic Review, 87(4), 545-564.

Ruhl, K. (2003). "Solving the Elasticity Puzzle," mimeo, University of Minnesota.

Ruhl, K., and J. Willis. (2017). "New Exporter Dynamics," International Economic Review, 58(3),
703-726.

Samaniego, R. M. (2008). "Entry, Exit and Business Cycles in a General Equilibrium Model,"
Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(3), 529-541.

Tian, C. (2018). "Firm-level Entry and Exit Dynamics over the Business Cycles," European Eco-
nomic Review, 102(C), 298-326.

Veracierto, M. (2008). "Firing Costs And Business Cycle Fluctuations," International Economic
Review, 49(1), 1-39.

                                              37
Woo, J. (2015). "The Cyclicality of Entry and Exit: A General Equilibrium Analysis with Imperfect
Information," mimeo, University of Rochester.




                                              38
                                                  Appendix

Data
        The extensive margin of trade is measured as the number of distinct varieties imported or
exported by the U.S. A variety is a country-good pair (example SITC code 99999 imported/exported
with Canada). For exports, variety is measured as an average of the number of 5-digit SITC code and
7 digit TSUSA except in 1978 where TSUSA code was used and in 1989 and 1990 the growth rate
based on SITC was used an averaged across the two years (these were years were the classi...cation
systems were substantially altered). For imports, goods were classi...ed at the 5-digit SITC code
level. A measure of export participation is also constructed from Bernard and Jensen (1999) using
the annual entry and exit rates of exporters from 1984 to 1992 and the Exporter Database from
1996 to 2015 (using ...rms with 1+ employees). The Exporter database is in NAICS from 97 to
2005 and in SIC from 96. The 97-98 report contains information by SIC and NAICS for 97 and 98.
The 1996 data was scaled based on the relative size of SIC to NAICS in 97. The stock of domestic
establishments is measured as a count of the number of private manufacturing establishments and
private establishments from the Census'  s Business Dynamics Statistics. GDP, exports, imports and
investment are from the BEA from 1975 to 2016 and are measured in real terms. Employment is
based on the BLS private employment series. Net exports are measured as the real trade balance
divided by real GDP. The real exchange rate is the trade-weighted real exchange rate broad index
from the BEA and the terms of trade is the ratio of export (BEA'   s nonagricultural export price) to
import prices (BEA'   s non-petroleum import price). All series are logged (except net exports) and
HP ...ltered using a smoothing parameter of 6.25.

Producer Lifecycle model
       Here we describe the producer lifecycle model. New producers draw their productivity from
a log normal distribution with a lower mean, ln a i; st iidN ln zE ; 2         a : These immature produces
cannot export. Each period, they face a transition probability of E to draw their productivity from
the higher mean productivity level, ln a i; st iidN 0; 2        a which is then an absorbing state. The
value of a producer with a drawn from the distribution with a lower mean zE is given by
                                                            Z
(A1) V L a; k; m; st = max          h ( a; k; m; st
                                                    ) + n d         Q st+1 jst k 0 dst+1
                                                               t +1
                                        Z                   Zs
                           + (1 nd )            (1      E)       Q st+1 jst      a0 jzE V L a0 ; k 0 ; 0; st+1 da0
                                          st+1               a0
                                 Z
                            + E      Q st+1 jst        a0 V a0 ; k 0 ; m0 ; st+1 da0 dst+1 ;
                                       a0

where (a0 jzE ) and (a0 ) are the probability of an idiosyncractic shock ln a0 with its mean ln zE
and 0; respectively. The entry condition is given as
                                                          Z
         E   t                    t        t       t
(A2) V     s     = max       fE s      P s kE s + nd            Q st+1 jst kE st dst+1
                      kE                                   st+1
                                Z   Z
                     + (1 nd )          Q st+1 jst   a0 jzE V L a0 ; kE ; 0; st+1 da0 dst+1 0;
                                     st+1   a0

where kE is the capital stock chosen by new establishments. As an entrant starts the next period
with a productivity drawn from the distribution with mean of zE it will choose a capital stock
di¤erent from that of incumbent which draws the productivity from the mean of zE :



                                                       39
             Table 1: Summary Statistics (HP deviations, 1977 to 2015)




                                           Volatility relative to GDP
                  Y    Exports   Imports    Mfr estabs Estabs Exporters       Importers
               1.23*      2.71      2.87           0.45       0.50    1.48         1.30
Correlation
    Y           1.00      0.58      0.88          0.41     0.47       -0.08        0.61
 Exports        0.58      1.00      0.43          0.43     0.31        0.37        0.14
 Imports        0.88      0.43      1.00          0.28     0.44       -0.17        0.70
Mfr estabs      0.41      0.43      0.28          1.00     0.81       -0.01        0.26
  Estabs        0.47      0.31      0.44          0.81     1.00       -0.28        0.31
Exporters      -0.08      0.37     -0.17         -0.01    -0.28        1.00       -0.25
Importers       0.61      0.14      0.70          0.26     0.31       -0.25        1.00

   GDP            Y    Exports   Imports    Mfr estabs   Estabs   Exporters   Importers
    t-1          0.3      0.44      0.08          0.79     0.57       -0.05        0.12
     t             1      0.58      0.88          0.41     0.47       -0.08        0.61
   t+1           0.3      -0.1      0.43         -0.09     0.23       -0.27        0.26

  Estabs          Y    Exports   Imports    Mfr estabs   Estabs   Exporters   Importers
    t-1         0.23      0.32     -0.04           0.4     0.39       -0.12       -0.05
     t          0.47      0.31      0.44          0.81        1       -0.28        0.31
   t+1          0.57      0.03      0.66          0.28     0.39       -0.09        0.57

Mfr estabs        Y    Exports   Imports    Mfr estabs   Estabs   Exporters   Importers
    t-1        -0.09      0.12     -0.32          0.38     0.28        0.05       -0.23
     t          0.41      0.43      0.28             1     0.81       -0.01        0.26
   t+1          0.79      0.43      0.76          0.38      0.4        0.14        0.54
*Absolute Volatility




                                           40
                                     Table 2: Parameter Values


Preferences                  = 0:960, = 2, = 0:383
Production                   = 0:566, = 0:750, = 5=6,
                             = 0:360, = 0:100, a = 0:450, nd = 0:054
                           M11 = M22 = 0:815, M12 = M21 = 0,
                           V ar( " ) = V ar( " ) = 0:0132 , Corr("; " ) = 0:250
Benchmark                  fE = 0:751, f0 = 0:116, f1 = 0:036

                                         Alternative Models

Closed                     fE = 0:876
No ...xed export costs     fE = 0:876; f0 = f1 = 0

No Sunk                    fE   = 0:751, f0 = 0:045, f1 = 0:045; a = 0:295
Overhead Costs             fE   = 0:36, fC =fE = 0:1; f0 = 0:110, f1 = 0:035
High Sunk Cost             fE   = 0:758, f0 = 0:242, f1 = 0:034; a = 0:68
Starter export intensity   fE   = 0:741, f0 = 0:075, f1 = 0:052; a = 0:412; = 1:224

Entrants'Disadvantage
   Sunk                    zE = 0:886;   E   = 0:200; a = 0:370; fE = 0:687, f0 = 0:103, f1 = 0:040
   Closed                  zE = 0:852;   E   = 0:200; fE = 0:798




                                                  41
                       Table 3: Key Moments on Entry and Exporting over the Cycle


                                                                       No ...xed   No sunk        No shocks to
                            Data      Benchmark   Closed   Financial    export      export   export    all   Entry
                                                           autarky       costs       costs    costs   costs costs
Volatility relative to output
  Imports, Exports           2.79       2.00         -       0.91        1.27       2.28      1.08    1.77    2.00
  All est.                   0.50       0.77       0.55      0.43        0.61       0.72      0.55    0.10    0.12
  Exporters, Importers      1.48        1.46         -       0.52        0.61       1.86      0.69    0.96    1.42
Correlation
  (Y, Exports)               0.58       0.32        -        0.82       0.35        0.35      0.13    0.25     0.33
  (Y, Imports)               0.88       0.66        -        0.76       0.61        0.66      0.47     0.62    0.72
  (Y, All est.)              0.47       0.25      -0.01      0.02       0.92        0.24      0.23     0.23   0.24
  (Y, Exporters)            -0.08       0.13        -        0.55        0.92       0.27     -0.37     0.25   0.32
  (Y, Importers)             0.61       0.59        -        0.92       0.02        0.65     -0.41     0.32    0.70
  (All est., Exporters)     -0.28       0.00        -        0.01       1.00        0.11     -0.02    -0.16   -0.25
  (All est., Importers)     0.31        0.07        -        0.16       -0.08       -0.31    -0.21    -0.02   -0.14
  (Exports, Exporters)       0.37       0.95        -        0.86       0.33        0.99      0.51     0.91    0.95
  (Imports, Importers)       0.70       0.95        -        0.86        0.33       0.99      0.51     0.91    0.95

                           Export                 Trade                                Entrants'
                           costs in   Overhead     cost      High        New         disadvantage
                         home labor    costs      shocks     sunk      exporter     open     closed
Volatility relative to output
  Imports, Exports           2.12       2.07       2.83      1.74        2.31       1.84        -
  All est.                   0.81       0.77       0.70      0.76        0.81       0.90      0.59
  Exporters, Importers       1.61       1.53       2.00      1.03        1.75       1.28        -
Correlation
  (Y, Exports)               0.29       0.23       0.55      0.31        0.27        0.31      -
  (Y, Imports)               0.62        0.60      0.83      0.67        0.57        0.70      -
  (Y, All est.)              0.29       0.41       0.22       0.23      0.28         0.14    -0.16
  (Y, Exporters)             0.11       0.10       0.36      0.18        0.23        0.25      -
  (Y, Importers)             0.52       0.53       0.81      0.37        0.51        0.64      -
  (All est., Exporters)      0.01       -0.11      0.02      0.18       -0.01        0.14      -
  (All est., Importers)      0.05       0.25       0.21      -0.13       0.00       -0.11      -
  (Exports, Exporters)       0.96       0.96       0.93      0.90       0.97         0.96      -
  (Imports, Importers)       0.96       0.96       0.93       0.90      0.97         0.96      -




                                                     42
                               Figure 1: Long-run Changes in Producers, Exporters, Importers
                                                     A. US Economy
                         100
                                       Employment
                                       Establishments
                         75            Importers
                                       Exporters


                         50
  Relative to 1977 (%)




                         25



                          0



                         -25



                         -50
                            1975     1980     1985      1990    1995       2000   2005   2010   2015
                                                                Year

                                                        B. Manufacturing
                         100
                                       Employment
                                       Establishments
                         75            Importers
                                       Exporters


                         50
Relative to 1977 (%)




                         25



                          0



                         -25



                         -50
                            1975     1980     1985      1990    1995       2000   2005   2010   2015
                                                                Year




                                                               43
                           Figure 2: Cyclical Fluctuations in Establishments, Exporters, and Importers
                                A. US Economy                                B. Exports and Exporters
                 4                                                                          10
                                                 GDP                                                                                 Exports
                                                 Establishments                              8                                       Exporters
                                                                                             6
                 2
Deviations (%)




                                                                                             4




                                                                         Deviations (%)
                                                                                             2
                 0                                                                           0
                                                                                            -2
                                                                                            -4
                 -2
                                                                                            -6
                                                                                            -8
                 -4                                                                       -10
                   1975      1985      1995      2005        2015                            1975       1985     1995         2005          2015
                                      Year                                                                       Year

                           C. Imports and Importers                                                 D. Net Trade and Exporters
                      9                                 Imports                             12
                                                                                                                         Exports/Imports
                      6                                 Importers                            9                           Exporters-Importers
                                                                                                                         Exporters-Domestic
                      3                                                                      6
                                                                           Deviations (%)




                      0                                                                      3
Deviations (%)




                  -3                                                                         0

                  -6                                                                        -3

                  -9                                                                        -6

                 -12                                                                        -9

                 -15                                                                      -12
                    1975      1985      1995     2005        2015                            1975      1985      1995         2005          2015
                                        Year                                                                      Year




                                                                    44
                                        Figure 3: Time Line
                                        Observes Receives              Makes     Hires labor   Invest
                    Incumbent
                                        aggregate    survival        exporting       and
                                      and individual shocks           decision    produces
                                       productivity           1-nd
                                         shocks

                                                                nd
                                                                     Exit
                                        Observes                       Makes   Hires labor     Invest
    Potential                           aggregate Receives           exporting     and
                 Makes
entrants observe entry                and individual survival         decision produces
   aggregate                           productivity shocks
                decision   Invest                             1-nd
  productivity                           shocks
     shocks
                                                                nd

                           Does not                                   Exit
                            enter




                                                  45
                                            Figure 4: Employment Dynamics of Establishments
                                                             A. Benchmark

                                 120


Relative to average employment   100              Initial exporters


                                  80
   of all establishments (%)




                                  60
                                                         Initial continuing exporters
                                  40


                                  20
                                            Initial entrants
                                   0


                                  -20                      Initial nonexporters

                                  -40
                                        0         1           2           3          4         5     6   7   8   9   10
                                                                                              Year


                                                                  B. Entrants'Disadvantage

                                 120


                                 100
                                                      Initial exporters

                                  80
Relative to average employment
    of all establishments (%)




                                                        Initial continuing exporters
                                  60


                                  40


                                  20
                                             Initial nonexporters
                                   0


                                 -20


                                 -40                                          Initial entrants


                                 -60
                                        0        1           2            3          4         5     6   7   8   9   10
                                                                                              Year




                                                                                         46
Figure 5: Participation Margins response to 1 sd Home Productivity Shock
                  16
                                                                                   Mass of entrants

                                                                                   Mass of exporters
                  12
                                                                                   Mass of importers
% deviations from steady state




                                                                                   Mass of all establishments

                                    8                                              Mass of all foreign establishments




                                    4




                                    0




                          -4
                                                0   2    4     6      8     10     12      14            16     18          20
                                                                            Year




                                           Figure 6: Home Aggregate response to 1 sd Home Productivity Shock
                                           6
                                                                                                Output
                                                                                                Consumption
                                           5                                                    Investment
                                                                                                Employment
          % deviations from steady state




                                                                                                Employments in production
                                           4


                                           3


                                           2


                                           1


                                           0


                                           -1
                                                0   2    4      6     8     10     12      14            16     18          20
                                                                            Year




                                                                          47
Figure 7: Home Output Response to 1 sd Home Productivity Shock in Model Variants
                         A. No Entrant' s Disadvantage
                                      2.5
                                                                           Benchmark

                                                                           Financial Autarty

                                      2.0                                  Closed RBC with Entry
     % deviations from steady state


                                                                           Benchmark No Shocks to Entry Cost

                                                                           Open RBC No Entry
                                      1.5




                                      1.0




                                      0.5




                                      0.0
                                            0   2   4    6     8     10         12       14        16      18      20
                                                                    Year

                                                        B. Entrant'
                                                                  s Disadvantage
                                      2.0
                                                                                               Benchmark

                                                                                               Financial Autarty

                                                                                               Closed
     % deviations from steady state




                                      1.5




                                      1.0




                                      0.5




                                      0.0
                                            0   2   4    6     8     10         12       14        16      18      20
                                                                    Year




                                                                   47
                                                                        Figure 8: Sensitivity Analysis: Exit Rate
                                                                       A. Labor Shares for Sunk and Fixed Costs
                                                18

                                                16

                                                14                                                                  Entrants

                                                12




   Share of Labor (%)
                                                10

                                                           8
                                                                                               Continuing exporters         Starters + Continuing exporters
                                                           6

                                                           4

                                                           2
                                                                                  Starters
                                                           0
                                                               1          2            3            4         5          6         7         8          9     10
                                                                                                              Exit rate (%)


B. Volatility of Masses of Exporters and All Establishments
                                                1.8


                                                1.6
                                                                                                Mass of exporters
                                                1.4
   Volatility relative to output




                                                1.2


                                                1.0
                                                                                               Mass of all establishments
                                                0.8


                                                0.6


                                                0.4


                                                0.2
                                                               1          2            3             4         5          6         7        8          9     10
                                                                                                               Exit rate (%)


                                                            C. Correlation with Mass of All Establishments
                                                           0.5

                                                           0.4                                                                          Output
             Correlation with mass of all establishments




                                                           0.3

                                                           0.2

                                                           0.1                                                                      Mass of importers

                                                               0

                                                      -0.1
                                                                                                                                Mass of exporters
                                                      -0.2

                                                      -0.3

                                                      -0.4
                                                                   1          2            3            4       5          6        7            8      9     10
                                                                                                                Exit rate (%)




                                                                                                               48
Figure 9: Sensitivity Analysis: Elasticity of Substitution Between Varieties within a Country
                 A. Volatility of Masses of Exporters and All Establishments
                                                   2.2


                                                   2.0


                                                   1.8
     Volatility relative to output




                                                   1.6
                                                                              Mass of exporters
                                                   1.4


                                                   1.2


                                                   1.0
                                                                  Mass of all establishments
                                                   0.8


                                                   0.6
                                                         0.8   0.82        0.84      0.86         0.88    0.9        0.92      0.94   0.96
                                                                                                  theta

                                                                      B. Correlation with Mass of All Establishments
                                                   0.4


                                                   0.3
     Correlation with mass of all establishments




                                                                            Output

                                                   0.2


                                                   0.1


                                                     0

                                                                                                                Mass of importers
                                            -0.1                 Mass of exporters


                                            -0.2


                                            -0.3
                                                0.80           0.82        0.84      0.86         0.88    0.90        0.92     0.94   0.96
                                                                                                  theta




                                                                                               49
Figure 10: Sensitivity Analysis: Elasticity of Substitution Between Home and Foreign Composites
                   A. Volatility of Masses of Exporters and All Establishments
                                                      2.5




                                                      2.0
        Volatility relative to output




                                                                                                                    Mass of exporters

                                                      1.5




                                                      1.0




                                                      0.5
                                                                                                             Mass of all establishments



                                                      0.0
                                                             1       1.5          2       2.5        3       3.5         4        4.5     5
                                                                                                 1/(1-rho)

                                                                           B. Correlation with Mass of All Establishments
                                                      0.5


                                                      0.4
        Correlation with mass of all establishments




                                                                   Mass of importers
                                                      0.3                                                              Output


                                                      0.2


                                                      0.1


                                                        0


                                                      -0.1
                                                                                                                   Mass of exporters

                                                      -0.2


                                                      -0.3
                                                             1.0      1.5        2.0      2.5      3.0       3.5        4.0       4.5     5.0
                                                                                                 1/(1-rho)




                                                                                                50
