                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CRYPTOCURRENCIES, CURRENCY COMPETITION, AND THE IMPOSSIBLE
                              TRINITY

                                       Pierpaolo Benigno
                                       Linda M. Schilling
                                          Harald Uhlig

                                      Working Paper 26214
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26214


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




Linda Schilling's work was conducted in the framework of the Chair 'Blockchain and B2B
Platforms' at Ecole Polytechnique. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Pierpaolo Benigno, Linda M. Schilling, and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cryptocurrencies, Currency Competition, and the Impossible Trinity
Pierpaolo Benigno, Linda M. Schilling, and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 26214
August 2019
JEL No. D53,E4,F31,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze a two-country economy with complete markets, featuring two national currencies as
well as a global (crypto)currency. If the global currency is used in both countries, the national
nominal interest rates must be equal and the exchange rate between the national currencies is a
risk- adjusted martingale. We call this result Crypto-Enforced Monetary Policy Synchronization
(CEMPS). Deviating from interest equality risks approaching the zero lower bound or the
abandonment of the national currency. If the global currency is backed by interest-bearing assets,
additional and tight restrictions on monetary policy arise. Thus, the classic Impossible Trinity
becomes even less reconcilable.

Pierpaolo Benigno                               Harald Uhlig
Dipartimento di Economia e Finanza              Department of Economics
Luiss Guido Carli                               University of Chicago
Viale Romania 32                                1126 E 59th Street
00197 Rome                                      Chicago, IL 60637 and
ITALY                                           NBER
pbenigno@luiss.it                               huhlig@uchicago.edu

Linda M. Schilling
Ecole Polytechnique CREST
5 Avenue le Chatelier
Palaiseau, Fran 91120
France
lin.schilling@gmail.com
1    Motivation

Globally usable cryptocurrencies are on the rise. 10 years after the introduc-

tion of Bitcoin, Facebook is seeking to launch Libra designed to appeal to its

more than 2 billion world-wide members. Other companies are not far behind.

While other means of payments have been in worldwide use before, the ease

of use and the scope of these new cryptocurrencies are about to create global

currencies of an altogether dierent quality.    How will they alter the nan-

cial landscape? How will this aect exchange rates and monetary policies of

traditional currencies? We shall argue: considerably so.

    Global currencies are not a new phenomenon. The Spanish Dollar in the

17th and 18th century, gold during the gold standard period, the Pound Ster-

ling prior to 1944 and the U.S. Dollar since then may provide prior examples,

and often served as an internationally accepted unit of account.       The new

cryptocurrencies, however, seek to become a means of payment, thus directly

competing with national currencies for transaction purposes. We argue that

this feature together with the consequences for national monetary policies is an

entirely new phenomenon: in any case, this phenomenon and its consequences

certainly deserves proper analysis. This is our aim.

    We analyze a two-country economy featuring a home, a foreign and a global

(crypto)currency. We adopt a general framework and assume that these cur-

rencies provide liquidity services. We show in section 7 that this framework

encompasses a number of standard approaches in the monetary economics lit-

erature.   For the benchmark case that markets are complete, that liquidity

services are rendered immediately and that the global currency is used in both

countries, we show that nominal interest rates must be equal and that the

exchange rate between the home and the foreign currency is a risk-adjusted

martingale, see proposition 4.1.   We call this phenomenon a     crypto-enforced
monetary policy synchronization (CEMPS). The home central bank, say, may
seek to regain independence from this forced synchronization by moving inter-

est rates down or up relative to the foreign interest rate. In the rst case, it

risks being trapped in too low-interest-rate policies, approaching the zero lower




                                       2
bound. In the second case, it risks that its own national currency is abandoned

as a medium of exchange. If the global currency is backed by interest-bearing

assets, additional and tight restrictions on monetary policy arise, see section 6.

In particular, the central bank may be forced to the zero lower bound, when

the global currency consortium seeks to keep its currency in use per selecting

appropriately low and competitive fees.

   Our results can be understood as a strengthened version of the Mundell-

Fleming Trilemma (Fleming, 1962; Mundell, 1963) or       Impossible Trinity.   Ac-

cording to this cornerstone result in international economics, it is impossible

to ensure a xed exchange rate, free capital ows and an independent mon-

etary policy, all at the same time. In our framework, we allow the exchange

rate to be exible and assume free capital ows: nevertheless, monetary pol-

icy becomes perfectly synchronized. More broadly, our results reach the same

conclusions as Rey (2015) that the trilemma is transformed into a 'dilemma'

or an 'irreconcilable` duo. While the global nancial cycle is the culprit in her

analysis, it is the worldwide diusion of a global currency in ours.



1.1    Literature

Our analysis adds to the literature on the implications of currency competition

for exchange rates and monetary policy. We provide a general framework based

on asset-pricing considerations, which can nest classical monetary models used

in the open-economy literature, like those presented in Obstfeld and Rogo

(1996), adding a global currency and assuming complete markets.

   Our paper is related but complementary to the literature on the interna-

tionalization of currency and vehicle currencies from the perspective of cur-

rency substitution.   Our result can be read as a sharp contrast to Obstfeld

and Rogo (2002), who argue that international monetary policy coordination

is of minor importance compared to national considerations:        in our frame-

work, the introduction of a global currency leaves the central bank with little

or only unattractive choices.    Krugman (1979), Goldberg and Tille (2008)

and Rey (2001) study a three country, three currency foreign exchange model




                                        3
where transaction costs may give rise to a 'vehicle currency', i.e.   the usage

of the third country's currency to avoid direct foreign exchange between two

countries. Here, instead, a third, global currency acts as substitute for either

country's currency, thus allowing for currency competition on the local level.

Therefore, currencies can be abandoned here despite symmetry in liquidity

services.   Further, the main focus of our analysis is on the implications for

monetary policy of competing currencies. Like us, Casas et al. (2016) examine

the impact of a global or dominant currency.     In contrast to us, they focus

on exchange rate pass-through under stickiness of prices, while we focus on

the usage of a currency as a means of payment. We thus view our research

as complementary to theirs. Benigno (2019) focuses on a one-country model

and shows that under competition to cryptocurrencies, the central bank can

face some bounds on interest rate and ination if government currency has

to retain some role as medium of exchange.      We dier from his analysis by

analyzing the consequence of cryptocurrency competition for the international

monetary system by building on a general stochastic framework.

   There is a large body of the literature which focuses on monetary pol-

icy under currency competition while abstracting from competition between

interest-bearing assets (bonds) and currency. A classic contribution is Kareken

and Wallace (1981) and its stochastic version Manuelli and Peck (1990). Gar-

ratt and Wallace (2018) provide an extension to cryptocurrencies.      Schilling

and Uhlig (2018) focus on implications of competition between a cryptocur-

rency and traditional at money for the price evolution of the cryptocurrency

and for monetary policy. Schilling and Uhlig (2019) analyze implications of

goods-specic transaction costs for currency substitution. Here, instead, the

nominal interest rates are decisive for currency substitution due to competi-

tion between bonds and currencies. Fernández-Villaverde and Sanches (2016)

analyze currency competition and monetary policy in a Lagos-Wright model.

Our framework is considerably more general than all these contributions, al-

lowing interest-bearing bonds and encompassing a number of monetary mod-

els. Like us, Brunnermeier and Niepelt (2019) pursues the implications of the

equivalence between private and public money, though our emphasis is on the



                                       4
international context and has a dierent focus. Our analysis in section 6 shares

common themes and conclusions with Marimon et al. (2003), who likewise em-

phasize that cheap inside monies place tight upper bounds on ination rates

there or nominal interest rates here.




2      A simple framework

This section uses a simple framework with a minimalist and non-stochastic

structure to provide intuition and to preview the main results.

     There are two countries, home and foreign, and three currencies: currency

h   and   f   of their respective countries and a global (crypto) currency             g.   While

currency      h   can be used for transactions only in country         h   and the currency    f
only in country       f,   the global currency can be used in both countries. Money,

either in a physical or digital form, provides non-pecuniary benets, which we

call liquidity services and yield liquidity premia. Let us assume that the two

currencies are perfect substitutes in providing liquidity services and that these
                                                                                1
services are delivered at the same time in which money is held.

     Let   St   be the exchange rate between currency           h
                                                         f in date t, i.e. the
                                                                    and

amount of currency h needed to buy one unit of currency f . Let Qt denote the

amount of currency h needed to buy one unit of the global (crypto) currency.
               
Likewise, let Qt the amount of currency f needed to buy one unit of the global

(crypto) currency. Therefore,



                                          Qt = St Qt                                          (1)



At a generic time       t,   a resident in country   h   can acquire   Mh,t   units in currency

h   and   Mg,t    units in the global currency at the exchange rate            Qt   implying an

    1 In a non-stochastic economy,it does not matter whether the liquidity services for holding
money in t are provided at time t or at time t +1. As it will be shown in the next sections and
in Appendix B.1, results in the stochastic economy are dierent and specic to the timing of
liquidity services. The assumption of perfect substitutability between the currencies is stark
and chosen to provide clear-cut results. The generalization to imperfect substitutability is
discussed in Appendix C.



                                               5
overall expenditure or total money holding


                                     tot
                                    Mh,t = Mh,t + Qt Mg,t ,                            (2)



expressed in units of the domestic currency. Note that we are assuming per-

fect substitutability here and in the main text:              the extension to imperfect

substitutability is taken up in Appendix C. Since liquidity services are de-

livered immediately in         t,   the investor in country    h   receives non-pecuniary
                                                           tot
benets from the overall money expenditure                 Mh,t   deated by the price of

some generic consumption good (either tradeable or non-tradeable) for which

money is exchanged for. At time           t + 1,   the two monies deliver an overall pay-

o   Mh,t + Qt+1 Mg,t ,   in units of the domestic currency. Since liquidity services

provided by each currency are substitutes, the amount of services received is in-

dependent of the portfolio choice. Only if the returns on money are equal, then

agents are willing to hold both currencies in their portfolio. This is equivalent

to saying that the exchange rate         Q should be constant, Qt+1 = Qt .    Otherwise,

one currency would dominate the other as a means of payment. This result is

nothing more than a restatement of Kareken and Wallace (1981), additionally

allowing the monies to provide liquidity services. The analysis can equivalently

be applied to country      f    to obtain that the exchange rate       Q   should also be

constant.

    Our rst result in the paper follows directly from the above analysis: when

a global currency is used in both local markets, the exchange rate,           S,   between

currency  h and f has to be constant too although h and f do not compete di-
rectly since h and f are not simultaneously accepted in the same local market.

The monies h and f , however, compete indirectly through the global currency

g which has worldwide acceptance, by this creating a link between the two
local currencies. This indirect competition then enforces equal returns on h
                                                         
and f . To see this result, use the constancy of Q and Q into (1).

    Our second result states that simultaneous trade in a global and local cur-

rencies requires synchronization of monetary policies across countries, i.e the

nominal interest rates are equalized across countries. To see this result, allow




                                               6
                                                 GLOBAL


               Q*t        Qt            1+i*t

    Country f                         L*t

                         St
                                                 Lt
                                                                                               t+2
                                                                      t+1
                                            t
                Country h
                                                      1+it
                                                      BOND

               Figure 1: International trade and money ow in time



investors in each country to trade also in two nominal bonds denominated in

currency   h   and       f,   respectively. In a non-stochastic economy, with frictionless

capital markets, uncovered interest rate parity holds


                                                1 + it   St+1
                                                     
                                                       =                                          (3)
                                                1 + it    St
                 
in which it and it denote respectively the nominal interest rate in country                     h and
f   from period      t   to   t+1   on one-period bonds denominated in the respective

currencies.     Since the exchange rate                S     is constant, interest rates should be

equal.   Figure 1 summarizes the key relationship between interest rates and

exchange rates.

     As the next section will show, the result of equal nominal interest rates

extends unchanged to a stochastic economy in the case liquidity services of

money are delivered at the same time money is held in the portfolio.                             The

result of constant exchange rates generalizes to a stochastic economy with

the qualication that the exchange rate between currency                          h   and   f   follows

instead a martingale in the risk-neutral measure.                       In the stochastic setting,

we will further show the equalization of the liquidity premia of money across




                                                        7
           2
countries.




3      A general framework

We present our main results through a general framework relying only on asset-

pricing considerations, in a stochastic multi-period economy. Our structure is
                                                                 3
broad enough to encompass a large variety of models.                 Both agents can trade

either bond and can hold the global currency. The agent in country                 h   can in

addition hold currency       h but not currency f .    Vice versa, the agent in country

f   can hold currency    f   but cannot trade currency      h.
     A key assumption for obtaining our result is that markets are complete,

arbitrage-free and frictionless. As a consequence, a stochastic discount factor

exists and is unique. Let      Mt+1   denote the nominal stochastic discount factor

in units of currency  h for the agent in country h, and let likewise M t+1 denote
the nominal    stochastic discount factor in units of currency f for the agent in

country   f.   An implication of complete markets is that the nominal discount

factors in units of the two local currencies are connected through their exchange
                                                                                        4
rate since they are equalized once expressed in the same unit of account.


Assumption 3.1 (Complete Markets:).


                                                        St
                                   Mt+1 = Mt+1               .                            (4)
                                                       St+1
    2 Liquidity premia are in general monotone in the opportunity cost of holding money,
i.e. the interest rate. Equal interest rates directly imply equal liquidity premia.
    3 The framework applies to one or multi-good exchange or production economies. Thus,
we do not pin down these features specically. Agents may live for two periods in an
OLG model or be innitively lived. In Section 7 we map our general framework into specic
examples drawn from classical monetary models in which we specify preferences, constraints
and maximization problem. These classical monetary models have been examined in a large
body of literature, including existence of equilibria and their properties: for these reasons,
we can sidestep these issues here.
   Time is discrete and there is uncertainty. The economy does feature the same two coun-
tries as introduced in previous section, and at least the same three currencies and two
nominal bonds.
    4 For the generality of this result see Obstfeld (2007).




                                              8
    Consider a (non-monetary) asset oering a (possibly random) nominal re-

turn   Rt+1   in currency     h.   Since returns have a price of one (Cochrane, 2009),

standard asset pricing considerations imply, that the stochastic discount fac-

tor,   Mt+1 ,   and return,    Rt+1 ,   are such that



                                        1 = Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ].                                         (5)



Thus, since a nominal one-period bond in country                     h    pays the return   Rt+1 =
1 + it ,
                                          1
                                               = Et [Mt+1 ]                                          (6)
                                        1 + it
and likewise for the bond in country            f

                                          1
                                               = Et [Mt+1 ].                                         (7)
                                        1 + it


    While nonmonetary assets are used for the intertemporal transfer of re-

sources, money oers some liquidity services above and beyond the intertem-

poral transfer. We shall therefore assume that currency                     h as well as the global
currency pays a non-monetary liquidity service                  Lt   to   agents in country h per

unit of currency, in addition to the intertemporal payo. Likewise, we assume

that currency        f   pays a liquidity premium         Lt   to agents in country     f   per unit

of currency. For clarity and simplicity, we here assume that currency                       h   and   g
in country      h   as well as currency    f   and   g   in country   g   are perfect substitutes,

postponing the generalization and discussion of imperfect substitutability to

Appendix C.

    In a full model specication such as given in Section 7, these liquidity

services are endogenously determined by the optimal consumption choices of

households.         In all of these models, money is held across periods from                    t   to

t + 1,     and the particular model structure determines, whether the services

are rendered in period         t   (immediately) or in          t+1       (with delay).     For the

benchmark case here, we assume the former, but return to the later in the

Appendix B.1.


Assumption 3.2 (Liquidity immediacy).                     The purchase of currency h and g

                                                 9
in country h at t yields an immediate liquidity premium Lt receivable in t.
Analogously, the time t purchase of currency f and g in country f at t yields
an immediate liquidity premium L  t receivable in t.


      The date-t (post-liquidity) price of a unit of currency        h,   expressed in units

of the same currency equals unity, by denition. Standard asset pricing con-

siderations then deliver

                                  1  Lt + Et [Mt+1 ].                                    (8)


Whenever (8) holds with equality, agents in country              h   are willing to accept

currency      h   at its unitary price, since they are exactly compensated by the

liquidity premium plus the discounted future value of the payo, which are

both terms on the right hand side of equation (8). In case of a strict inequality,

the current price of currency     h is too high compared to expectations on future
price development such that agents are not willing to hold the currency. Note

that we do not allow short sale.

      Likewise, for a unit of the global (or crypto) currency, trading at a price of

Qt    in terms of units of currency   h,   we obtain



                              Qt  Lt Qt + Et [Mt+1 Qt+1 ],                               (9)



where this equation holds with equality, if the global currency is used in coun-

try   h,   i.e.   if agents are compensated for the price       Qt   of a global currency

exactly by the liquidity premium plus the discounted future value of the pay-

o, on the right hand side of equation (9). The price cannot be lower than the

right hand side, since otherwise agents in country         h   would seek to acquire the

currency and bid up its value. The price can be higher, however, if the global

currency is not used in country       h.   We implicitly rule out short sales or, more

precisely, rule out that short-sold currencies render negative liquidity premia.

Combining (6) and (8), we obtain


                                         it
                                               Lt ,                                    (10)
                                       1 + it

which holds with equality when currency            h   is used and therefore describes


                                             10
a monotone relationship between the nominal interest rate and the liquidity

services. For the foreign country, we likewise obtain




                                 1  L         
                                     t + Et [Mt+1 ]                               (11)

                             Q                     
                              t  Lt Qt + Et [Mt+1 Qt+1 ],                         (12)

                            it
                                      Lt.                                         (13)
                          1 + it


     In the analysis that follows we stick to the following assumptions.


Assumption 3.3 (Nonnegative liquidity premia).               The liquidity premia are
non-negative, i.e. Lt  0 and         Lt    0.

     This assumption together with equations (10) and (13) implies that it        0
     
and it    0, i.e.   imply a zero lower bound for nominal interest rates. Moreover,

we assume that at least one currency is used in each country while bonds

cannot serve as medium of exchange.


Assumption 3.4 (Currency usage).     In country h, at least one of (8) and (9)
holds with equality. In country f , at least one of (11) and (12) holds with
equality.
     Additionally, it is reasonable to impose that at least one of (9) or (12)

holds with equality, but we are not making use of that restriction. We make

the assumption that the global currency has a positive value in the time period

t   under consideration.


Assumption 3.5 (Global currency is valued).



                                   Qt > 0 and Qt > 0                              (14)



     Given the triangular relationship among exchange rates,         Q = SQ ,   it fol-

lows that   Q > 0 if   and only if   Q > 0.     Thus, the currency being valued in one

country necessarily spills over to the other country.




                                                11
4        Main Results

Some additional terminology shall prove useful. For a generic random variable

Xt+1 ,   dene risk adjusted expectation   ~t [Xt+1 ]
                                          E            in country   h   as



                           ~t [Xt+1 ]  Et [Mt+1 Xt+1 ] ,
                           E                                                           (15)
                                          Et [Mt+1 ]

    and the risk adjusted expectation   ~t [Xt+1 ]
                                        E              in country   f   as


                                              
                           ~t [Xt+1 ]  Et [Mt+1 Xt+1 ] .
                           E                                                           (16)
                                          Et [Mt+1 ]


    We now obtain our main result.


Proposition 4.1 (Stochastic Economy under Liquidity Immediacy)

In a stochastic economy, under the assumption of liquidity immediacy, com-
plete markets, and the global currency being valued. If all currencies are used
in both countries, i.e. if equations (9), (12) and (8), (11) hold with equality,
then
 i) the nominal interest rates are equalized it = it;

 ii) the liquidity premia are equal Lt = Lt;

iii) the nominal exchange rate St between currency h and f follows a martin-
     gale, using risk adjusted expectations of country h;
iv) the nominal exchange rate St = 1/St between currency f and h follows a
    martingale, using risk adjusted expectations of country f ;
Proof.   [Proposition 4.1] The competition between currency             h    and the global

currency, i.e. (8) and (9) with equality, the complete-market assumption (4)

and nally the competition between currency         f    and global currency, i.e. (11)

and (12) with equality, deliver


                                  Qt+1           Qt+1
           Et [Mt+1 ] = Et Mt+1        = Et Mt+1      = Et [Mt+1 ]
                                   Qt             Qt



                                        12
Equations (8) and (11) now imply   Lt = Lt   and thus it   = it , per equations (10)
and (13). Exploit the equality (17) and use the complete market assumption

(4) to obtain
                                                   St+1
                         Et [Mt+1 ] = Et Mt+1                                  (17)
                                                    St
implying the country-h risk adjusted martingale property for the exchange

rate,
                                      ~ [St+1 ].
                                 St = E

Proceeding instead per replacing    Mt+1    on the left hand side of (17) with

M                                                                           
  t+1 St /St+1 implies the country-f risk adjusted martingale property for St =
1/St ,
                                 St = E ~  [S  ].
                                             t+1


   Proposition 4.1 says that, with complete markets, global usage of the global

currency, and simultaneous usage of local currency, monetary policies must be

perfectly synchronized: their nominal interest rates must be equal. This result,

which we call   Crypto-Enforced Monetary Policy Synchronization (CEMPS),
constitutes a constraint on the impossible trinity. Under free capital ows and

without a global currency, uncovered interest parity and the classic Impossible

Trinity result provides the home central bank with a choice: it can either give

up on a pegged exchange rate or the independence of monetary policy. Our

result shows that adding a global currency implies a further restriction, when

it becomes a perfect substitute of the local currencies.      Now, the monetary

policy of the central banks can no longer be independent. Additionally, the

exchange rate is now a risk-adjusted martingale and not necessarily a peg. The

classical Impossible Trinity thus becomes even less reconcilable.

   It is instructive to examine the special case of a non-stochastic economy as a

benchmark. The following corollary immediately follows from Proposition 4.1.

It is a version of the celebrated result in Kareken and Wallace (1981).


Corollary 4.1 (Deterministic Economy under Liquidity Immediacy)

In a deterministic economy, under the assumption of liquidity immediacy, com-
plete markets, the global currency being valued and global currency usage, the

                                       13
nominal exchange rate St between currency h and f is constant, St  S
                                                                   ¯.

Proof.   Immediate.


   With currency substitution, the countries' nominal interest rates are equal-

ized independently of whether the economy is stochastic or deterministic. How-

ever, the result of constant exchange rate in the deterministic case is replaced

by the martingale behavior of the stochastic economy. Still in this case it is

possible to say something on the probability of deviations from a constant

exchange rate by exploiting the Markov inequality, i.e. that any nonnegative

random variable     X   satises


                                                   E [X ]
                                   P ( X  a) 
                                                     a

for any   a > 0.   As is well known, this bound is sharp only, if         X   has point

masses at either zero or at       a.   The argument is applied to the change of the

exchange rate    X = St+1 /St      and the result may be useful for bounding the

probabilities of extreme events in a distribution-free manner.


Proposition 4.2 (Deviations)

For any K > -1, the percentage deviation from constancy of the nominal
exchange rate satises
                         St-1                   1 + (1 + it ) t|M t|S/S
                   Pt         -1>K                                                 (18)
                          St                            K +1

Proof.   [Proposition 4.2] Proof in Appendix A.

                                                                  St-1
   Since   K   is allowed to be negative, the likelihood that
                                                                   St
                                                                       drops below one

can be estimated as well.



4.1      Regaining monetary policy independence

Revisiting the result from Proposition 4.1, does this mean that the central

banks in the two countries have no choice but to accept this fate of coordinated

monetary policy?        Or can, country     h   deviate from the monetary policy in



                                             14
country   f,   and if so, in which direction? Proposition 4.1 can also be read the

other way around. If     it = it,   then either the global currency is not used in at

least one country or one of the national currencies is not in use or both. The

central bank in country    h may then contemplate pursuing a policy that makes
sure that the global    currency is not used in country h, i.e. that (9) remains

an inequality.


Proposition 4.3 (Escaping global currency adoption)

In a stochastic economy, under the assumption of liquidity immediacy, com-
plete markets, and the global currency being valued. Assume that both local
currencies are used in their corresponding countries, i.e. equations (8) and
(11) hold with equality. Independently of whether the global currency is used
or not in country f , if it < it , then


 i) the global currency is not adopted in country h;
 ii) the liquidity premia satisfy Lt < Lt;

iii) the nominal exchange rate St between currency h and f follows a super-
     martingale, using risk adjusted expectations in country h;
iv) the nominal exchange rate St = 1/St between currency f and h follows a
    submartingale, using risk adjusted expectations in country f ;
Proof.   [Proposition 4.3] Proof in Appendix A.


   To understand the economics behind this result, it is important to acknowl-

edge not only the competition between the currency            h   respectively   f   and the

global currency but also the countrywise competition between the bond and

currency and the role of the free foreign exchange market. The proof has 3

parts. First, since the nominal interest rate in country           f   is higher than the

nominal interest rate in country         h,   currency liquidity services in country      f
are higher than in country      h.    Second, the competition between the national

currencies and the global currency yields upper bounds on the risk-adjusted

return of the global currency. The bound is sharper, if the nominal interest

rate is higher, i.e. in country     f , and it binds, if the global currency is adopted.


                                              15
Third, by free foreign exchange markets and the no arbitrage condition, the

risk-adjusted return on the global currency has to be equal in countries             h   and

f.    As a consequence, the country with the weaker constraint on that return

does not adopt the global currency.

      The proposition shows, that there is an escape hatch indeed, but only

to one side.     Starting from an equilibrium in which the global currency is

used in both countries, by lowering the risk-free interest rate in currency               h
below that in currency     f , the central bank in country h lowers the opportunity
costs of holding the domestic currency and thus makes it more attractive than

the global currency as a means of payment, crowding out global currency in

country     h.
      This escape hatch is not particularly attractive, however. Nominal interest

rates can only be lowered to zero. Furthermore, a rat race between the two

central banks may then eventually force both to stick at the zero lower bound
                                           5
forever or at quite low interest rates.        Some may applaud this as the ultimate

and global implementation of the Friedman rule, while others may fear dea-

tionary spirals and macroeconomic damages. Either way, these surely would

also count as dramatic consequences of the presence of a global currency.

What can force central banks to lower interest rates rather than raise them

is the risk of entering in unknown territories in which their currency is aban-

doned as mean of exchange in favor of the global currency. These worries can

limit in a signicant way the room of manoeuvering of the central bank in

stabilizing economy. The next Proposition depicts a case in which the global

currency is used in country      f   and spreads to country    h   when its central bank

raises rates above the foreign ones.


Proposition 4.4 (Losing medium-of-exchange property)

In a stochastic economy, assume liquidity immediacy, complete markets, and
the global currency being used in country f , i.e. equation (12) holding with
     5 In
        a one-country model Benigno (2019) has shown that if the central bank keeps the
ination target below the growth rate of private currency, then it can maintain the monopoly
power as medium of exchange. However, cryptocurrencies' issuance is in general engineered
with quite low, or zero, growth rates so that ination targets set by central banks should be
close to zero or below.

                                               16
equality. If the central bank in country h sets it > it , then currency h is aban-
doned in country h and the global currency takes over (currency substitution).
   Currency    h   would also be abandoned in country       h   if the central bank sets

it =   it and only currency   g   is used in country   f.

Proof.   [Proposition 4.4] Proof in Appendix A.



4.2      Global currency pricing

We now collect results on the stochastic process driving the global currency.

Conclusions depend on which currency is adopted for liquidity services and in

which country.


Proposition 4.5 (Global currency's stochastic process based on usage)

In a stochastic economy, under the assumption of liquidity immediacy, com-
plete markets, and the global currency being valued.
 i) If both the global currency and currency h (f ) are used in country h (f ),
    equations (9) ((12)) and (8) ((11)) hold with equality, then the global
    currency's exchange rate in units of currency h (f ) follows a martingale
    in the country-h (f ) risk-adjusted measure

                     ~t [Qt+1 ] = Qt ,
                     E                                  ~t Q
                                                       (E          
                                                            t+1 = Qt ).            (19)



 ii) If in country h (f ), the only currency used is currency h (f ), then the
     global currency's exchange rate in units of currency h (f ) follows a su-
     permartingale in the country-h (f ) risk-adjusted measure

                     ~t [Qt+1 ] < Qt
                     E                                  ~t Q
                                                       (E          
                                                            t+1 < Qt ).            (20)



iii) If in country h (f ), the only currency used is the global currency, then
     the global currency's exchange rate in units of currency h (f ) follows a



                                           17
     submartingale in the country-h (f ) risk-adjusted measure

                   ~t [Qt+1 ] > Qt
                   E                               ~t Q
                                                  (E          
                                                       t+1 > Qt ).            (21)



Proof.   Proof in Appendix A.


    Note, part (i) of Proposition 4.1 is similar to the fundamental pricing equa-

tion in Schilling and Uhlig (2018).




5     Benchmark: no global currency

It is helpful to compare the result of Proposition 4.1 to those that would

obtain without a global currency. In the latter case, the competition between

domestic bond and money implies the relationship between interest rate and

liquidity premia as shown in equations (10) and (13), for country       h   and   f,
respectively. The competition, instead, between the two nominal one-period

bonds denominated in currency     h and f   together with completeness of markets

yields uncovered interest parity:


                                       St+1   1 + it
                           Et Mt+1          =        ,                        (22)
                                        St    1 + it


which can be also written using country-h risk-adjusted expectation as


                                ~t [St+1 ]
                                E            1 + it
                                           =        .                         (23)
                                   St        1 + it


Lacking the competition induced by the global currency, there is nothing

that ex-ante restricts liquidity premia across countries and synchronizes in-

terest rates. Monetary policymakers are free to choose their policies and the

exchange-rate regime. The interest rate can be set to react to macroeconomic

variables, and the exchange rate is let to oat. Alternatively, one of the two

countries can even decide to x or manage the exchange rate but in this case it

has to relinquish its independence in setting monetary policy, as the Impossible

Trinity would say. Competition from a global currency makes this trinity even


                                         18
harder to reconcile. As discussed in the previous section, one should expect

more synchronization of policies or a pressure to set rates low in order to keep

medium-of- exchange properties for government currencies.




6      Special case: asset-backed global currencies

This section is motivated by the recent announcement that Facebook is going

to launch a new global currency, Libra. The main characteristic of Libra that

we are going to investigate is its backing through a basket of risk-free securities

denominated in government currencies. In our framework, suppose that the

consortium issuing the global currency backs it by safe bonds denominated in

currency   h.   Moreover, assume that the consortium is ready to buy and sell any

amount of the global currency at a xed price             Qt .   When issuing the amount

t of the global currency at some date t, the consortium invests the proceeds
t Qt in the safe bonds of country h. In period t + 1, the consortium receives
the interest payments on the bonds. The consortium keeps a portion of the

date  t+1     portfolio value as a per-period asset management fee, assumed to

be   t t Qt     for some   t  0   set in   t.   One may wish to think of these fees as

prots paid to the shareholders of the consortium.

     The consortium then sets the new price           Qt+1 ,    again trading any amount

of global currency at that price and investing their client's funds in home safe

bonds. The bond returns after management fee which accrues between                 t   and

t + 1 to the global currency investors can be redeemed at the global currency's
price Qt+1 or are reinvested.

    In order to credibly promise the repurchase of the global currency for Qt+1

at t + 1 and assuming no prots beyond the asset management fee, assets and

liabilities have to grow at the same rate,



                                 Qt+1 = (1 + it - t ) Qt                               (24)



Note that for it     t     the price of the global currency then increases over time

Qt+1  Qt .


                                                19
Proposition 6.1 (Asset backed global currency)

Assume the global currency is valued.
(i) If t < it , then currency h is crowded out and only the global currency is
used in country h. Moreover, Lt = 1+  t
                                        it
                                           .
(ii)If t = it , both the currency h and the global currency coexist in country h.
(iii) If t > it , then only currency h is used in country h.
Proof.     Proof in Appendix A.


    From the results in proposition 6.1, we can retrieve more striking implica-

tions if we assume the fee to take the form of a xed portion of the interest

payments,     t = it     for some parameter    0    1.        Then


   1. If  < 1, then it  t only holds for it = 0. Moreover, it = 0 implies
      t = 0 and the global currency is used together with the local currency
      in country h.


   2. If   =1     (or   t = it ),   then the price   Qt   for the global currency is xed

      (Stablecoin) and both currencies are used.


    A useful reading of the above results from a central-banking perspective

is the following.       For the local currency       h   to maintain usage, the nominal

interest rate has to undercut or match the management fee            .   The proposition

therefore suggests that an interesting Bertrand-type game could unfold. The

home central bank may seek to undercut the fee charged by the consortium, in

order to drive the global currency out of usage at home. But without usage, the

global currency consortium could not earn any revenue from the fees: it would
                                                                                     6
be better o and might in turn respond by lowering its fees in response . In

the limit, this dynamic could result in both parties ratcheting down the price

for its currencies to their marginal costs of issuance. If these marginal costs

are zero or near zero, an assumption often made in the literature, one obtains

a zero interest rate policy and a zero fee in the limit.             Put dierently, the

   6 The  consortium may not care, if country h is small. It presumably would care, though,
if this is a large and economically important country or a large and important currency
union.

                                             20
currency competition between the currency    h and the global currency leads to
the establishment of the celebrated Friedman rule to keep interest rates at zero,

thereby setting the private costs of holding the currencies equal to the social

cost of producing it. There is a large literature establishing conditions under

which the Friedman rule is optimal, see Woodford (1990).        More generally,

if one currency has higher marginal costs of production than the other, then

the resulting zero prot condition for this higher-cost currency will dictate the

resulting limit.

    These results are also reminiscent of view in Hayek (1978), that unfettered

competition can align private incentives with social objectives.     To extract

rents from liquidity services, currency issuers have to supply a better money

than others, by keeping its value high and therefore ination low. But then

competition kicks in to eradicate rents to zero and eliminate liquidity pre-

mia, so that the better money serves also the social benets. Benigno (2019)

presents a model of currency competition obtaining the same result under

free entry. Our insights are related to the analysis in Marimon et al. (2003),

who likewise emphasize that cheap inside monies place tight upper bounds on

ination rates there or nominal interest rates here.

    In a nutshell, Libra may push central banks back to the zero lower bound.

In essence, an asset backed global currency employs bonds to nance liquidity

services, thus combining both the advantages of the liquidity services of money

with the interest payments of bonds. Using the home currency can now not

be more costly than the asset management fee charged by the consortium.




7     Examples

In the previous sections, we have presented our results using a general frame-

work with a generic notation for the stochastic discount factors and the liq-

uidity services. We now provide several examples of models which put more

structure on preferences and constraints. We consider three dierent models:

1) a money-in-utility function model; 2) a cash-in-advance-constraint model

in which the credit market opens before the cash market; 3) a cash-in-



                                       21
advance-constraint model in which the cash market opens before the credit

market. The rst two models can be casted in the framework of Section 3 in

which liquidity services are received at the same time money is held in agents'

portfolio. Model 3) deals with the case of delayed liquidity services, which is

discussed in its more general form in Appendix refsec:delay.



7.1      Money-in-the-utility-function model

The model follows the Sidrauski-Brock framework extended to allow for mul-

tiple currencies. Consumers in Home country have preferences of the form


                                                                 tot
                                          t-t0
                                                               Mh,t
                          Et0                    U (Ct ) + V                                         (25)
                                t=t0
                                                                Pt

         tot
where  Mh,t  = Mh,t + Qt Mg,t as in equation (2), where  is the rate of time
preferences with 0 <  < 1, C is a consumption good and P its price in units

of currency h. We can also assume more generally that C represents a bundle

of goods. Consumers get utility from consumption, through a concave function

U (·) strictly increasing in C and from real money balances by holding currency
h, Mh , and the global currency Mg . The utility V (·) is weakly increasing in
real money balances but may exhibit a satiation point at a nite level of real

money balances;      Qt   is the price of the global currency in units of currency                    h.
    Consistently with the general framework of Section 3, consumers can invest

in four securities:   i) a risk-free bond denominated in currency h, Bh , paying
an interest   rate i; ii) a risk-free bond denominated in currency f , Bf , paying
                    
an interest   rate i ; iii) money in units of currency h, Mf , and iv ) the global

money,   Mg .   Consumers can also trade in a set of state-contingent securities

able to span all states of nature.                We omit them from the presentation of

the budget constraint of the consumer. The nominal exchange rate between

currency   h and f    is denoted by          S , as in the main text;   let   T   denote lump-sum

transfers received from the government in units of currency                        h    while   Tg    are

transfers from the issuer of global money in units of global currency. Finally,

Y   is the home endowment of good                 C.   Preferences in country       f   are specular,



                                                    22
with appropriate starred variables.      Consumers are subject to the following

budget constraints



        Bh,t + St Bf,t + Mh,t + Qt Mg,t = Wt + Pt (Yt - Ct ) + Tt + Qt Tg,t ,

in which



        Wt  Mh,t-1 + Qt Mg,t-1 + (1 + it-1 )Bh,t-1 + (1 + it-1 )St Bf,t-1 .


   In the preferences (25) domestic and global money are perfect substitutes.

While we shall allow short sales of bonds, as in the main text, we impose a

short-sale constraint on the global currency and currency          h, i.e. Mg  0   and

Mh  0.     The rst-order conditions with respect to      Bh ,   Bf , Mh , Mg are

                         U C (Ct ) 1         UC (Ct+1 )
                                       = Et 
                            Pt 1 + i t         Pt+1

                      UC (Ct ) 1        UC (Ct+1 ) St+1
                                 
                                  = Et 
                        Pt 1 + it         Pt+1      St
                                        tot
                 UC (Ct ) 1           Mh,t              UC (Ct+1 )
                           Vm                  + Et 
                   Pt     Pt           Pt                 Pt+1
                                      tot
             Qt UC (Ct )  Qt        Mh,t               Qt+1 UC (Ct+1 )
                             Vm               + Et                       ,
                 Pt       Pt         Pt                     Pt+1

with the last two equations holding with equality for an interior solution in

which   Mh  0   and   MG  0,   respectively. As in main text, at least one should

hold with equality. In the above conditions,   UC (·) and Vm (·) are the derivatives
of the respective functions with respect to their argument.

   These equations can be casted in the notation of Section 3 by noting that

the stochastic discount factors are


                        UC (Ct+1 ) Pt                  UC (Ct+1 ) Pt
              Mt+1    =                       Mt+1   =
                         UC (Ct ) Pt+1                  UC (Ct ) Pt+1




                                         23
and the liquidity premia are


                                                                       tot,
                                  tot
                                 Mh,t                                 Mf,t
                           Vm                                Vm        Pt 
                                  Pt
                    Lt =                              Lt =                     ,
                             U C (Ct )                            UC (Ct )

         tot,    
where   Mf,t  = Mf,t + Q   
                        t Mg,t , analogously to (2).               Note that complete markets

imply that
                                  U C (Ct )    UC (Ct )
                                            =k
                                     Pt         St Pt
for some positive parameter           k   which can be set equal to one.                 In the case

purchasing power parity holds,            Pt =   St Pt , marginal utilities of consumption
are proportional across countries. When all currencies are used, Proposition

4.1 applies and therefore     Lt = L t . Another implication is that the marginal
utilities of real money    balances Vm (·) are equalized across countries.



7.2     Cash-in-advance model, type I

Consider a cash-in-advance model with the timing of Lucas and Stokey (1987),

in which the credit market opens before the cash market. Consumers living

in country   h   have the following preferences

                                       
                                Et0           t-t0 U (CT,t , CN,t )                                (26)
                                      t=t0


in which    CT and CN      are, respectively, a traded and non-traded good and

,   with   0 <  < 1 is     the intertemporal discount factor;                 U (·, ·)   is a concave

function, strictly increasing in both arguments. Preferences in country                        f    are

similar with variables denoted by a star.

    Each period is divided in two sub-periods. In the rst sub-period nancial

markets are open and consumer's budget constraint is given



                  Bh,t + St Bf,t + Mh,t + Qt Mg,t = Wt + Tt + Qt Tg,t                              (27)




                                                 24
in which     Wt   is the nominal wealth, which remains after taking into account

the purchases of goods in the previous period




      Wt = (1 + it-1 )Bh,t-1 + (1 + it-1 )St Bf,t-1 + Mh,t-1 + Qt Mg,t-1 +                   (28)

                  +PT,t-1 (YT,t-1 - CT,t-1 ) + PN,t-1 (YN,t-1 - CN,t-1 ).

     YT   and    YN   are the endowments of the traded and non-traded goods, and

PT   and    PN    the respective prices.         In the second subperiod of period      t,   the

cash market opens and non-traded goods can be purchased following this

constraint
                                         tot
                                        Mh,t  PN,t CN,t .                                    (29)

           tot
where     Mh,t = Mh,t + Qt Mg,t         as in equation (2). Budget constraints can be

written specularly for the consumers living in country                  f.
     The rst-order conditions with respect to               Bh , Bf ,   Mh , Mg   are


                                         t
                                              = Et {t+1 }                                    (30)
                                       1 + it

                                     t             St+1
                                        
                                          = Et t+1                                           (31)
                                   1 + it           St
                                      t  µt + Et {t+1 }                                      (32)


                                 t Qt  µt Qt + Et {t+1 Qt+1 }                                (33)


with the last two equations holding with equality for an interior solution              Mh,t >
0   and   Mg,t > 0,   respectively;    t   and   µt   are the multipliers associated with the

constraints (27) and (29), respectively.                Moreover the rst-order conditions

with respect to       CN   and   CT   implies that


                            UCN (CT,t , CN,t )
                                               = µt + Et {t+1 } ,                            (34)
                                 PN,t

                                 UCT (CT,t , CN,t )
                                                    = Et {t+1 } ,                            (35)
                                      PT,t


                                                  25
where    UCT (·, ·)   and   UCN (·, ·)   are the derivatives of the function         U (·, ·)   with

respect to the rst and second arguments, respectively. We can now map this

model in the notation of the general framework of Section 3, by noting that

the stochastic discount factors are given by


                                      t+1                         t+1
                            Mt+1    =                   Mt+1    =
                                      t                           t


while the liquidity premia can be written instead as


                                            µt                 µ
                                    Lt =               Lt =
                                                                t
                                                                  .
                                            t                   t


      Using the rst-order conditions (32), (34) and (35), we can also write the

nominal stochastic discount factors


                                      UCN (CT,t+1 , CN,t+1 ) PN,t
                           Mt+1 = 
                                       UCN (CT,t , CN,t ) PN,t+1
                                                              
                                      UCN (CT,t+1 , CN,t+1 ) PN,t
                           Mt+1    =                         
                                       UCN (CT,t  , CN,t ) PN,t +1


and the liquidity premia as


                                                         PN,t
                                UCN (CT,t , CN,t ) -          U (CT,t , CN,t )
                                                         PT,t CT
                      Lt =
                                                 UCN (CT,t ,CN,t )
                                                         PN,t            
                                UCN (CT,t , CN,t )-           U (CT,t
                                                         PT,t CT
                                                                      , CN,t )
                      Lt    =                                                    .
                                                        ,C  )
                                                 UCN (CT,t N,t



      The results of Proposition 4.1 applies in the case all currencies are used.

Additional results can be derived in this particular example. Note rst that

complete market implies that             t = t       for some positive constant       and at all
t,   which in the context of the above model can be also written as

                                                               
                            UCN (CT,t , YN,t )    UCN (CT,t , YN,t )
                                               =k         
                                                                     .                          (36)
                                 PN,t                 St PN,t

Under appropriate conditions on the initial distribution of wealth, the constant



                                                  26
                             7
k   can be set equal to 1.       In (36), we have substituted equilibrium in the non-
                                                          
traded goods market,        CN,t = YN,t     and   CN,t = YN,t .    Moreover, combining the

rst-order conditions (30), (32), (34) and (35) it is possible to obtain that


                                                                                     
      UCN (CT,t , YN,t )             PN,t             UCN (CT,t , YN,t )         
                                                                                    PN,t
                         = (1 + it )                               
                                                                         = (1 + it )  ,
      UCT (CT,t , YN,t )             PT,t             UCT (CT,t , YN,t )            PT,t

Using   it = it    and (36) with   k=1      in the above conditions, we obtain that


                                  UCT (CT,t , YN,t )    PT,t
                                               
                                                     =     
                                                               .                           (37)
                                  UCT (CT,t , YN,t )   St PT,t

                                                                                         
Assume that the law-of-one price holds for traded goods, then                 PT,t = St PT,t ,
                                                          
and consider the special case in which            YN,t = YN,t ,    then (37) implies perfect
                                                                                        
cross-country risk-sharing of the consumption of traded goods,                  CT,t = CT,t .

Using this result in (36), we also obtain that the law-of-one price holds for
                                   
non-traded goods        PN,t = St PN,t ,    for which it is key the equalization of the

nominal interest rates.



7.3         Cash-in-advance model, type II

Consider a cash-in-advance model with a dierent timing, in which the cash

market now opens before the credit market. Preferences of consumers living

in country     h   are similar to (26). Each period is divided in two sub-periods.

In the rst sub-period the non-traded good can be purchased subject to the

following constraint



                             Mh,t-1 + Qt Mg,t-1  PN,t CN,t                                 (38)



in which variables follow previous denitions. After the cash market closes,

in the second sub-period of period          t   the credit market opens and consumers

    7 The
       result that t =     t implies (36) depends on the fact that money allows to insure
any movement in the price of non-traded good in the cash constraint (29).




                                                 27
are subject to the following constraint



              Bh,t + St Bf,t + Mh,t + Qt Mg,t + PT,t CT,t + PN,t CN,t =
                          +PT,t YT,t + PN,t YN,t + Tt + Qt Tg,t + Wt                     (39)



where



          Wt  (1 + it-1 )Bh,t-1 + (1 + it-1 ) St Bf,t-1 + Mh,t-1 + Qt Mg,t-1 .


       Budget constraints can be specularly written for the consumers in country

f.
       The rst-order conditions with respect to       Bh , Bf , Mh , Mg      are


                                     t
                                          = Et {t+1 }
                                   1 + it

                                  t             St+1
                                     
                                       = Et t+1
                                1 + it           St
                                 t  Et {µt+1 + t+1 }

                           t Qt  Et {(µt+1 + t+1 )Qt+1 }

with the last two equations holding with equality for an interior solution

Mh,t > 0      and   Mg,t > 0,    respectively.    In the above conditions,         t   and   µt
are the multipliers associated with the constraints (39) and (38), respectively.

Moreover the rst-order conditions with respect to            CN   and   CT   implies that


                                UCN (CT,t , CN,t )
                                                   = µt + t ,                            (40)
                                     PN,t

                                  UCT (CT,t , CN,t )
                                                     = t .                               (41)
                                       PT,t
       Note that in this model liquidity premia are received with one-period de-

lay.    Therefore this example can be mapped in the notation of the general

framework presented in Appendix B.1, by noting that the stochastic discount




                                             28
factors are given by


                                t+1                     t+1
                       Mt+1 =                 Mt+1 =
                                t                       t


while liquidity premia are


                                 µt+1                 µt+1
                        Lt+1   =              Lt+1   =     .
                                 t+1                  t+1

    Using the rst-order conditions (40) and (41), we can further write the

stochastic discount factors and the liquidity premia as




                                UCT (CT,t+1 , CN,t+1 ) PT,t
                   Mt+1 = 
                                 UCT (CT,t , CN,t ) PT,t+1
                                                        
                                UCT (CT,t+1 , CN,t+1 ) PT,t
                   Mt+1      =                         
                                 UCT (CT,t  , CN,t ) PT,t+1


and


                                 UCN (CT,t+1 , CN,t+1 ) PT,t+1
                  1 + Lt+1 =
                                 UCT (CT,t+1 , CN,t+1 ) PN,t+1
                                                          
                                 UCN (CT,t +1 , CN,t+1 ) PT,t+1
                  1 + Lt+1     =                          
                                                                .
                                 UCT (CT,t+1 , CN,t+1 ) PN,t+1


    The results of Proposition B.1 and Corollary B.1 apply to this model.




8     Conclusion

Starting from a general framework, we have analyzed a two-country economy

featuring a home, a foreign and a global (crypto)currency. For the benchmark

case that markets are complete, that the global currency is used in both coun-

tries and that currency liquidity services are immediate, we have shown that

nominal interest rates must be equal and that the exchange rate between the

home and the foreign currency is a risk- adjusted martingale.       We call this




                                         29
phenomenon   Crypto-Enforced Monetary Policy Synchronization (CEMPS). It
adds a further restriction to the classic Impossible Trinity. We have discussed

the dangers for monetary policies, seeking to escape this restriction. We have

characterized the implications for the exchange rate dynamics and the pricing

dynamics of the global currency. If the global currency is backed by interest-

bearing assets, additional and tight restrictions on monetary policy arise. We

demonstrate, how our general framework encompasses a number of classic

monetary models in the literature such as money-in-the-utility function and

cash-in-advance. In the appendix, we have extended our results to the case of

delayed liquidity services, where additional correlation terms arise, and when

currencies are not perfect substitutes.

   We conclude that the introduction of a globally used currency may there-

fore substantially change the landscape of international monetary policy. We

leave to future research to further investigate how the dominant role of tradi-

tional currencies as safe assets in international markets will be challenged by

the presence of global crypto currencies.




                                      30
References

Pierpaolo Benigno.    Monetary policy in a world of cryptocurrencies.      CEPR
  Discussion Paper No. DP13517, 2019.
Markus K Brunnermeier and Dirk Niepelt. On the equivalence of private and

  public money.     Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,

  2019.


Camila Casas, Federico J Díez, Gita Gopinath, and Pierre-Olivier Gourin-

  chas. Dominant currency paradigm. Technical report, National Bureau of

  Economic Research, 2016.


John H Cochrane.     Asset pricing: Revised edition.   Princeton university press,

  2009.


Jesús Fernández-Villaverde and Daniel Sanches.         Can currency competition

  work? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2016.


J Marcus Fleming. Domestic nancial policies under xed and under oating

  exchange rates.   Sta Papers, 9(3):369380, 1962.
Rodney Garratt and Neil Wallace. Bitcoin 1, bitcoin 2,....: An experiment in

  privately issued outside monies.   Economic Inquiry, 56(3):18871897, 2018.
Linda S Goldberg and Cédric Tille. Vehicle currency use in international trade.

  Journal of international Economics, 76(2):177192, 2008.
Friedrich Hayek. Denationalising money: the argument rened, 1978.


John Kareken and Neil Wallace. On the indeterminacy of equilibrium exchange

  rates.   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 96(2):207222, 1981.
Paul R Krugman.      Vehicle currencies and the structure of international ex-

  change, 1979.


Robert E. Lucas and Nancy L. Stokey. Money and interest in a cash-in-advance

  economy.    Econometrica, 55(3):491513, 1987.

                                       31
Rodolfo E Manuelli and James Peck. Exchange rate volatility in an equilibrium

  asset pricing model.   International Economic Review, pages 559574, 1990.
Ramon Marimon, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. Insideoutside money

  competition.   Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(8):17011718, 2003.
Robert A Mundell. Capital mobility and stabilization policy under xed and

  exible exchange rates.Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Sci-
  ence/Revue canadienne de economiques et science politique, 29(4):475485,
  1963.


Maurice Obstfeld.    International risk sharing and the costs of trade.   Ohlin
  Lectures, Stockholm School of Economics, 2007.
Maurice Obstfeld and Kenneth Rogo.         Global implications of self-oriented

  national monetary rules.   The Quarterly journal of economics,   117(2):503

  535, 2002.


Maurice Obstfeld and Kenneth S. Rogo.           Foundations of International
  Macroeconomics.    MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996.


Helene Rey. International trade and currency exchange.     The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 68(2):443464, 2001.
Hélène Rey.    Dilemma not trilemma:    the global nancial cycle and mone-

  tary policy independence. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic

  Research, 2015.


Linda Schilling and Harald Uhlig. Some simple bitcoin economics. Technical

  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.


Linda Schilling and Harald Uhlig.    Currency substitution under transaction

  costs.   Available at SSRN 3314249, 2019.
Michael Woodford. The optimum quantity of money.        Handbook of monetary
  economics, 2:10671152, 1990.


                                      32
          FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION
                APPENDIX
A        Proofs of Propositions

In this Appendix, we collect the proofs of the Propositions.



A.1      Proof of Proposition 4.2

Proof.   [Proposition 4.2] Let   K > -1   arbitrary, e.g.   K = 0.   From (17), and

again using the denition of the covariance,


                                  St+1                      St+1
                0 = covt Mt+1 ,          + Et [Mt+1 ] Et         -1 .          (A.1)
                                   St                        St

Solving for   E [St+1 /St ],

    St+1     covt (Mt+1 , SS
                           t+1
                               )                             St+1
  E      =1+                t
                                 = 1 + (1 + it ) covt Mt+1 ,               .   (A.2)
     St         Et [Mt+1 ]                                    St

In what follows, dene   t|M the conditional standard deviation of the nominal
stochastic discount factor, t|S the conditional standard deviation of the nom-

inal exchange rate between home and foreign, and (Mt+1 ,St+1 ) the correlation

coecient between the two. Then, the likelihood that the percentage change




                                          i
of the exchange rate exceeds K is bounded from above by


                St+1                  Et [ SS
                                            t+1
                                                ]
           Pt        -1>K                    t

                 St                    K +1
                                      1 - (1 + it ) covt (Mt+1 , SS
                                                                  t+1
                                                                   t
                                                                      )
                                 =
                                                   K +1
                                      1 - (1 + it ) t (Mt+1 , SS
                                                               t+1
                                                                t
                                                                   ) t|M t|S
                                 =
                                                  K +1
                                  1 + (1 + it ) t|M t|S
                                 
                                         K +1
                                  0 as K  

where the rst inequality holds by the conditional Markov inequality, the fol-

lowing equality holds by (A.2), the consecutive equality holds by denition

of the correlation coecient and the inequality thereafter holds since always

  [-1, 1]    and since standard deviations are positive.



A.2      Proof of Proposition 4.3

Proof.   [Proposition 4.3] It holds

                                        
                         Qt+1        Qt+1
                 Et Mt+1      = Et Mt+1                                              (A.3)
                          Qt           Qt
                                                          1
                                    Et [Mt+1 ] =                                     (A.4)
                                                        1 + it
                                           1
                                   <            = Et [Mt+1 ] = 1 - Lt                (A.5)
                                         1 + it

The rst step follows by market completeness, the second step holds since

the global currency may or may not be in use in country             f,   by this yielding a

weakly lower return than currency      f   in country   f.   The third step uses equation

(7). The fourth step, the inequality sign, is implied by the assumption it            < it,
the fth step uses equation (6) and the nal step follows from the assumption

that currency   h   is used in country   h,   i.e. equation (8) with the equality sign.




                                              ii
Thus,


                                       Qt+1
                            Et Mt+1         < 1 - Lt                                   (A.6)
                                        Qt

and the global currency is not used in country              h.   Further, we directly see

Lt < Lt   from our derivation. Thus, by market completeness


                               St+1
                     Et Mt+1        = Et [Mt+1 ] < Et [Mt+1 ]                          (A.7)
                                St

where the last step follows from the derivation above. Therefore,              St   follows a

supermartingale in country-h risk-adjusted measure. Vice versa,


                                                                  St
                     Et [M                         
                          t+1 ] < Et [Mt+1 ] = Et Mt+1                                 (A.8)
                                                                 St+1

                                                       S
Thus, with   S  = 1/S , Et [M               
                              t+1 ] < Et Mt+1 St
                                                t+1
                                                    and also            the exchange rate

from the   perspective of country f follows a submartingale.



A.3       Proof of Proposition 4.4

Proof.   [Proposition 4.4] We have


                                    1         1
                     Et [Mt+1 ] =         <      
                                                   = Et [Mt+1 ]                        (A.9)
                                  1 + it    1 + it
                                                         
                                                    Qt+1
                                 1 - Lt = Et Mt+1                                     (A.10)
                                                       Qt
                                             Qt+1
                                = Et Mt+1           1 - Lt                            (A.11)
                                              Qt

Here the rst step uses equation (6), the second step uses the policy set in

the two countries,   it  it,   the third step equation (7). The fourth step and

inequality follows because currency    f    may or may not be used in country             f.
The fth step uses that the global currency is used in country             f , the sixth step
uses completeness of markets and the last step uses that the global currency

may or may not be adopted in country             h.   Altogether,   Et [Mt+1 ] < 1 - Lt   for



                                           iii
i > i .   Alternatively,  Et [Mt+1 ] < 1 - Lt         for   i = i   if currency   f   is not used in

country    f , Et [M             
                    t+1 ] < 1 - Lt .



A.4       Proof of Proposition 4.5

Proof.    [Proposition 4.5] (1) Assume in country             h that the global currency and
currency    h   are used. Then


                                        Qt+1
                          Et Mt+1            = 1 - Lt = Et [Mt+1 ]                              (A.12)
                                         Qt

Multiplication by        Qt /Et [Mt+1 ] yields the result.
(2) Assume in         country h that currency h is used             and the global currency is

not used then we have


                                        Qt+1
                          Et Mt+1            < 1 - Lt = Et [Mt+1 ]                              (A.13)
                                         Qt

As before, multiplication by           Qt /Et [Mt+1 ] yields the result.     The parallel result

for country     f   follows similar steps, as well as case (3).



A.5       Proof of Proposition 6.1

Proof.    [Proposition 6.1] (i) Assume         t < it .     Then


                               Qt+1
    1 - Lt  Et Mt+1                 = (1 + it - t ) Et [Mt+1 ] > Et [Mt+1 ].                    (A.14)
                                Qt

The rst inequality holds by (9), the second step holds by (24), the third step

follows from        it > t .   Since   1 - Lt > Et [Mt+1 ],         the local currency      h   is not

used. Given the assumption that at least one currency is used in country                            h,
(9) has to hold with equality,          1 - Lt = (1 + it - t ) Et [Mt+1 ],            and the global

currency is used in       h.   By no arbitrage, a comparison between the return on

the global currency and the bond through (6) yields


                                         1 - Lt       1
                                                  =                                             (A.15)
                                       1 + it - t   1 + it

                                                 iv
                 t
and thus   Lt = 1+it
                     .

(ii)   Assume t = it ,    then


                            Qt+1
       1 - Lt  Et Mt+1           = (1 + it - t ) Et [Mt+1 ] = Et [Mt+1 ]   (A.16)
                             Qt

and since at least one currency has to be in use, we have


                                             Qt+1
                         1 - Lt = Et Mt+1         = Et [Mt+1 ]             (A.17)
                                              Qt

implying that both currencies are used.

(iii) Assume   t > it ,   then


                                                                 Qt+1
       1 - Lt  Et [Mt+1 ] > (1 + it - t ) Et [Mt+1 ] = Et Mt+1             (A.18)
                                                                  Qt

Thus, the global currency is not used. But since once currency has to be used,

it has to be currency      h, 1 - Lt = Et [Mt+1 ].


B        Robustness analysis

In this section, we present some robustness analysis of our main results. First,

we investigate the case in which liquidity services are delayed one period with

respect to when money is held in the agents' portfolio. Second, we sketch out

the implications of imperfect substitutability between monies.



B.1       Delayed liquidity services

An important assumption of our framework is liquidity immediacy, i.e. that the

liquidity services provided by currency occur at the same date     t that money is
added to the portfolio of agents. However, some models, like the third example

in Section 7, instead postulate liquidity premia to be received a period after

portfolio choices are made, i.e. with delay in       t + 1:

Assumption B.1 (Liquidity delay).          The purchase of the global currency and

                                            v
currency h in country h at t yields delayed liquidity premia Lt+1 receivable in
t + 1. Analogously, the time t purchase of global currency and currency f in
country f at t yields delayed liquidity premia Lt+1 receivable in t + 1.


      In this case, equations (8), (9) and (10) need to be replaced with



                                      1  Et [Mt+1 (1 + Lt+1 )],                   (B.19)

                                  Qt  Et [Mt+1 (1 + Lt+1 )Qt+1 ],                 (B.20)
                              it
                                    Et [Mt+1 Lt+1 ].                              (B.21)
                            1 + it

The liquidity premia are appropriately discounted by the stochastic discount

factor. Since we will focus on equilibria in which all currencies are used, we

set (B.19), (B.20), (B.21) with an equality sign.

      In country   f,   one must likewise replace (11), (12) and (13) with



                                      1  Et [M          
                                              t+1 (1 + Lt+1 )],                   (B.22)

                                  Q                        
                                   t  Et [Mt+1 (1 + Lt+1 )Qt+1 ],                 (B.23)

                                 it
                                          Et [M     
                                               t+1 Lt+1 ].                        (B.24)
                            1 + it


And again in what follows, we are going to assume that the above equations

hold with an equality sign. Dene the conditional covariance under the home

country risk-adjusted measure as


                                                              ~ t [Y ]
                            cov t (X, Y )  Et [XY ] - Et [X ] E                   (B.25)



For a random variable            X,    dene the risk-adjusted expectation in country   f   as

the equivalent to       ~t [·]
                        E        via



                                        ~        Et [M t+1 X ]
                                        Et [X ]                                   (B.26)
                                                  Et [M t+1 ]


Let

                                             t  it - it




                                                  vi
be the dierences between the nominal interest rates. Maintaining all other

assumptions, we now turn to derive the implications for the exchange rate.

The next results apply in general independently of whether liquidity premia

are or are not delayed, and they just need as input the interest rate dierential,

like in (B.29).


Proposition B.1 (Delayed Liquidity Services and Exchange Rates)

In a stochastic economy, assuming liquidity delay, complete markets, all cur-
rencies being used, the expected liquidity services dierences and exchange rates
then satisfy
                                   ~t [Lt+1 ] - E
                               t = E            ~  L                        (B.27)
                                                  t t+1

and
                                 ~t [St+1 ]
                                 E                t
                                            =1+                             (B.28)
                                    St          1 + it

   This corollary is a consequence strictly of the given interest dierential:

the presence of the global currency is not necessary to establish these conse-

quences. Note how the results here are adjusted relative to the expressions in

our benchmark result. The (expected) liquidity services now dier by the in-

terest rate dierential. If that is zero as in the main result, so is the (expected)

liquidity service dierence. The exchange rate is no longer a risk-adjusted mar-

tingale: instead, there is an adjustment term that depends on the interest rate

dierential. If that interest rate dierential is zero as in the main result, we

are back to the risk-adjusted martingale.


Proof.   [ Proposition B.1 ]    Note that (B.19) and (B.21) can be written as


                                          ~t [Lt+1 ]
                                     it = E

Likewise, (B.22) and (B.24) can be written as



                                     i    ~ 
                                      t = Et [Lt+1 ]


The combination yields (B.27). Finally, consider the uncovered-interest-parity

relationship (23) to obtain (B.28).


                                           vii
Corollary B.1 (Stochastic Economy under Delayed Liquidity Premia)

In a stochastic economy, assuming liquidity delay, complete markets, and all
currencies being used, the nominal interest rate dierential satises
                            covt (Lt+1 - Lt+1 , Qt+1 )       covt (Lt+1 , St+1 )
                it - it =                                +                                (B.29)
                                     ~t [Qt+1 ]
                                     E                           ~t [St+1 ]
                                                                 E

     Note that the benchmark result of interest rate equality in case of liquidity

immediacy is a direct consequence of (B.29), since the conditional covariance

terms must be zero, if        Lt+1   and   Lt+1   are known in     t.   In the general case,

nonzero covariance terms arise and equation (B.29) informs us, in which di-

rection one needs to adjust the interest dierential.


Proof.    [ Corollary B.1.]      Since all currencies are used, (B.21) and (B.24)

hold with equality.     With (6) and (7), rewrite (B.21) and (B.24) using the

risk-adjusted measures as
                                            ~t [Lt+1 ]
                                       it = E                                             (B.30)


and
                                                    ~t L St+1
                                                    E
                                  ~                      t+1
                             it = Et [Lt+1 ] =                                            (B.31)
                                                       ~
                                                      Et [St+1 ]
where in the latter we have also used the assumption of complete markets.

Combining the two equations above, we can write the interest-rate dierential

as
                                                                 
                                                          covt (Lt+1 , St+1 )
                 i         ~         ~
                  t - it = Et Lt+1 - Et [Lt+1 ] +              ~t [St+1 ]
                                                                                ,         (B.32)
                                                               E
Note that this equation holds, regardless of whether there is a global currency

or not.    The presence of the global currency, however, delivers a restriction

on the dierence between the expected liquidity services. Use (B.23) together

with the assumption of complete markets and the equivalence                         Qt = St Qt   to

obtain

                             Qt = Et [Mt+1 (1 + Lt+1 )Qt+1 ]                              (B.33)




                                             viii
This can be written under the risk-adjusted measure as


                                      ~t (1 + L
                        (1 + it )Qt = E        t+1 )Qt+1 .                            (B.34)



Also write (B.20) using the risk-adjusted measure


                                      ~t [(1 + Lt+1 )Qt+1 ] ,
                        (1 + it )Qt = E                                               (B.35)



and compare it with the equation above to obtain that


                             ~t (L - Lt+1 )Qt+1
                           0=E                                                        (B.36)
                                  t+1


and thus
               ~t L      ~                   covt (Lt+1   - Lt+1 , Qt+1 )
               E   t+1 - Et [Lt+1 ] =                 ~t [Qt+1 ]
                                                                             ,        (B.37)
                                                      E
Plug (B.37) into (B.32) to deliver (B.29).


    Note that equation (B.37) determines the expected dierence in the liquid-

ity premia, by which we can retrieve the result of the benchmark case of equal

liquidity premia when   Lt+1   and   Lt+1   are known at time t.




C     Imperfect substitutability of currencies

Our analysis easily generalizes with suitable modication to the situation,
                                                                                        tot
where the currencies are not perfect substitutes.            As in section 2, let      Mh,t
denote the total money holding in country         h   at time      t,   expressed in units of

the domestic currency. In section 2 and implicitly in the general framework of
                                      tot
section 3, we have assumed that      Mh,t    is the sum of the nominal value of the

home currency as well as the global currency used at home,


                                tot
                               Mh,t = Mh,t + Qt Mg,t ,                                (C.38)




                                            ix
see equation 2. More generally, assume that


                              tot
                             Mh,t = f (Mh,t , Qt Mg,t )                              (C.39)



for some constant returns to scale function    f (·, ·).   This captures the idea that

the national currency may be relatively more useful for certain transactions,

while the global currency is more useful for others. A fully spelled out version

of this idea is in Schilling and Uhlig (2019). Due to constant returns to scale,

(C.39) can alternatively written in terms of real units as


                             tot
                           Mh,t          Mh,t Qt Mg,t
                                 =f          ,                                       (C.40)
                            Pt           Pt     Pt

Equation (C.38) arises for the linear specication



                        f (Mh,t , Qt Mg,t ) = Mh,t + Qt Mg,t

                                                                                tot
Total home money holdings provide the total liquidity services              Lt Mht  .   Via

(C.39), a marginal unit of home currency therefore provides liquidity ser-

vices Lt f1,t , while a marginal unit of global currency provides liquidity ser-
vices Lt f2,t Qt , where f1,t and f2,t are the partial derivatives of the function f

with respect to their rst and second argument, evaluated at (Mh,t , Qt Mg,t ).

Equations (8) and (9) now become



                              1  Lt f1,t + Et [Mt+1 ]                                (C.41)



and
                                                    Qt+1
                          1  Lt f2,t + Et Mt+1                                       (C.42)
                                                     Qt
These equations and the usual properties of constant-returns-to-scale functions

make clear, that the marginal liquidity services      Lt f1,t   and   Lt f2,t   provided by




                                         x
                                               8
either currency now depend on the ratio            of their nominal values


                                          Qt Mg,t
                                    t =                                               (C.43)
                                           Mh,t

Propositions 4.1, 4.3 and 4.4 require appropriate modication.                If   f   is not

linear, then   it <   it generally results in a tilt towards home currency and
decrease in t rather than a complete elimination of the global currency, though
the latter is still a possibility, if f2 (· · · , 0) < , i.e. if the two currencies are
                                                     
substitutes, and the interest rate dierence it - it is suciently large. Likewise,

it > i generally results in a tilt towards the global currency and increase in
t , rather than a complete elimination of the home currency. Once again,
the latter can happen in the economically plausible case of substitutes and

f1 <       as well as a suciently large interest rate dierential        it - i .      These

considerations add nuance to the main analysis, without changing its core

message.




   8 For completeness and as usual, dene the function g () = f (1, ). Note that M tot =
                                                                                 h,t
g (t )Mh,t . Calculate that f1,t = g (t ) - g (t )t and f2,t = g (t ).


                                          xi
