                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          HOW DO FORECLOSURES EXACERBATE HOUSING DOWNTURNS?

                                      Adam M. Guren
                                    Timothy J. McQuade

                                     Working Paper 26216
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26216


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




We would like to thank John Campbell, Edward Glaeser, and Jeremy Stein for outstanding advice
and Pat Bayer, Karl Case, Raj Chetty, Darrell Duffie, Emmanuel Farhi, Simon Gilchrist, Erik
Hurst, Lawrence Katz, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Greg Mankiw, Chris Mayer, Monika Piazzesi,
Andrei Shleifer, Alp Simsek, Johannes Stroebel and seminar participants at Harvard University,
Stanford University, the NBER Summer Institute, the Penn Search and Matching Workshop, and
the Greater Boston Urban and Real Estate Economics Seminar for helpful comments. We would
like to acknowledge CoreLogic and particularly Kathryn Dobbyn for providing data and
answering numerous questions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Adam M. Guren and Timothy J. McQuade. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Foreclosures Exacerbate Housing Downturns?
Adam M. Guren and Timothy J. McQuade
NBER Working Paper No. 26216
August 2019
JEL No. E30,R31

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper uses a structural model to show that foreclosures played a crucial role in exacerbating
the recent housing bust and to analyze foreclosure mitigation policy. We consider a dynamic
search model in which foreclosures freeze the market for non-foreclosures and reduce price and
sales volume by eroding lender equity, destroying the credit of potential buyers, and making
buyers more selective. These effects cause price-default spirals that amplify an initial shock and
help the model fit both national and cross-sectional moments better than a model without
foreclosure. When calibrated to the recent bust, the model reveals that the amplification generated
by foreclosures is significant: Ruined credit and choosey buyers account for 25.4 percent of the
total decline in non-distressed prices and lender losses account for an additional 22.6 percent. For
policy, we find that principal reduction is less cost effective than lender equity injections or
introducing a single seller that holds foreclosures off the market until demand rebounds. We also
show that policies that slow down the pace of foreclosures can be counterproductive.


Adam M. Guren
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
guren@bu.edu

Timothy J. McQuade
Stanford Graduate School of Business School
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
tmcquade@stanford.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26216
Foreclosures were one of the dominant features of the U.S. housing downturn. From 2006
through 2013, approximately eight percent of the owner-occupied housing stock experienced
a foreclosure.1 Although the wave of foreclosures has subsided, understanding the role of
foreclosures in housing downturns remains an important part of reformulating housing policy.
    The behavior of the housing market concurrent with the wave of foreclosures is shown in
Figure 1. Real Estate Owned (REO) sales -- sales of foreclosed homes by lenders -- made
up over 20 percent of existing home sales nationally for four years. Non-foreclosure sales
volume fell 65 percent as time to sale rose. Prices dropped considerably, with aggregate
price indices plunging a third and non-distressed prices falling by a quarter.
    This paper uses a structural model to argue that quantitatively matching national and
cross-sectional features of the bust requires that foreclosures play a significant role in exac-
erbating the bust. Indeed, in our calibrated model we find that the eect of having more
homeowners with a foreclosure flag on their credit record and increased buyer choosiness
due to the presence of foreclosures together account for 25.4 percent of the total decline
in non-distressed prices and that the reduction in lending stemming from default-induced
lender losses accounts for an additional 22.6 percent. Our model implies that foreclosures
have far greater equilibrium eects than those found in micro-econometric studies, which use
highly localized fixed eects and absorb much of the city-level variation reduction in supply
and demand that is at the heart of our structural analysis. The role played by foreclosures
opens the door to various foreclosure mitigation policies, and we use our model to compare
several such policies. Our policy analysis reveals that both lender equity injections and
a government facility to strategically hold foreclosures o the market are highly eective,
while principal reductions similar to those pursued by the Home Aordable Modification
Program (HAMP) are less cost eective. Furthermore, if household liquidity shocks are per-
sistent, slowing down foreclosures can prolong the bust to the point that doing so becomes
counterproductive.
    We analyze an equilibrium search model of the housing market with random moving
shocks, undirected search, idiosyncratic house valuations, Nash bargaining over price, and
endogenous conversion of owner-occupied homes to rental homes. The model builds on a lit-
erature on search frictions in the housing market, notably Wheaton (1990), Williams (1995),
Krainer (2001), Novy-Marx (2009), Ngai and Tenreryo (2014), and Head et al. (2014). We
add a mortgage market with a representative competitive lender facing a regulatory capi-
tal constraint and costly equity issuance, as well as mortgage default, whereby underwater
homeowners default if hit by a liquidity shock, to this workhorse model. The mortgage
sector in our model is related to recent research that models the interaction of the banking
  1
      All figures are based on data from CoreLogic described in detail below.


                                                      1
                                   Figure 1: The Role of Foreclosures in the Housing Downturn

                                                         A: Delinquent and In-Foreclosure Loans
    % of Oustanding Loans
    0    2    4   6   8




                            2000      2002           2004          2006            2008          2010           2012                2014
                                                                            Year

                                                  90+ Days Delinquent                      In Foreclosure Process


                                                          B: Foreclosures and REO Share
               30




                                                                                                                               0 .5 1 1.5 2
                                                                                                                               % of Housing Stock
    % of Sales
     10   20   0




                            2000      2002         2004          2006          2008         2010         2012           2014
                                                                        Year

                                         REO Share of Sales (L Axis)               Foreclosure Completions (R Axis)



                                             C: Price and Transactions Relative to Peak - Whole U.S.
    0 20 40 60 80100
       % of Peak




                        2000          2002          2004           2006            2008          2010           2012                2014
                                                                            Year

                                     Price Index - All                    Price Index - Non-Distressed                 REO Sales
                                     Existing Home Sales                  Non-Distressed Sales



Notes: All data is seasonally adjusted national-level data from CoreLogic as described in the appendix. The
grey bars in panels B and C show the periods in which the new homebuyer tax credit applied. In panel C,
all sales counts are unsmoothed and normalized by the maximum monthly existing home sales while each
price index is normalized by its separate maximum value.



                                                                        2
sector and housing market, including Elenev et al. (2016), Greenwald et al. (2018), Hedlund
(2016a, 2016b), Hendlund and Garriga (2019), and Paixao (2017).
    Foreclosures have three distinguishing characteristics in our model: They cause losses
for lenders and reduce lender equity, REO sellers have higher holding costs, and individuals
who are foreclosed upon cannot immediately buy a new house. We show that foreclosures
dry up the market for non-distressed sales and reduce volume and prices through three main
equilibrium channels. First, reduced equity pushes lenders against their capital constraint
and causes them to ration mortgage credit, which prevents some buyers from being pre-
approved for a loan, which we call the lender rationing eect. Second, because foreclosed
upon homeowners are for a time prevented from purchasing due to the foreclosure flag on
their credit, foreclosures further reduce the number of buyers in the market relative to the
number of sellers. We call this the foreclosure flag eect. Both the lender rationing eect and
foreclosure flag eect result in an imbalance of buyers and sellers, reducing the probability
that a seller contacts a buyer and lowering equilibrium prices. Typically, foreclosures are
thought of as an expansion in supply; our model emphasizes that foreclosures also reduce
demand. Third, the presence of distressed sellers increases the outside option to transacting
for buyers, who have an elevated probability of being matched with a distressed seller next
period and consequently become more selective. This choosey buyer eect endogenizes the
degree of substitutability between REO and non-distressed sales.
    In conjunction with the eect of foreclosures on prices, default amplifies the eects of
negative shocks: An initial shock that reduces prices puts some homeowners under water and
triggers foreclosures, which causes more price declines and in turn further default. Lock-in
of underwater homeowners also impacts market equilibrium by keeping potential buyers and
sellers out of the market, increasing the share of listings which are distressed. Endogenous
conversion of owner-occupied units to renter-occupied in response to the increase in demand
for rental units provides an important countervailing force.
    We calibrate our model to match the nation-wide price decline, sales decline, REO share,
and aggregate number of foreclosures from 2006 to 2013. The model fits a number of moments
that are not direct calibration targets, including the decline in non-distressed prices. We use
our model to quantitatively decompose the sources of the price decline. The choosey buyer
and foreclosure flag eects together account for 32.3 percent of the decline in aggregate
prices and 25.4 percent of the decline in non-distressed prices. We find that credit rationing
associated with weakened lender balance sheets can explain an additional 27.1 percent of
the decline in aggregate price indices and an additional 22.6 percent of the decline in non-
distressed prices. Only 40.6 percent of the decline in aggregate prices and 52.0 percent of the
decline in non-distressed prices is accounted for by an exogenous and permanent shock to


                                              3
aggregate prices that we interpret as a bursting bubble. These amplification eects are far
more substantial than those found by micro-econometric studies of foreclosure externalities.
Such studies compare the highly local eect of foreclosures on neighboring prices and find
minor eects; we find more substantial eects because our structural approach allows us to
analyze market-wide equilibrium eects that are absorbed into the constant in micro studies.
    To further validate the extent to which foreclosures can account for the bust, we add a
parsimonious amount of cross-sectional heterogeneity to our model and evaluate its ability to
explain cross-sectional moments relative to a model without default. In particular, we allow
CBSAs to dier in their initial loan balance distribution, their unemployment rate, and the
size of the preceding boom, assuming that the persistent component of the price decline in
the bust is proportional to the boom. The calibrated model fits a number of cross-sectional
moments despite the fact that most parameters are calibrated to pre-downturn moments and
that these cross-sectional moments are not used in the calibration. In particular, the model
does a good job of explaining quantitatively why cities with a larger boom had a more-than-
proportionally-larger bust, which our model attributes to foreclosure. By contrast, a model
without default does not explain these cross-sectional patterns and has a poorer fit because
the size of the bust is proportional to the size of the boom.
    Finally, we use the model to quantify the equilibrium impact of a number of government
policies aimed at ameliorating the crisis, including principal reduction, equity injections, a
facility to purchase foreclosures and hold them o the market until demand rebounds, and
regulations to slow down the pace of foreclosures. To our knowledge, the only other papers
to analyze foreclosure policy in a quantitative equilibrium model are Hedlund (2016b), who
studies making non-recourse mortgages recourse, and Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2017),
who consider debt forgiveness programs in a model with no price-default spiral. We first
show that the eectiveness of slowing down the rate of foreclosure completions depends on
the rate at which homeowners cure by regaining the ability to pay the mortgage or becoming
above water. If the cure rate is fast enough, slowing down the rate of completions can be
eective at limiting the amount of default. However, this policy also lengthens the crisis,
which has a negative impact on prices. If the cure rate is su ciently slow ­ which is likely
the empirically-relevant case in a crisis ­ the eect of lengthening the crisis can dominate
and slowing down the rate of completions can actually exacerbate the crisis. Second, we
compare the equilibrium eects of three dierent government interventions to ameliorate the
housing bust that operate on dierent margins: lender equity injections, homeowner principal
reduction, and a government facility to purchase distressed homes, maintain them o the
market, and re-introduce them once demand rebounds. We find the government facility to
be highly cost-eective since since it directly addresses the imbalance of supply and demand


                                              4
caused by foreclosures, which supports higher prices and reduces default. This in turn
improves lender balance sheets, which further reduces the severity of the crisis. Government
equity injections are also quite eective, while principal reductions have stronger aggregate
eects than previous micro-econometric studies would suggest, but are still the least-cost
eective of the policies we consider due to imperfect targeting.
    Our analysis has a few limitations which one should be mindful of when interpreting the
results. First, we consider only liquidity-driven default and do not consider a household's
incentives to strategically default. Our model is a good approximation to the 2000s, as the
literature has found that strategic default was limited in the crisis.2 However, the absence of
strategic default means that our model is not well suited to consider policies like the complete
elimination of foreclosure, which would likely lead to widespread strategic default and cripple
lender balance sheets. This pushes us to focus on ex post policies that would not dramat-
ically change strategic default incentives if implemented carefully. Second, given our focus
on a building a rich, structural framework of housing market dynamics and lender balance
sheets, we do not fully model the household's dynamic budget constraint and non-housing
consumption. Our approach yields useful insights about several prominent foreclosure poli-
cies, but it does limit our ability to consider some others like interest rate reductions (which
we do our best to consider in an appendix) or alternate mortgage designs that work through
the household budget constraint. Third, because we do not model the household's budget
constraint, we abstract from general equilibrium eects such as the impact of tax or debt
financing needed to pay for foreclosure policies or the eect of such policies on equilibrium
interest rates. Despite these limitations, our framework delivers quantitative insights re-
garding the mechanisms driving housing crises and oers clean economic intuitions about
the relative cost-eectiveness of various policies in stemming a price-default spiral, given a
particular funding scheme and level of government expenditures.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1 presents facts about the
downturn across metropolitan areas. Section 2 introduces our basic model of the housing
market, and Section 3 describes the calibration of the model. Section 4 explains and quanti-
fies the forces at work in the national model, and Section 5 evaluates the model's ability to
explain cross-sectional moments about the bust. Section 6 considers foreclosure policy, and
Section 7 concludes.
   2
    Ganong and Noel (2019b) show that essentially all default by non-investors was liquidity triggered.
Bhutta et al. (2017 ) estimate that the median non-prime borrower does not strategically default until
their equity falls to negative 74 percent. Similarly, Gerardi et al. (2017) find that there were few strategic
defaulters in the PSID as most defaulters do not have the assets to make a mortgage payment and maintain
their consumption. The largest estimate of the share of defaults that are strategic is 15 to 20 percent (from
Experian Oliver-Wyman). See also Elul et al. (2010) and Foote et al. (2008).



                                                      5
        Figure 2: Price and Sales in Selected MSAs With High Levels of Foreclosure

                                           Las Vegas MSA                                                      Oakland MSA

           0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                             0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
            Fraction of Peak




                                                                              Fraction of Peak
                               2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014                           2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
                                                 Year                                                              Year


                                            Phoenix MSA                                                    San Bernardino MSA
           0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                             0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
            Fraction of Peak




                                                                              Fraction of Peak
                               2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014                           2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
                                                 Year                                                              Year


                                    Price Index - All                Price Index - ND                                       REO Sales
                                    Existing Home Sales              Non-Distressed Sales

Notes: All data is seasonally adjusted CBSA-level data from CoreLogic as described in the appendix. Sales
are smoothed using a moving average and normalized by the maximum monthly existing home sales, while
each price index is normalized by its maximum value.


1     Empirical Facts
The national aggregate time series for price, volume, foreclosures, and REO share presented
in Figure 1 mask substantial heterogeneity across metropolitan areas. To illustrate this,
Figure 2 shows price and volume for four of the hardest-hit Core Based Statistical Areas
(CBSAs). In Las Vegas, for instance, prices fell nearly 60 percent, and the REO share was
as high as 75 percent.
    To provide a more systematic analysis of the heterogeneity of the bust across cities and to
motivate, calibrate, and test the model, we use a proprietary data set provided by CoreLogic
supplemented by data from the United States Census. CoreLogic provides monthly data
for 2000 to 2013 for the nation as a whole and 99 of the 100 largest CBSAs. The data
set includes a repeat sales house price index, a house price index for non-distressed sales
only, sales counts for REOs and non-distressed sales, and estimates of quantiles of the LTV
distribution. We seasonally adjust the CoreLogic data and smooth the sales count series
using a moving average. A complete description of the data and summary statistics are in
the appendix.

                                                                         6
                        Figure 3: Price Boom vs. Price Bust Across MSAs




Note: Scatter plot of seasonally adjusted data from CoreLogic along with quadratic regression line that
excludes CBSAs in greater Detroit which busted without a boom. The data is described in the appendix.
Each data point is an CBSA and is color coded to indicate in which quartile the CBSA falls when CBSAs
are sorted by the share of homes with over 80 percent LTV in 2006. Although the highest LTV CBSAs had
almost no boom and no bust (e.g. Indianapolis), the CBSAs below the best fit line tend to be MSAs with a
large share of homeowners with high LTVs in 2006 (third quartile).


    The best predictor of the size of the bust is the size of the preceding boom. Figure 3
plots the change in log price from 2003 to 2006 against the change in log price from each
market's peak to its trough. There is a strong downward relationship, which motivates a
key feature of our model: The shock that causes the bust is a fall in home valuations that is
assumed to be proportional to the size of the preceding boom.
    Figure 3 also reveals a more subtle fact: Metropolitan areas that had a larger boom had
a more-than-proportional larger bust. While a linear relationship between log boom size and
log bust size has an r-squared of .62, adding a quadratic term that allows for larger busts in
places with larger booms increases the r-squared to .68. The curvature can be seen in the
best-fit line in Figure 3.3 We argue that by exacerbating the downturn in the hardest-hit
areas, foreclosures explain why places with larger booms had disproportionately larger busts.
   3
    For the best fit line, the regressions that follow, and the model calibration, we exclude two outlier CBSAs
in southeast Michigan which had a large bust without a preceding boom so that the non-linearity is not
overstated. All results are robust to including these two CBSAs.



                                                      7
    This explanation has an important corollary: Because default is predominantly caused
by negative equity, a larger bust should occur not only in places with a larger initial negative
shock to prices, but particularly in locations with a combination of a large shock and a
large fraction of houses with high LTVs -- and thus close to default -- prior to the bust. To
provide suggestive evidence that this prediction is borne out in the data, the points in Figure
3 are color-coded by quartiles of share of homeowners in the CBSA with over 80 percent
LTV in 2006. While the largest high LTV shares occurred in places that did not have a bust
-- home values were not inflated in 2006, so the denominator of LTV was lowest in these
locations -- one can see that the majority of CBSAs substantially below the quadratic trend
line were in the upper end of the high LTV share distribution (red triangles in the figure).
    To formally investigate whether the interaction of many households with high LTVs and
a large preceding boom is correlated with a deep downturn, we estimate:

                     Yi =     0   +   1   03 06    log (Pi ) +    2   [   03 06   log (Pi )]2   (1)
                             + 3X +        4   (   03 06   log (Pi )  X ) + "i ,

where i indexes CBSAs, X is an interacted variable, and the outcome variable Yi is either
the maximum change in log price, the maximum peak-to-trough change in log non-distressed
prices, the maximum peak-to-trough REO share, or the fraction of houses that experience
a foreclosure. We use two X s. First, to test whether the combination of a large bust and
a large fraction of houses with high LTV creates a particularly large downturn, we use the
z score of the share of mortgages with over 80 percent LTV in 2006. This regression is
similar in spirit to Lamont and Stein (1999), who show that prices are more sensitive to
income shocks in cities with a larger share of high-LTV households. Second, to more directly
test the role of foreclosures, for price and non-distressed price we use the ex-post fraction
of houses that experience a foreclosure. The regression results are shown in Table 1, with
summary statistics and robustness checks in the appendix. With the share of mortgages
with a high LTV in 2006 as the interacted variable, the fourth row of the first four columns
shows the key result: The interaction term between the size of the run-up and the share
of high-LTV homeowners is significantly negative for price, non-distressed price, and sales
volume and significantly positive for the mean REO share of volume and the fraction of the
housing stock that is foreclosed upon. This is consistent with a combination of a steep price
run-up and high LTV homeowners triggering a price-default spiral.
    Columns 5 and 6 show both a negative direct eect of foreclosures and a negative eect
of the interaction between foreclosures and the size of the run up. While the interaction
term is insignificant for the overall price index due to a large standard error, the eect is


                                                      8
          Table 1: Cross-MSA Regressions on the Impact of the Size of the Boom and Its Interaction With High LTV Share
      Dependent Variable:                 log (P)           log (Pnd )    Mean REO Share          % Foreclosed            log (P )    log (Pnd )
     X (Interacted Variable)       Z LTV > 80%         Z LTV > 80%         Z LTV > 80%            Z LTV > 80%        % Foreclosed % Foreclosed
          log (Price)03 06               0.251               0.092              -0.531                 -0.362            -0.662        -0.758
                                        (0.414)            (0.321)            (0.273)*               (0.139)**         (0.291)**   (0.225)***
           log (Price)2
                      03      06         -1.886             -1.537              1.391                  0.988             -0.031         0.355
                                     (0.498)***          (0.382)***          (0.331)***             (0.171)***          (0.504)       (0.392)
                  X                      0.054               0.061              -0.002                 -0.013             -1.01        -0.521
                                       (0.029)*           (0.024)**            (0.021)                (0.013)         (0.381)***     (0.297)*




9
         log (Price)03   06   X          -0.310             -0.336              0.205                  0.235             -0.631        -1.519
                                      (0.123)**          (0.113)***          (0.075)***             (0.054)***          (0.905)     (0.711)**
                  r2                     0.690               0.716              0.467                   0.651             0.783         0.815
                  N                        97                  97                 96                      96                98            98
    Notes: * = 10% Significance, ** = 5% Significance *** = 1% significance. All standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Each column shows
    estimates of (1) with the constant suppressed. For the first four columns, the interaction variable X is the z-score for the share of houses in 2006
    with an LTV over 80%. In the last two columns, the interaction variable X is the share of the housing stock that experienced a foreclosure. Pnd is a
    non-distressed only price index. The mean REO share of sales volume is the average from 2008 to 2013, and the fraction foreclosed is the fraction of
    the housing stock foreclosed upon over the first 8 years of the downturn. All data is from CoreLogic and described in the appendix. Data is for 98
    largest CBSAs excluding Detroit MI, Warren MI in all columns, Syracuse NY in columns 1-4, and, Birmingham AL for columns 3-4. All dependent
    variables are peak-to-trough maximums with the exception of percentage foreclosed upon. See the appendix for robustness and regressions including
    southeast Michigan.
statistically significant for non-distressed prices. A negative direct eect and interaction is
expected for the aggregate price index since foreclosures trade at a discount, but the negative
eect on non-distressed prices provides evidence that foreclosures amplify the bust. Finally,
adding the interaction with fraction foreclosed to the regression eliminates the strong and
negative quadratic term on price, which suggests that the non-linearity in the size of the
bust relative to the size of the boom can be accounted for by foreclosures, as will be the case
in our model.


2       Model
We construct a a Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides undirected equilibrium search model of
the housing market to quantitatively analyze the eects of foreclosures and policies aimed at
ameliorating their eects. Search frictions play an important role in housing markets: Houses
are illiquid, most households own one house and move infrequently, buyers and sellers are
largely atomistic, and search is costly, time consuming, and random.
    We first describe the environment, agents, and shocks that agents receive. We then
describe the housing and mortgage markets and define equilibrium.


2.1     Environment, Agents, and Shocks
Time is discrete and indexed by a t subscript, and the discount factor is . All agents
have linear utility. There are a unit mass of individuals who are assumed to be natural
homeowners and a unit mass of houses which can either be owned and rented.4 The model
is thus a closed system with a fixed population and housing stock.5
                                                                                         b
    Individuals can be in one of four states. A mass lt of individuals are homeowners, vt  are
                                                                      r
buyers who are searching for a home and renting while they do so, vt are renters who do not
have a foreclosure on their record but have not qualified for a mortgage and are waiting to
                              f
search until they do so, and vt are renting and have a foreclosure on their record. The stock
                                                                    v
of houses can have one of three statuses. lt are owner-occupied, vt   are non-owner-occupied
                                   d                                                   v
and not owned by a lender, and vt are owned by lenders after a foreclosure. Of the vt    non-
                                                          a
owner-occupied houses that are not owned by a lender, vt are converted to rent temporarily,
    4
      We focus on natural homeowners, but natural renters and transitions in and out of homeownership can
be added without substantially changing the model.
    5
      For tractability and to focus the paper, we abstract away from housing supply. In practice, there was
little residential construction during the crisis. However, this assumption implies we may miss some features
of the crisis, such as depreciation of the existing housing stock or foreclosed homes being demolished. It also
means that we will not capture regional heterogeneity in housing supply elasticities when we perform our
cross-city analysis.


                                                      10
                                                           n
which precludes them from being listed for sale, and vt      are listed for sale. As we describe
below, lenders have higher holding costs, and they consequently list all of the homes they
own for sale.
     Homeowners experience two dierent shocks. First, they experience moving shocks with
probability that represent changes in tastes and life events that induce them to leave their
house as in Krainer (2001) and Ngai and Tenreyro (2014). We assume that these shocks occur
at a constant rate and that only individuals who are mismatched with their house attempt
to find a new one. When a moving shock occurs, what happens depends on the homeowner's
equity position. If a homeowner has negative equity, which we will define momentarily, she
cannot pay o her mortgage balance with the proceeds from a sale, and consequently the
homeowner is "locked in" to the current house. We assume the homeowner takes actions
to accommodate the mismatch shock given her inability to move and remains a homeowner
until she receives another shock.6 If a homeowner has positive equity, she sells her house,
pays o the lender, and attempts to buy another house.
     To define a homeowner's equity position, we assume that there exists a competitive fringe
of market-markets who pay homeowners a price V    etn for the house and then market the home
to buyers through a search and matching process described subsequently, similar to Hedlund
(2016a).7 Homeowners thus have negative equity and are locked in if their loan balance
L > V  e n and have positive equity and sell if L  V  e n . When positive equity homeowners
        t                                              t
sell their house, they pay o their mortgage and attempt to secure pre-approval for new
financing.8 Pre-approval occurs with equilibrium probability Pt . If the individual receives a
pre-approval, she enters the housing market as a buyer. If the individual is unable to secure
pre-approval, she becomes a renter and attempts to secure pre-approval again at exogenous
rate r . Pre-approval specifies = (L, µ), the loan amount and the interest rate at which
financing can be secured at the time of purchase. We describe the endogenous pre-approval
probability Pt and loan terms when we introduce the mortgage market below.
     The second type of shock a homeowner may receive is a liquidity shock, which occurs with
time-varying probability t . Again, what happens when a homeowner experiences a liquidity
shock depends on her equity position. Homeowners with negative equity who experience
   6
      For parsimony we do not fully model the income and savings of households. Rather, we make the reduced
form assumption that underwater homeowners experience lock-in. In practice, homeowners who are only
slightly underwater may have su cient savings to make up the dierence.
    7
      As an alternative, one can imagine that when a homeowner enters the market, they turn into both a
seller and a buyer that are independent of one another as in Ngai and Tenreryo (2014). V      ~tn would then
reflect the value of having a listing on the market, inclusive of marketing and maintenance costs.
    8
      Our modeling of pre-approvals implicitly assumes that households require financing to purchase a home.
In practice, few households purchase without a mortgage. Incorporating heterogeneous down payments
would significantly increase model complexity while adding little economic insight.



                                                    11
a liquidity shock default because they are unable to aord their mortgage payments and
the price they could receive from a market-maker is insu cient to pay o their mortgage.
This "double trigger" default is the only source of default in our model. While "ruthless" or
"strategic default" by borrowers ­ that is default by a homeowner with the liquidity to pay
their mortgage ­ has occurred, there is a consensus in the literature that strategic default
accounts for a very small fraction of mortgage defaults.9 To keep the model tractable and
maintain a focus on housing market dynamics, we thus do not model strategic default, nor
do we model the strategic decision of the lender to foreclose, modify the loan, rent to the
foreclosed-upon homeowner, or pursue a short sale, which are options that were not widely
used until late in the crisis. Consequently, we assume that homeowners with L > V   e n default
                                                                                     t
if they experience a liquidity shock and enter the foreclosure process.
    Homeowners who receive a liquidity shock who are above water, on the other hand, do not
default. In our baseline model, we further assume that they can remain in their house despite
the liquidity shock. In practice, homeowners with positive equity who receive a liquidity
shock have various means to avoid having to sell. For example, borrowers with positive home
equity could potentially borrow against it to cover temporary lost income. Homeowners with
positive equity could also pursue a refinancing or a term extension. For parsimony, we do
not fully model these options and instead make the reduced-form assumption that liquidity
shocks do not force sales for households with positive equity. In the appendix, we consider an
alternate model in which we do assume that above-water homeowners who receive liquidity
shocks are forced to sell as a robustness test. This model features the same economic forces as
our baseline model and does reasonably well quantitatively. However, too many households
are forced to rent during the crisis relative to the data, which is why we prefer our baseline
assumption.
    We further assume that foreclosure occurs immediately in our baseline model. In practice,
foreclosure is not immediate, and some loans in the foreclosure process do cure before they
are foreclosed upon. As another robustness check, in the appendix we consider a model in
which there is a delay before foreclosure completion and find similar results. We also study
the eects of slowing down foreclosure completions when we analyze policy in Section 6.
    Homeowners who experience a foreclosure are prevented from buying for a period of time
and must rent in the interim. Foreclosure dramatically reduces a borrower's credit score, and
many lenders, the GSEs, and the FHA require buyers to wait several years after a foreclosure
before they are eligible for a mortgage. Molloy and Shan (2013) use credit report data to
show that households that experience a foreclosure start are 55-65 percentage points less
likely to have a mortgage two years after a foreclosure start. Consequently, we assume that
  9
      See references in footnote 2.


                                              12
each period, individuals who defaulted become eligible to apply for a new mortgage with
probability .
    When a homeowner with positive equity sells, a market-maker takes possession of the
home. As in Head (2014), each period market-makers have the option of listing a house
for sale, which incurs a flow cost of mn , or renting the house for rt . When a homeowner
with negative equity defaults and is foreclosed upon, the lender takes possession of the
house and lists the house for sale, incurring a flow cost of md .10 Lenders do not rent out
distressed properties.11 We anticipate md < mn < 0, since vacant, distressed properties tend
to depreciate faster and thus require higher ongoing costs to maintain.12 This will manifest
itself in equilibrium as distressed homes selling at lower prices than other listed homes.
    Buyers who have been pre-approved, renters, and households with a foreclosure on their
record all rent at the equilibrium rent rt . We assume that a given unit of housing provides
rental services for  renter households, with  < 1 so that renters occupy less square footage
than owner-occupants as in the data. The rental market is competitive and the supply con-
sists of those owner-occupied homes being rented out plus a permanent stock of rental homes
of mass v rs . The endogenous conversion of owner-occupied homes to rentals to accommodate
increased rental demand during the crisis is important in the bust.


2.2     Housing Market
Buyers and sellers in the housing market are matched randomly each period according to a
standard fixed-search-intensity constant-returns-to-scale matching function. Defining market
                                                       b   s        s    n    d
tightness t as to the ratio of buyers to listed homes vt /vt where vt = vt + vt , the probability
                          s                                                b
a seller meets a buyer qt   and the probability a buyer meets a seller qt    can be written as
functions of t . Buyers meet each type of seller in proportion to their share of listed homes
in the market.
    When matched, the buyer draws a valuation for the house h from a distribution Ft (h)
  10
     Alternatively, we could assume that lenders also sell to market-makers and that the costs to market-
makers of selling foreclosures are higher than the costs of selling non-distressed properties. Lenders would
then receive a price Vtd for the property.
  11
     We abstract away from the purchase of distressed home by institutional investors. In practice, these
investors did not enter until late in the crisis (around 2012) and then only in a few markets, such as Atlanta,
Tampa, and Phoenix. In our policy section we consider the impact of a government facility which purchases
distressed homes and then re-introduces them into the housing market once demand rebounds, which is
similar to the role played by investors.
  12
     Lenders must make payments to security holders until a foreclosure liquidates, and they must also
assume the costs of pursuing the foreclosure, securing, renovating, and maintaining the house, and selling
the property. Even though they are paid additional fees to compensate for the costs of foreclosure and are
repaid when the foreclosed property sells, the lender's eective return is far lower than its opportunity cost
of capital.



                                                      13
which is time-varying. This valuation is a one-time utility benefit consumed at purchase and
is common knowledge to both the buyer and seller. Prices are determined by generalized
Nash bargaining with weight      for the seller. If the buyer and seller decide to transact,
the seller leaves the market and the buyer obtains financing at the pre-approved terms and
becomes a homeowner. If not, the buyer and seller each return to the market to be matched
next period. The value of being a homeowner can be written as:

                                      Vth (h, ) = h +   t   ( ),                              (2)

where t ( ) is a continuation value function that is a function of today's loan terms            .
This value function takes into account the possibility of moving, lock-in, and default. It is
the only place where the value of being a renter both with and without a foreclosure on one's
credit record enter. We relegate the formal definition of t and the value functions which
are necessary to define it to the appendix.
     Denote the total match surplus when a buyer pre-approved to receive a loan with terms
   meets a seller of type j 2 {n, d} and draws a match quality h at time t by StS,j (h, ), the
buyer's surplus by StB,j (h, ), and the seller's by StS,j (h, ), with St,j
                                                                           (h, ) = StB,j (h, ) +
StS,j (h, ). Let the price of the house if it is sold be pj
                                                          t (h, ). The buyer's surplus is equal to
the value of being in the house minus the down payment and the outside option of staying
in the market:

                   StB,j (h, ) = Vth (h, )     pj
                                                t (h, )       L          Et Bt+1 ( )          (3)

where B is the value function for being a buyer. The seller's surplus is equal to the price
minus the outside option of staying in the market:

                               StS,j (h, ) = pj
                                              t (h, )
                                                                etj
                                                             Et V +1 ,                        (4)

where V etj is the value of having a vacant house that can be rented or put up for sale. Because
utility is linear and house valuations are purely idiosyncratic, a match results in a transaction
if h is above a zero-surplus threshold denoted by hj   t ( ):

                                                   h               i
                        Vth hj
                             t ( ),      =                     etj
                                             L + Et Bt+1 ( ) + V +1 .                         (5)

   We can then define the remaining value functions. The value of listing a house for sale as
a market-marker n or as a lender d is equal to the flow payo plus the discounted continuation
value plus the expected surplus of a transaction times the probability a transaction occurs.


                                               14
Because sellers who list meet buyers with probability q s (t ) and transactions occur with
probability 1 Ft hj  t ( ) , the value of putting a house up for sale as a j = {n, d} type seller
is:
                                 ^                      h                       i
      j   j      e j       s
    Vt = m + Et Vt+1 + q (t )                 j            S,j
                                     1 Ft ht ( ) Et St (h, ) |h ht ( ) dGp  j
                                                                                     t ( ) , (6)



where Gp t ( ) is the distribution of pre-approval terms and the integral is Lebesgue. The
value of a vacant home to a market maker V   ~ n reflects the option to either list or rent the
                                              t
home, and in equilibrium market makers are indierent so that:

                                        etn = rt + Et V
                                        V             etn      n
                                                        +1 = Vt .                                        (7)

This condition pins down rents. In equilibrium, competitive market makers make zero profits
                   ~tn is also the price they pay households selling their home. The value of
in expectation, so V
being a buyer is defined similarly to that of a seller:

                               X                        j
                                                       vt                         h                        i
Bt ( ) =   rt + Et Bt+1 ( )+            q b ( t )    n    d
                                                            1     F t hj
                                                                       t( )     Et StB,j (h, ) |h   hj
                                                                                                     t ( )   .
                               j =n,d
                                                    vt + vt
                                                                                       (8)
The buyer value function takes into account the possibility she can meet either normal or
REO sellers.
   The conditional expectation of the total surplus given that a transaction occurs can be
simplified as in Ngai and Tenreyro (2014) by using (2) together with (3) and (4):

                     j
                    St, (h, ) = Vth (h, )                Vth hj
                                                              t ( ),   =h       hj
                                                                                 t ( ).                  (9)
                               
This implies Et Stj |h hnt ( ) = Et [h   hn
                                          t ( ) |h hn
                                                    t ( )] .
   Prices can be backed out by using Nash bargaining along with the definitions of the
surpluses (3) and (4) and (9) to obtain:

                            pj
                             t (h, ) =               h     hj            j
                                                            t ( ) + Et Vt+1 .                          (10)

This pricing equation is intuitive. The first term contains h hj   t ( ), which is a su cient
statistic for the surplus generated by the match as shown by Shimer and Werning (2007).
As the seller bargaining weight increases, more of the total surplus is appropriated to the
seller in the form of a higher price. The final two terms represent the seller's outside option
of continuing as a seller next period. These terms form the minimum price at which a sale
can occur, so that all heterogeneity in prices comes from the distribution of h above the

                                                          15
cuto hj t ( ).
    Define the joint distribution of current homeowner loan balances L and interest rates µ at
time t by Gt (L, µ) and the marginal distribution of loans as Gt (L). Given this specification
for the housing market and the environment defined in the previous section, the laws of
motion are:
                                                                              
                 lt+1 = (1         ) l t Gt~ n
                                           Vt + (1        t ) l t 1     ~tn
                                                                      G V                          (11)
                                          ^ X      j
                                                  vt
                              b b
                          + v t qt (  t )       n       d
                                                             1 Ft hj    t ( )   dGpt ( )
                                       j =n,d
                                              v t +  v  t
                       h                                              i
              b
             vt +1   =              ~tn + r Pt vt
                          Pt l t Gt V                 r
                                                         + Pt v t   f
                                                                                                   (12)
                            "              ^ X                                                 #
                                                              j
                                                            v
                          b
                       + vt    1 q b ( t )                n
                                                              t
                                                                  d
                                                                      1 Ft hj t( )    dGpt ( )
                                               j =n,d
                                                       v  t +   v t



                                                            
          r
         vt +1 = (1         P
                           r t  ) v r
                                    t +    (1   P  ) l
                                                  t t t Vt
                                                        G    ~ n + (1 Pt ) vt      f
                                                                                                   (13)
                                               ^
          v
         vt                 ~ n
                  = l t G V t + vt 1     n
                                                   q s (t ) (1 Ft (hn               p       a
            +1                                                          t ( ))) dGt ( ) + vt       (14)
                                                          ^
          d
         vt +1    = t l t 1 G V t     ~ n       d
                                             + vt 1          q s ( t ) 1 F t h dt ( )  dGp
                                                                                         t ( )     (15)
                                                   
          f
         vt +1    = (1        f
                           ) vt  + t l t 1 G V      ~n .                                           (16)
                                                      t


Equation (11) says that the stock of homeowners lt increases due to buyers purchasing
homes and decreases due to above-water homeowners receiving taste shocks and below-
water homeowners receiving liquidity shocks. (12) provides the law of motion for the stock
            b
of buyers vt  . New potential buyers come from above-water homeowners who receive a taste
shock, individuals who previously defaulted losing their foreclosure flag, and individuals
who were previously denied pre-approval. Entering the market as a buyer is conditional
on receiving a pre-approval, which occurs with probability Pt . (13) gives the law of motion
for the stock of renters who have been denied a pre-approval. These renters re-apply for
pre-approval at rate r . Equation (14) gives the law of motion for houses not currently
                                         v
owner-occupied, which we denote as vt      . Because a vacant home can either be listed for sale
or rented, the number of non owner-occupied homes is equal to the number of sellers last
period who did not sell plus the number of homes that were rented last period plus the
flow of above-water homeowners who experience a moving shock. (15) says that the mass of
distressed sellers is equal to the inflow of foreclosures plus those distressed sellers who did


                                                     16
                                                                                               f
not sell last period. Finally, equation (16) gives the law of motion for the stock of renters vt
locked out of mortgage market due to a foreclosure flag on their credit report. Equilibrium
in the rental market requires:
                                                    h                           i
                                 a        rs             b         f        r
                                vt   +v        =        vt   +    vt   +   vt       ,      (17)

where v rs is the stock of dedicated rental housing. We provide the laws of motion for Gt (L, µ)
and Gpt ( ) in the appendix.



2.3    Mortgage Market
All homeowners purchase their house with a mortgage. Mortgages in our economy can
be represented by (L, µ), a tuple that includes the loan balance L and interest rate µ.
Mortgagees pay down a constant fraction of the house's principal L plus interest each
period as in Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2015). The required payment is thus ( L + µ) L
and the principal evolves according to Lt+1 = (1       L ) Lt . To keep the model tractable, we

assume that pre-payment can only occur in the event of a sale, so there is no endogenous
refinancing.
    Households obtain mortgages from a continuum of competitive, risk neutral lenders. We
assume all lenders are identical and none go bankrupt unless the whole system becomes
insolvent, so the balance sheet of the financial system can be represented by a representative
lender. For tractability, we assume that at any point in time t, there is a single mortgage
contract oered to borrowers. To do so, we assume that there is an institutional constraint
that all mortgages are pre-approved at a fixed loan-to-value ratio relative to the average
non-distressed price in the market at time t, p ¯n
                                                 t.
    The asset side of the representative lender's balance sheet is comprised of pre-approvals
and originated mortgages. The book value t of these assets is equal to:
                                     ^                            ^
                            t = lt        LdGt (L) +          b
                                                             vt        LdGp
                                                                          t ( L) ,         (18)

where Gt (L) is the marginal distribution of outstanding loan balances on originated mort-
gages and Gp  t (L) is the marginal distribution of pre-approved loan balances. We assume
that the lender raises the financing for the loan at the time of pre-approval and holds the
proceeds in short-term marketable securities earning the risk-free rate µf until the loan is
funded.
    The representative lender funds itself by issuing short-term debt that is insured and thus
risk-free from the perspective of its creditors. The lender is, however, subject to a regulatory


                                                17
capital requirement that mandates that its book equity Et be greater than or equal to a
certain percentage of its assets at all times:

                                                      Et        t .                                      (19)

    The financial system can be in two states of the world. In the first, lenders can costlessly
raise equity so that the capital constraint is satisfied. This is the default state that holds in
steady state, and in this state Pt = 1 because the lender can serve all customers by raising
equity. In the second, there is a breakdown in the equity issuance market, the ability to raise
new private capital is limited, and the law of motion for lender equity is:
                                                  ^
                 Et+1 = Et + (1         ) t l t       1 [Lt > Vtn ] Vtd   Lt dG (Lt ) +   R
                                                                                          t ,            (20)

where G (Li t ) is the distribution of loan balances at the beginning of period t. The second
term represents equity losses due to default, equal to a fraction 1           of total book losses,
with reflecting the impact of government bailouts and (limited) private equity issuance.13
The outstanding mortgage balance is Lt , but the lender only receives Vtd from selling a
foreclosure. The final term, R   t , reflects increases in lender equity due to retained earnings.
The expression for retained earnings R      t is provided in the appendix.
                                                                           14

    The combination of capital requirements and the limited ability to issue new equity
implies that lenders may be prevented from issuing enough debt to cover the full demand
for new mortgage pre-approvals. In this case, for (19) to hold, t must fall, which occurs
through Pt falling below one. The resulting equilibrium rationing occurs on quantity rather
than price, and rationing is random. The interest rate is always set such that lenders break
even in expectation. As a microfoundation, one can imagine that when households apply
for financing at time t, there is random sorting into a queue. Only the first Pt fraction of
applicants in the line can be serviced. Lenders and households bargain over the financing
terms, with the Nash bargaining weight of the household equal to 1. This implies break-even
pricing even in the rationing equilibrium.
   13
      This specification seems natural, as internal and regulatory pressures to recapitalize are likely higher
during periods of significant losses. This specification also puts government bailouts and private capital
injections during the crisis on an equal footing, which makes economic sense and is useful when we consider
policy. In Appendix D.2.4, we consider an alternative law of motion for lender equity where the private
capital injection is additive rather than part of . All of the the economic insights of the paper continue
to hold under this alternate law of motion for lender equity, although the model fit is worse than under our
preferred specification.
   14
      We assume that the lenders believe that the probability of a breakdown in the equity issuance is su -
ciently small and the benefits of debt are su ciently large such that lenders pay out all retained earning to
their shareholders and that the capital requirement binds when equity can be freely issued.



                                                           18
    Our mortgage and banking system is similar to approaches taken by a number of recent
papers that study the interaction of housing markets and the banking sector. Elenev et al.
(2016) and Greenwald et al. (2018) also include capital constrained lenders in a model with
default, but they focus on bank failure in a model with heterogenous lenders and tailor their
model to study restructuring the GSEs and shared-appreciation mortgages, respectively.
Hedlund (2016a, 2016b) and Hedlund and Garriga (2019) also include a mortgage sector in a
search model of the housing market. However, their directed search model shuts down some
of the main eects we highlight in our undirected search model, and their lending sector is
competitive and not subject to a capital constraint. Finally, Paixao (2017) finds results of a
similar magnitude in a model focused on household consumption.


2.4     Equilibrium
Given this setup we can define an equilibrium:
                                                                  b    n    d    v    a    r    f
Definition 1. An equilibrium is defined by: masses lt , vt          , vt , vt , vt , vt , vt , vt , value
            d    n ~n                                                          n             d
functions Vt , Vt , Vt , Vt (h, ) , t ( ), and Bt ( ), purchase cutos ht ( ) and ht ( ), rents
rt and house prices pjt (h, ), a competitive interest rate µt , a book value of the representative
lender's assets t , Equity Et , a pre-approval probability Pt , and distributions Gt ( ) and
Gpt ( ) such that:


   1. The laws of motion and adding up constraints (11), (12), (13), (14), (15), (16), (17),
                                     v     n    a
      and the adding-up constraint vt  = vt  + vt are satisfied and the distributions Gt ( )
            p
      and Gt ( ), evolve according to the laws of motion in the appendix.

                                                        ~ n = V n , and the equation for
   2. The value functions (2), (6) for j = {n, d}, (8), V                                          t   ( )
                                                          t    t
      in the appendix are satisfied.

   3. The purchase cutos satisfy (5) for j = {n, d}.

   4. Rents satisfy (7).

   5. House prices satisfy (10).

   6. The book value of the representative lender's assets satisfies (18). Equity satisfies (19)
      and, if equity issuance is limited, satisfies (20).

   7. The pre-approval probability Pt = 1 if equity can be raised and Pt 2 [0, 1] satisfies (19)
      if equity issuance is limited.

   8. Lenders break even in expectation given the interest rate.

                                                   19
3      Calibration
We solve our model numerically. After choosing several functional forms, we take a four-
step approach to calibrating the parameters of the model. First, we externally calibrate
several parameters that correspond directly to parameters commonly used in the literature
or which are directly observable in the data. Second, we select several parameters to match
the model's steady state without default to pre-downturn empirical moments. Third, we
calibrate parameters specific to the downturn to match the model's simulated nationwide
downturn to moments from the recent housing crisis. Finally, we evaluate our calibrated
model's ability to match cross-sectional heterogeneity in the severity of the downturn across
dierent cities.


3.1     Parameterization of Functional Forms
We calibrate the model so that one period is a week. We use a constant-returns-to-scale
                                                   b              s                     b     s 1 
Cobb-Douglas matching function so that with vt       buyers and vt  sellers there are  vt  ( vt )
                                                                              
matches. The probability a seller meets a buyer is thus q s (t ) = t , and the probability
a buyer meets a seller is q b (t ) =     t
                                            1
                                              . The elasticity of the matching function is set to
 = .84 based on Genesove and Han (2012).15
    We parameterize the distribution of idiosyncratic valuations F (·) as an exponential dis-
tribution with parameter shifted by a    ¯t , which represents the aggregate valuation of homes.
Using an exponential is a neutral assumption because the memoryless property implies that
                            1
E t h hj  t ( ) |h  hjt ( ) =     for all , which eliminates the eects of di cult-to-measure
properties of the tail thickness of the distribution on the conditional expectation of the sur-
plus. This assumption implies all movements in average prices p          ¯j
                                                                          t =   / + Et Vtj+1 work
            j
through Vt .


3.2     Externally-Calibrated Parameters
We set the annual household discount rate to five percent. Lenders and households discount
at the same exogenous rate, so the riskless lender cost of capital is µf = 1/          1. The
probability of a moving shock is set to match a median tenure for owner occupants of
approximately nine years from the American Housing Survey (AHS) from 1997 to 2005. We
also use the AHS to set the fraction of an owner-occupied house's floor space occupied by a
renter,  , to be 0.65. This reflects a conservative estimate of the average fraction of square
  15
     is normalized to 0.5 so that the probability of matching falls on [0, 1], and the results are not sensitive
to this normalization.



                                                      20
footage per person and lot size occupied by renters who moved in the past year relative to
owner occupants, as detailed in the appendix.
    We set the non-distressed seller flow cost to reflect an annual maintenance cost of 3%.
The Nash bargaining weight is set to satisfy the Hosios condition.
    We set the probability that a foreclosed-upon homeowner returns to being able to be pre-
approved for a loan so that the average foreclosed-upon homeowner is out of the market
for two-and-a-half years. Most lenders require one to seven years to pass after a foreclosure
to be eligible for another mortgage. For instance, Veterans Administration loans require
two years, Federal Housing Administration loans three years, and Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac required five years prior to 2011 and now require seven years, although reductions are
allowed based on circumstances. We choose two-and-a-half years to fall in the middle of the
range of waiting periods and alter this parameter in robustness checks.
    The geometric rate of principal pay down is based on a thirty-year amortization. The
LTV requirement is set to = .80 to reflect the conforming loan limit, and our results are
not sensitive to increasing this to = 0.90. r is set so that a household that is denied
prepayment waits an average of eight weeks to seek another pre-approval. We set the capital
requirement     equal to 10% based on evidence from Begenau (forthcoming).16 Capital
injections during the crisis = G + E reflect government bailouts G and limited private
equity infusions. We set G = .25. based on evidence from Begenau et al. (2019) and let
the data pin down E .17


3.3     Calibration to Steady-State Moments
We choose the initial housing preference parameter a ¯0 , the shape parameter for the exponen-
tial distribution of idiosyncratic valuations , the dedicated stock of rental housing v rs , and
the REO seller flow cost md to match four pre-crisis moments in the data to the steady-state
of the model, which we denote by dropping time subscripts. Because default was negligible
pre-crisis, we consider a steady state in which  = 0, so defaults are measure zero. We also
assume that in the steady-state equity issuance is costless, which implies that P = 1. These
two assumptions simplify the steady state, as described in the appendix.
    For these four parameters, we target the non-distressed seller time on the market, the
average buyer time on the market, the mean house price, and the average REO discount.
  16
     Begenau (forthcoming) estimates a Tier 1 capital requirement of 9.3%, taking into account banks' buers
over the regulatory threshold.
  17
     Begenau et al. (2019) report total charge-os by bank holding companies of approximately $520 billion
during the crisis. The "Paulson Plan" injected $130 billion into these companies in the form of preferred
equity (Veronesi and Zingales (2010)). While these numbers do not reflect the entire scope of losses or
government interventions during the crisis, the implied bailout of 25% provides a reasonable baseline.


                                                    21
                                       Table 2: Target Moments
                     Moment                       Target                      Source
                 Mean House Price                 $300k         Adelino et al. (2012)
                                                                mean price for 10 MSAs
                  REO Discount                     12.5%        Clauretie and Deneshvary (2009),
                                                                Campbell et al. (2011)
           Non-Distressed Time on Market       26.00 Weeks        Piazzesi and Schneider (2009)
               Buyer Time on Market            29.05 Weeks      1.117 times seller time from
                                                                Genesove and Han (2012)


                Table 3: Parameter Values Calibrated to           Pre-Downturn Moments
 Param           Value         Units          Param               Value           Units
                 1 .52 05
                             Weekly Rate                           0. 5
                   0.08
                    52
                             Weekly Rate                           0.84
       L      1/(30  52)     Weekly Rate                           0.65
       r           1/8       Weekly Rate                           0.16
              1/(2.5  52)    Weekly Rate        mn                 0.144      Thousands of $
                   0.10                           G                0.25
       a
       ¯         609.67    Thousands of $       md                 0.483      Thousands of $
                  0.015    Thousands of $       v rs              0.023 Mass ( Housing stock = 1)


Intuitively, the mean price and seller time on the market are jointly determined by a
                                                                                    ¯0 and ,
                                                                    rs
the buyer time on the market relative to sellers is determined by v , and the REO discount
is determined by md . The REO discount in steady state is calculated as the sale price of
an infinitesimal number of distressed sales in the housing market. The target values for the
moments are summarized in Table 2 and detailed in the appendix, and these moments are
matched exactly. Our resulting parameter values are listed in Table 3, with the parameters
set exogenously in the top panel and the parameters set through moment matching in the
bottom panel. Importantly, matching the REO discount implies md < mn < 0.18


3.4        Simulating a National Housing Crisis
We simulate a housing crisis which matches the features of the national US housing market
between 2006 and 2013. To do so, we start the model at its steady-state, with the exception
that the initial LTV distribution matches the national loan balance distribution in 2006 from
CoreLogic. We then compute the perfect foresight impulse response to a housing valuation
  18
    Andersson and Mayock (2014) indicate that the total costs of foreclosing upon, maintaining, and selling
an REO in the Great Recession were 8.5% of the house's value. In the model downturn when REO prices
plunge and time on the market rises, the average REO seller's cumulative listing costs rise to 9% of the price.
The md we use is thus of reasonable magnitude.


                                                      22
                 Table 4: Parameter Values Calibrated to Downturn Moments
                                     Param      Value
                                        f rac
                                      a         0.7525
                                       TE     194 Weeks
                                          E      .390
                                       C        0.328


shock and a concurrent increase in liquidity shocks. Specifically, at the time of the crisis,
we hit the model with a permanent shock to home valuations, which we implement by
reducing the minimum idiosyncratic valuation a      ¯0 to a¯t = af rac a
                                                                       ¯0 . We use a permanent
shock since it reflects a bursting bubble and is consistent with the empirical facts in Section
1. We further assume that at the time of the crisis, there is an increase in the rate of
liquidity shocks t , which will create default among underwater homeowners. We assume
t = C U nempt , where C is a constant and U nempt is a moving average of the time path of
long-run unemployment in the Great Recession as detailed in the appendix. This assumption
reflects the fact that large liquidity shocks come from persistent income shocks proxied by
long-run unemployment. Finally, we assume that during the crisis lenders are limited in their
ability to raise new equity capital for TE periods. This reflects the temporary breakdown in
financial markets that occurred in the Great Recession and creates a role for lender balance
sheets in the crisis.
     We choose four parameters that aect the downturn but not the steady state of the model
to match four empirical moments of the national housing downturn. These parameters are
the constant scaling the liquidity shocks C , the size of the decline in housing valuations
af rac , the fraction of losses covered by raising private capital during the crisis E , and the
date TE that equity markets fully re-open. We target four moments: The peak-to-trough
decline in the housing price index, the peak-to-trough decline in non-distressed transaction
volume, the average REO share between 2006 and 2013, and the total number of foreclosures
between 2006 and 2013.19
     To solve the model, we discretize the possible mortgage balances using an equally spaced
grid with 51 grid points. Further numerical details as well as the full system of equations that
result from this discretization are provided in the appendix. We do a good job matching the
target moments, with no moment more than 0.2 percent from its target value. The resulting
parameter values of the calibration are reported in Table 4. The 24.75 percent fall in a       ¯
implies that prices fall permanently by 11.91 percent nationally due to the valuation shock.
  19
     The moments are jointly determined, but each moment is principally controlled by a single parameter.
C determines the total number of foreclosures, TE the average REO share given the number of foreclosures,
af rac the price decline, and E the volume decline.


                                                   23
3.5     Simulating the Cross-Section of Downturns
To further evaluate the performance of our model, we consider its ability to match cross-
sectional variation in the severity of the crisis across metropolitan areas. To do so, we
simulate a separate housing downturn in each of the 100 largest CBSAs. We assume that
each CBSA is a closed system, with a housing market described by Sections 2.1 and 2.2.20
We furthermore assume that there is a national representative lender. This is a good ap-
proximation to the fact that most loans are made by lenders with wide geographic coverage
and most loans that are securitized are pooled geographically.21 This implies that the path
for Pt is the same for each CBSA and is calculated from from the national downturn.
    We allow for cities to dier in the the size of the permanent price drop, the magnitude of
liquidity shocks, and the initial loan balance distribution. We focus on these three dimensions
of heterogeneity because the size of the preceding price run-up is the single best predictor of
the size of the ensuing downturn as described in Section 1, because cities varied dramatically
in their unemployment rate in the Great Recession, and because the loan balance distribution
is critical to the strength of the price-foreclosure feedback in our model. The empirical loan
balance distribution comes from proprietary estimates by CoreLogic, who report quantiles of
the combined loan-to-value distribution for active mortgages in 2006 computed from public
records and CoreLogic's valuation models.22 We allocate mass to finer loan balance bins
in the model within each quantile equally as described in the appendix. We incorporate
heterogeneity in the magnitude of liquidity shocks by letting the path of liquidity shocks in
                           max U nempc
city c be c t = C U nempt max U nemp , where C is from the national calibration, U nempt is the
                                                            U nempc
national long-rune unemployment time series, and max     max U nemp
                                                                    is the ratio of the maximum
long-run unemployment rate in city c to the national long-run unemployment rate.23 The
permanent shock to home valuations af rac is chosen to generate a price decline proportional
to the log price gain from 2003 to 2006:

                             log ppermanent =     1 ( log p2003    2006   0 ) .                      (21)

0 is an intercept term chosen so that             log ppermanent matches the af rac in the national
  20
     This assumption of a closed system implies that we neglect migration between CBSAs. Modeling mi-
gration between CBSAs would greatly complicate the analysis and add little in terms of insights.
  21
     While one could try to model several lenders with dierent market shares in dierent cities, this would
introduce tremendous complexity into the model without substantial added value.
  22
     Because our model concerns the entire owner-occupied housing stock and not just houses with an active
mortgage, we supplement the CoreLogic data with the Census' estimates of the fraction of owner-occupied
houses with a mortgage from the 2005-2007 American Community Surveys.
  23
     We take this approach this rather than using the time series of U nempC directly because the BLS does
not produce city-level long-run unemployment time series that are reliable at a high frequency.



                                                   24
calibration and 1 is a slope term.24 The limited amount of heterogeneity between cities
creates a stringent test for the ability of our model to match the cross-sectional empirical
patters of the housing crisis.
    1 is chosen to minimize the sum of squared dierences between the model and the data
for the peak-to-trough log aggregate price decline for each metropolitan area. We start each
CBSA in the initial steady state and calculate the perfect foresight impulse response given
the initial loan balance distribution, the time path of the national lender's pre-approval
probability Pt , the city-specific time path of liquidity shocks c
                                                                 t , and the city-specific a
                                                                                             f rac

calculated to satisfy (21). This yields a unique optimum of 0 = 0.113 and 1 = 0.456. This
implies that if a city has a larger boom than the national average, roughly half of that boom
relative to the national average is permanently lost when the bust hits. We return to the
cross-sectional calibration in Section 5.


4      Decomposing the Eects of Foreclosures
4.1     Downturn Dynamics
Figure 4 illustrates the model dynamics for the national downturn. As shown in panel A,
at the time of the shock, prices fall considerably for both REO and non-distressed sales and
gradually return to steady state as the liquidity shocks dissipate. The aggregate price index
dips more than the non-distressed price index since REO sales trade at a discount. This
discount widens in the crisis, consistent with evidence from Campbell et al. (2011). Panel B
shows that sales fall on the impact of the shock and continue to fall substantially as REOs
become prevalent in the market. Panel C shows the decline in market tightness over the
crisis, and Panel D shows the dynamics of foreclosures. The largest dierence between the
model and the data is that the model does not feature price momentum (Guren, 2018), so
prices fall immediately on the impact of the shocks rather than gradually.


4.2     Forces Aecting Prices and Sales in a Downturn
There are three main forces through which default aects the non-distressed market in our
model: a lender rationing eect, a foreclosure flag eect, and a choosey buyer eect. In this
subsection, we describe the intuition and qualitative impact of each eect before quantifying
their respective contributions.
  24
    A handful of cities with small booms from 2003 to 2006 have a small permanent increase in their long-
term price level under this formulation. Our results are not sensitive to capping log ppermanent at zero for
these cities.


                                                    25
                                                           Figure 4: Dynamics of National Downturn
                                                           A: Average Price by Type                                                                           B: Sales by Type
                                                   1.1                                                                                            1.2




                                                                                                                 Sales Index (Steady State = 1)
                  Price Index (steady state = 1)
                                                                                      Total                                                                            Total
                                                    1                                 REO                                                          1                   REO
                                                                                      Retail                                                                           Retail
                                                   0.9                                                                                            0.8

                                                   0.8                                                                                            0.6

                                                   0.7                                                                                            0.4

                                                   0.6                                                                                            0.2

                                                   0.5                                                                                             0
                                                      -1   0         1            2    3                                                            -1   0         1            2   3
                                                                   Time (Years)                                                                                  Time (Years)




                                                                                               Annualized % Of Owner-Occupied Stock
                                                               C: Market Tightness                                                                           D: Foreclosure Rate
                                                   1.2                                                                                  0.05
                  Ratio of Buyers to Sellers




                                                                                                                                        0.04
                                                    1

                                                                                                                                        0.03
                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                        0.02

                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                        0.01


                                                   0.4                                                                                             0
                                                      -1   0         1            2    3                                                            -1   0         1            2   3
                                                                   Time (Years)                                                                                 Time (Years)
Note: This figure shows the results of the calibrated national model . Panels A and B show the average price
and sales by type, with pre-downturn price and volume normalized to 1. Panel C shows market tightness.
Panel D shows the annualized fraction of the owner occupied housing stock that is foreclosed upon at each
point in time.


    First, there is a foreclosure flag eect. When a homeowner defaults, the lender sells the
property as an REO, but the homeowner has a foreclosure flag on her credit record and is
locked out of the housing market for a time until the flag is cleared. The foreclosure process
thus creates listings immediately, but the corresponding demand only arrives with a delay.
    Second, there is a lender rationing eect. Default leads to declines in lender equity.
Lenders ration mortgage credit because they are temporarily unable to raise equity and would
violate their capital constraint if they were to fully meet the demand for new mortgages by
issuing debt. Mortgage rationing causes some homeowners who sell their house to delay their
next purchase because they cannot secure financing. This too creates immediate listings,
but the corresponding buyers only arrive with a delay as the lenders gradually recapitalize
and households re-apply for financing.25
    By creating an imbalance between the number of sellers and the number of buyers op-
erating in the housing market, both the foreclosure flag and lender rationing eects reduce
market tightness t . The reduction in market tightness is partially oset by sellers who
convert their owner-occupied house to rental space, which is required to meet the increased
  25
     See Paixao (2019) for empirical evidence that house price declines aected credit supply through bank
balance sheets in the housing bust.


                                                                                           26
rental demand by foreclosed-upon households and households unable to secure financing.
The fall in market tightness decreases the probability a seller meets a buyer, which in turn
incentivizes sellers to transact faster, weakening their bargaining position and leading to
lower prices. This incentive to sell is stronger for REO sellers who have a higher opportunity
cost of not meeting a buyer, causing the REO discount to grow. Conversely, buyers are more
willing to walk away from a deal, strengthening their bargaining position, which also leads
to declines in price. Because the reduction in market tightness pushes down non-distressed
prices, it pushes more homeowners underwater and leads to increased default, which leads
to further rationing and foreclosure flag eects through a price-default spiral.
    The third way that the non-distressed market is aected by default is a choosey buyer
eect. Since REO sales trade at a discount, the presence of distressed sales increase the
buyer's outside option to transacting, which is resampling from the distribution of sellers
next period. This choosey buyer eect causes infra-marginal buyers to walk away from non-
REO listings. This reduces non-distressed transaction volume and causes buyers to negotiate
a lower price when they do transact. The choosey buyer eect is reinforced by the foreclosure
flag eect and lender rationing eect. Both push down market tightness which has a bigger
eect on the value functions of REO sellers and increases the REO discount. This in turn
sweetens the prospect of being matched with an REO seller next period, amplifying the
choosey buyer eect.
    The choosey buyer eect is new to the literature and formalizes folk wisdom in housing
markets that foreclosures empower buyers and cause them to wait for a particularly favorable
transaction.26 We expect that choosey buyer eects arise in other frictional asset markets
with idiosyncratic valuations.
    Finally, there are two other eects at work in our model that aect aggregates that are
averages of the distressed and non-distressed markets. First, there is a lock-in eect. In
the absence of liquidity shocks ­ and thus the absence of default ­ the permanent decline in
housing valuations places some households underwater. These households are then locked
  26
    For instance, The New York Times reported that "before the recession, people simply looked for a house
to buy...now they are on a quest for perfection at the perfect price," with one real estate agent adding that
"this is the fallout from all the foreclosures: buyers think that anyone who is selling must be desperate. They
walk in with the bravado of, `The world's coming to an end, and I want a perfect place'" ("Housing Market
Slows as Buyers Get Picky" June 16, 2010). The Wall Street Journal provides similar anecdotal evidence,
writing that price declines "have left many sellers unable or unwilling to lower their prices. Meanwhile,
buyers remain gun shy about agreeing to any purchase without getting a deep discount. That dynamic
has fueled buyers' appetites for bank-owned foreclosures" ("Buyer's Market? Stressed Sellers Say Not So
Fast" April 25, 2011). Albrecht et al. (2007) introduce motivated sellers into a search model, but focus
on steady-state matching patterns (e.g. whether a high type buyer can match with a low type seller) and
asymmetric information regarding seller type. Du e et al. (2007) consider a liquidity shock similar to our
foreclosure shock, but a transaction occurs whenever an illiquid owner meets a liquid buyer, so their model
does not have a choosey buyer eect.


                                                      27
                       Table 5: Decomposition of Eects in National Model
             Statistic                        No Liquidity        No Rationing,              No          Full
 (Peak to Trough Unless Indicated)              Shocks          No Choosey Buyer          Rationing     Model
            Price Index                         40.57%               71.49%                72.88%       100%
    Non-Distressed Price Index                  51.96%               74.19%                77.40%       100%
   Non-Distressed Sales Volume                  22.71%               51.86%                56.43%       100%
        Average REO Share                         0%                 61.52%                62.75%       100%
         Total Foreclosures                       0%                 76.84%                77.76%       100%
Note: Each cell indicates the fraction of the full model accounted for each column's model relative to the full
model. No rationing turns o the lender rationing eect by setting Pt = 1 . No rationing and no choosey
buyer additionally turns o the choosey buyer eect by altering the buyer's value function so she does not
take into account the possibility of meeting an REO seller, which leaves only the foreclosure flag eect. No
default turns o all of the eects and entirely eliminates default.


into their current house until they pay down their mortgage enough to become above water.
This lock-in eect has a minimal impact on prices but does lower sales volume. Second,
there is a compositional eect. A greater share of REO sales makes the average sale look
more like an REO, which sells faster and at a lower price both in and out of steady state.
This aects sales-weighted averages such as total sales and the aggregate price index.


4.3     Quantitative Decomposition of Eects
To quantify the relative contributions of each force, we introduce them one by one. We first
simulate a housing crisis in which we shut down default completely by eliminating liquidity
shocks, so the only eects are the initial housing valuation shock and lock-in. We then
simulate a crisis where we shut down both the lender rationing eect by assuming lenders
can costlessly raise equity and the choosey buyer eect by assuming the the buyer's value
function does not take into account the possibility of meeting a REO seller. This leaves only
the foreclosure flag eect. We then reintroduce the choosey buyer eect but continue to shut
down the lender rationing eect.
    Table 5 shows the fraction of the decrease in various measures of prices, sales, and foreclo-
sures in the full nation-wide model accounted for by each model. Our preferred measure of
the extent to which foreclosures exacerbate housing downturns is the decline in non-distressed
prices because it does not include compositional eects and is a direct measure of foreclosure
spillovers. Table 5 reports that the model without any default account explains 51.96% of
the peak-to-trough decline in non-distressed prices. The foreclosure flag eect explains an
additional 22.23%, and the choosey buyer eect explains an additional 3.21%. The impact
of the choosey buyer eect is significantly larger in the hardest hit CBSAs where the REO
share was much higher. Finally, lender rationing explains the remaining 22.60%. Note that

                                                      28
lender rationing plays a particularly large role in explaining the decline in sales volume.
Indeed, to jointly match the substantial price and volume declines in the data, our model
requires a significant lender rationing channel. Overall, our quantitative results suggest that
accounting for default is crucial to understanding the dynamics of the housing bust.
    These eects are substantially larger than the spillover eects of foreclosures estimated
by microeconometric studies that cannot account for the general equilibrium eects of fore-
closure at the search market level or the eects of foreclosures on lender balance sheets (e.g.
Campbell et al., 2011; Gerardi et al., 2015; Anenberg and Kung, 2014). An exception is
Mian et al. (2014), who find much larger eects using more macro variation arising from
dierences in foreclosure policies at state lines, which is consistent with our finding of a
substantial search-market-level eect.


4.4    Robustness
In the appendix we present calibration robustness checks to show that our results are robust
to some of our assumed parameter values, in particular r , , and  . There is some dispersion
in the strength of the various eects across calibrations, but generally the lender rationing
eect accounts for between 20 and 25 percent of the overall decline in non-distressed prices,
the choosey buyer eect accounts for approximately three percent, and the foreclosure flag
eect accounts for 20 to 25 percent of the decline. In all cases, there are important spillovers
from foreclosures to the non-distressed market, principally through the foreclosure flag and
lender rationing channels.
    The appendix also reports results for four alternate models. First, we show that a model
without the lender rationing fails to account for the decline in sales in the data. Second,
we show that a model in which there is some foreclosure delay can still fit the data quite
well. Third, we show that a model in which positive-equity homeowners who experience
an liquidity shock are forced to sell does reasonably well matching the cross-section but
overstates the amount of conversion to rental relative to the data. Finally, we show that we
obtain similar results with an alternate parameterization for private equity injections.


5     Cross-City Quantitative Analysis
To provide further support for our structural model and calibration, we now assess whether
our model with a limited amount of heterogeneity can account for dierences in the downturn
across cities. We then illustrate the importance of default and foreclosure in explaining the
downturn by showing that our model does a better job at matching the cross-sectional


                                              29
                                                                  Figure 5: Cross-CBSA Simulations vs. Data
                                                                 A: Max Change in Price Index                                                                B: Total Foreclosures
                                                 0                                                                                       0.35

                                               -0.1
                                                                                                                                          0.3
                                               -0.2
               Max Change in Log Price, Data
                                                                                                                                         0.25




                                                                                                             Fraction Foreclosed, Data
                                               -0.3

                                               -0.4
                                                                                                                                          0.2

                                               -0.5

                                                                                                                                         0.15
                                               -0.6

                                               -0.7                                                                                       0.1

                                               -0.8
                                                                                                                                         0.05
                                               -0.9

                                                -1                                                                                         0
                                                     -1   -0.8          -0.6        -0.4          -0.2   0                                      0   0.05      0.1       0.15         0.2   0.25
                                                                 Max Change in Log Price, Model                                                            Fraction Foreclosed, Model


Note: Each panel shows scatter plots of data vs simulation results for 96 CBSAs in regression analysis. The
red X represents the national simulation and each black dot is a CBSA. The 45-degree line illustrates a
perfect match between the model and the data. The variable being plotted shown in each plot's title. The
data is described in the appendix. The calibration methodology, which fits the cross-cities model only to the
aggregate price decline in panel A, is described in text. The price decline is the maximum peak-to-trough
change, while the fraction foreclosed which is the total from 2006 to 2013.


moments described in Section 1 than a model without default.


5.1     Cross-Sectional Model Fit
Figure 5 plots our simulated results from the baseline model against actual data for 96 CBSAs
(black dots) and the national model (red X). Panel A shows the maximum log change in
aggregate prices, which is used in the calibration of 1 . The model fits well, with the data
points clustering around the 45-degree line across the spectrum of price declines. Indeed,
when we regress the simulated data on the actual data we get a coe cient of 1.005, and we
cannot statistically reject a coe cient of one and an intercept of zero. Panel B shows the
fraction of the housing stock foreclosed upon over eight years. This is a moment used in the
national calibration, so the national model is fits almost exactly, but it is not a target for
the cross-section. Nonetheless, when we regress the simulated data on the real data, we get
a coe cient of .992 and we cannot reject a coe cient of one and an intercept of zero. The
limited heterogeneity in our model thus does a good job capturing the variation in default
across cities.27
  27
    The appendix presents a calibration where we do not include heterogeneity in the liquidity shock series
by CBSA. The model qualitatively has fits many of the features described in this section but does not
quantitatively fit quite as well: if we regress the log change in the aggregate price index in the model on
the corresponding data, we get an r-squared of 0.667 rather than 0.736. The model fits better with the
unemployment heterogeneity because of a few hard-hit CBSAs like Las Vegas.



                                                                                                         30
                       Table 6: Cross-CBSA Simulations vs. Data
                                                Mean REO       %        %
             Variable      log P     log (Pnd )   Share    Foreclose Convert
           Reg Coef of    1.005       1.389      0.8283      0.992    0.434
          Data on Model (0.063)      (0.087)     (0.090)    (0.069)  (0.055)
               R2         0.736       0.734       0.482      0.695    0.419
Note: Each column shows a comparison of the model and data for the given variable. The comparisons
show the slope term of a regression of the actual data on the model simulated data. Standard errors are in
parenthesis.


    Table 6 summarizes the model fit for the national prices and foreclosures as well as three
other metrics: the decline in non-distressed prices, the mean REO share, and a proxy for
the share of the owner-occupied housing stock converted to rentals. For each outcome, we
report the coe cient and r-squared we obtain when we regress the simulated data on the
actual data. The coe cient is somewhat too high for non-distressed prices because the model
under-predicts the decline in non-distressed prices in the hardest hit CBSAs. However, the
non-distressed price index in these CBSAs indicates a declining foreclosure discount, which
is inconsistent with the literature and suggests that these indices are biased downward by
negative quality selection on the non-distressed houses that sell in the hardest-hit CSBAs.
The model does well with REO share, although the coe cient is a bit too low because the
model under-predicts the sales decline in the least-hit CBSAs. In the data, even cities with
no price decline exhibited a significant volume decline. The volume decline from the decrease
in national pre-approvals is not enough to fully match the volume decline in these cities.
    The last column provides an additional out-of-sample test by comparing the maximum
share of owner-occupied homes converted to rental homes in the model to approximate
figures for 2006 to 2013 described in the appendix. This is important because if the model
dramatically under-predicts the number of conversions, the change in market tightness in the
bust will be too strong and the model will ascribe too much of the downturn to foreclosures.
The model predicts that at the peak level of conversion, 7.38 percent of the owner-occupied
housing stock is converted to rentals nationally relative to 4.35 percent in the data. Across
cities, there is a positive correlation between the model and the data despite a considerable
amount of noise due to the data we use for conversion being a crude proxy. The amount of
endogenous conversion in our model is thus of the right order of magnitude.


5.2     Comparison With No Default Model
We now ask how well our model can account for cross-sectional variation in the data relative
to a model with no default. To do so, we compare our model to a model with no liquidity

                                                   31
                                                   Figure 6: Boom vs. Bust in Baseline and No Default Models
                                                                   A. Baseline Model                                                                               B. Model With No Default
                                                    0                                                                                                   0
                                                                                   Baseline Model                                                                       No Default
                                                                                   Quadratic Fit, Baseline                                                              Quadratic Fit, No Default
                                                  -0.1                                                                                                -0.1
                                                                                   Quadratic Fit, Data                                                                  Quadratic Fit, Data

                                                  -0.2                                                                                                -0.2

               Change Log Price, Peak To Trough




                                                                                                                   Change Log Price, Peak To Trough
                                                  -0.3                                                                                                -0.3

                                                  -0.4                                                                                                -0.4

                                                  -0.5                                                                                                -0.5

                                                  -0.6                                                                                                -0.6

                                                  -0.7                                                                                                -0.7

                                                  -0.8                                                                                                -0.8

                                                  -0.9                                                                                                -0.9

                                                   -1                                                                                                  -1
                                                         0   0.2          0.4           0.6                  0.8                                             0   0.2          0.4               0.6   0.8
                                                             Change Log Price, 2003-2006                                                                         Change Log Price, 2003-2006


Note: The left panel shows the size of the boom vs. the model simulated data for the baseline calibrated
model with default, while the right panel shows the same plot for the no default model. The black solid
line is a best quadratic fit. The red dashed line shows the best quadratic fit to the actual data. For the no
default model, 1 = 0.844.


shocks and thus no default or foreclosures. We calibrate the model to match the national
price decline and optimally choose 1 using equation (21) as before to give the no-default
model the best possible opportunity to match the data.
     Figure 6 replicates Figure 3 and plots the size of the bust against the size of the boom
using model simulations for the baseline and no default models rather than the raw data.
The solid black line shows the best quadratic fit to the model simulated data, while the red
dashed line shows the best quadratic fit to the actual data as in Figure 3.
     The baseline model quantitatively captures the non-log-linearity in the size of the bust
relative to the size of the boom in the data: The solid black and dashed red lines are close to
each other and have similar curvature. Furthermore, moving from a linear fit to a quadratic
fit in the simulated data increases the r-squared from 0.78 to 0.85, relative to 0.62 to 0.68
in the actual data. By contrast, the model without default is nearly linear in the size of the
bust relative to the size of the boom and adding a quadratic term does little to improve the
fit, with the r-squared rising from 0.990 to only 0.994. This is because essentially all of the
price decline comes from the permanent decrease in prices that is proportional to the boom.
Consequently, the model fit for price is much better in both the hardest and least hardest
hit ares in the model with default relative to the model without default. A final measure
of fit is the mean squared error for the aggregate price index. Without default, the mean
squared error is 0.0166, while with default this falls to 0.0135.
     To further explore the improvement in fit, Table 7 reports the interaction term from
regression (1) from Table 1 using simulated outcomes from the baseline and no default

                                                                                                              32
        Table 7: Model vs. Data: Interaction of Size of Boom With High LTV Share
       log (P)  Z LTV > 80%            log (P)       log (Pnd )   Mean REO Share % Foreclosed
              Baseline                -0.396         -0.140            0.307        0.167
                                    (.034)***     (0.013)***        (0.029)***    (.014)***
            No Default                 -.102          -.102              0            0
                                    (.004)***      (.004)***
               Data                   -0.310         -0.336              0.205                0.235
                                    (0.123)**     (0.113)***          (0.075)***           (0.054)***
Notes: * = 10% Significance, ** = 5% Significance *** = 1% significance. All standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity. Each column shows estimates of (1) with the constant suppressed. Pnd is a non-distressed
only price index. The mean REO share of sales volume is the average from 2008 to 2012, and the fraction
foreclosed is the fraction of the housing stock foreclosed upon over the first 8 years of the downturn. All
data is from CoreLogic and described in the appendix.


models. The model does qualitatively well. The no default model has a negative interaction
for price due to lock in, but the coe cient is too small relative to the data. The baseline model
with default, by contrast, does a better job of matching the data, although the interaction
is a too strong for regular prices and too weak for non-distressed prices.
    Overall, we conclude that including default is crucial for models to match cross-sectional
moments from the recent housing bust.


6      Foreclosure Policy
A number of foreclosure mitigation policies have been proposed to reduce the severity of a
housing crisis. In this section, we use our calibrated model to perform a quantitative study
of the positive eects of several dierent interventions, focusing on their eects on house
prices declines and foreclosure rates. We begin by evaluating the eects of interventions at
the local local level, that is in one city holding national credit conditions fixed, and then
move on to to evaluating the eects of national government policy interventions that allow
credit conditions to be endogenous.
    Before examining the policies, there are some important limitations to our policy analysis
that the reader should keep in mind. First, since we do not fully model household consump-
tion and the household costs of default, we are unable to make quantitative statements about
welfare.28 Second, while we compute the dollar costs to the government of various types of
  28
    In practice, default and foreclosure can have significant welfare eects that are outside the scope of
our model. For example, defaulting is costly for households. Foreclosures have significant non-pecuniary
costs and lead to worse outcomes for children (Diamond et al., 2019), , adversely aect future employment
outcomes (Brevoort and Cooper, 2013) and carry a significant cost of social stigma (Guiso et al., 2013).
Furthermore, default and foreclosure amplify price declines in our model, and these declines in housing


                                                    33
policy interventions, we do not model the means by which the government finances the ex-
penditure, which may involve distortionary taxation or borrowing that aects equilibrium
interest rates. Nonetheless, we are able to give clear intuitions on the positive eects of
various government interventions and make clear, quantitative statements about the cost-
eectiveness of various types of foreclosure policies in terms of mitigating a price-default
spiral.


6.1     Limiting Foreclosure Completions
We begin our policy analysis by considering the impact of slowing down the rate of foreclo-
sure completions, which was a policy intervention hotly debated during the housing crisis.
Proponents argued that this policy could be implemented quickly and at a low cost relative
to other government interventions. However, this policy also had its detractors. For exam-
ple, during the 2012 Presidential campaign, Mitt Romney proposed removing legal barriers
to foreclosure completion to get the economic damage over with rather than slowing them
down to prolong things.
    Since most of the variation in foreclosure timelines is at the the state or municipal level,
we consider the local impact of slowing down the rate of foreclosure in a single city, taking
national lender balance sheets as given. That is, we hold Pt fixed for this policy only. To
incorporate the policy into our model, we continue to assume that homeowners becomes
delinquent at the rate t . However, we now further assume that a maximum of the housing
stock can be foreclosed upon each week due to institutional or legal constraints. In particular,
we set to half of the maximum rate of foreclosure completions in the baseline model, which
corresponds to limiting the total number of foreclosures to 2.20% of the total local housing
stock in a given year.29
    Limiting foreclosure completions results in an equilibrium backlog of foreclosure starts
waiting to be completed during the crisis. We assume that homeowners in the backlog are
randomly processed. Finally, due to the lag, homeowners who are delinquent but who have
not been foreclosed upon have the opportunity to "cure" out of foreclosure by becoming
current on their loan, which we assume occurs to underwater homeowners each period with
probability ! . This allows us to evaluate how the eectiveness of the policy depends on the
rate at which homeowners recover from a liquidity shock such as a long-term unemployment
prices can have their own welfare impacts by impeding borrowing by households and firms (Iacoviello, 2005;
Chaney et al., 2012; Adelino et al. 2015) and through aggregate demand eects (Mian and Sufi, 2011; Mian
and Sufi, 2014).
  29
     Note that capping the total number of foreclosure completions allowed in a given period is just one way
to implement a slowing down policy. Alternatively, one could simply assume that foreclosure completions
occur at some rate f . We have explored this policy and find similar qualitative and quantitative results.


                                                    34
                         Table 8: Eects of Limiting Foreclosure Completions
                            !                   log Pagg      log Pnd    Total Foreclosures
                  Baseline (No Policy)         -0.388        -0.289            8.37%
                            0                  -0.363        -0.301            9.24%
                       1/(352)                 -0.339        -0.281            7.38%
                       1/(252)                 -0.335        -0.278            7.05%
                       1/(152)                 -0.329        -0.273            6.53%
Notes: The table shows the peak-to-trough decline in log aggregate prices, log non-distressed prices, and the
total foreclosures from 2006 to 2013 under each policy. All policies are fore a local intervention that does
not aect the representative lender's balance sheet.


spell. Homeowners also cure if prices rise to the point that they have positive equity, in
which case they can sell their house.
    Our results are reported in Table 8. We first consider the case in which homeowners
never cure from their liquidity shock, so ! = 0. In this case, slowing down foreclosures is
actually mildly counterproductive. While there is a 6.44% smaller decline in the aggregate
price index, this is purely a compositional eect, and the non-distressed price index actually
falls by 4.15% more.
    To understand why slowing down foreclosures makes non-distressed price declines larger,
recall that the non-distressed average price p    ¯n
                                                   t is a constant markup over the seller's value
function Vtn . By equation (6), the seller's value function is equivalent to holding a financial
perpetuity which costs mn each period but pays out / each period with time-varying
probability equal to the probability that a seller transacts with a buyer. A policy of slowing
down foreclosures leads to two competing forces on the value of this claim. First, in any given
period, the policy reduces the imbalance between the number of buyers and sellers, leading
to a smaller peak-to-trough decline in the equilibrium probability of a seller transacting.
However, the policy also delays the recovery, so that the decline in the seller's probability of
sale lasts longer. In our baseline calibration, the latter eect weakly dominates, leading to
lower prices, and ultimately more default. Because of the lengthened crisis, few homeowners
cure by coming above water. The relative strength of the these two forces is a numerical
result and depends on our calibration.30
    When homeowners exogenously cure (! > 0), slowing down the pace of foreclosures can
reduce the the severity of the crisis if ! is high enough because since some homeowners recover
before they are foreclosed upon, leading to a smaller price-default spiral. Quantitatively, if
! = 1/(2  52) so that homeowners cure on average after two years, halving the maximum
flow of foreclosures reduces the non-distressed price decline by 3.81%. If ! = 1/52, the same
  30
       For example, if sellers discount the future by more, then the first eect can dominate.


                                                       35
policy reduces the non-distressed price decline by 5.54%. Given the evidence of long-term
scarring for displaced workers in the labor literature, ! is likely low in practice. However,
our results suggest that if policy makers expect a quick recovery either in the labor market
or in house prices, slowing down foreclosures may be modestly eective.


6.2     Government Cash or Equity Injections
We now turn our attention to three policy interventions implemented at the national level
which can aect lender balance sheets and once again let the pre-approval probability Pt be
endogneous.
    The first policy we consider is an additional government equity injection into the financial
sector. Our baseline calibration has such an intervention already built into it to reflect the
25% bailout of lenders losses during the crisis by the Federal government. We begin our
analysis by considering the impact of larger government bailouts of financial institutions.
Specifically, we consider the impact of cash injections equal to 30%, 40%, and 50% of of
bank losses
    The results from this policy experiment are reported in the first three rows of Table 9.
The baseline calibration with a cash injection of 25% of banking sector losses leads to a non-
distressed price index log decline of -0.289 and a foreclosure rate of 8.34%. The present-value
cost to the government is $1,584, calculated on a per household basis.31 32 A 30% injection
of cash as a percentage of losses results in a 10.67% smaller non-distressed price decline and
a 8.39% reduction in the number of foreclosures and costs $1,619 per household. A 40%
injection of cash as a percentage of losses results in a 20.52% smaller non-distressed price
decline and a 17.07% reduction in the number of foreclosures and costs $1,819 per household.
A 50% injection of cash as a percentage of losses results in a 23.88% smaller price decline
and a 19.30% reduction in foreclosures. It costs $2,175 per household.
    Additional government bailouts of the financial sector ameliorate the impact of the hous-
ing crisis by increasing lender equity and thus reducing the amount by which the repre-
sentative lender has to ration pre-approvals, a force which accounts for 22.6 percent of the
decline in non-distressed prices. This reduced rationing has a direct eect on market tight-
ness and drives up non-distressed prices, which brings some households above water, reduces
default, and undoes some of the price-default spiral. The eect of additional equity injec-
tions is strong because the 10% capital requirement implies that for each 1% increase in
  31
    Formulae for the cost to the government of each policy can be found in the appendix.
  32
    These figures reflect the cost of a cash bailout. A better policy is likely to purchase preferred stock.
Since the lender does not default along the perfect foresight equilibrium path, this constitutes a riskless
investment on the part of the government.



                                                    36
                                  Table 9: National Policy Interventions
                 Policy                                  log Pnd    Total Foreclosures      Per-Household Cost
        Baseline (25% Bailout)                          -0.289            8.34%                   $1,584
              30% Bailout                               -0.258            7.64%                   $1,619
              40% Bailout                               -0.230            6.92%                   $1,819
              50% Bailout                               -0.220            6.73%                   $2,175
 25% Bailout, $5K Principal Reduction                   -0.272            7.59%                   $1,782
 25% Bailout, $10K Principal Reduction                  -0.259            6.98%                   $1,917
        25% Bailout, g = 1/52                           -0.159            4.98%                   $2,150
Notes: The table shows the peak-to-trough decline in log non-distressed prices, the total foreclosures from
2006 to 2013, and per-household costs to the government. The intervention is a national intervention that
aects the representative lender's balance sheet. The policy is as indicated, and formulae for computing the
per-household cost are in the appendix.


bank equity, the bank can increase the size of the balance sheet by 10%.33


6.3        Mortgage Modification
The next policy we consider is principal reduction, which was implemented as part of the
Home Aordable Modification (HAMP) PRA program. This program financed principal for-
giveness for homeowners, with the principal reduction capped at the point where the LTV
ratio reached 115%. Using a regression discontinuity design, Ganong and Noel (2019a) doc-
ument that, controlling for payment reduction, HAMP principal reductions for underwater
homeowners had no eect on the short-run incidence of default. Scharlemann and Shore
(2016) report similar results using a regression kink design.
    To keep our analysis in line with the actual HAMP program, which only reduced principal
up to the point where LTV ratios reached 115%, we consider a policy which oers principal
forgiveness of dollars or until 115% LTV is reached (whichever is less) to all homeowners
with LTV ratios exceeding 115% at the onset of the crisis. We assume that the government
pays the residual principal and interest payments to the bank throughout the life of the
loan, so the bank does not incur any losses on its balance sheet. To isolate the impact of
the principal reduction, we assume that incidence of the liquidity shocks remains constant.
Finally, we again consider this policy as incremental, taking the baseline 25% lender bailout
as given.
    The quantitative results for principal reduction are in the fourth and fifth rows of Table
9. Relative to a baseline with no principal reduction, $5,000 principal reduction up to a
115% LTV cap lowers the price decline by 5.83% and the incidence of foreclosure by 9.04%
  33
       Note that higher levels of private equity injections during the crisis would have similar eects.



                                                        37
and has a total cost of $1,782 per household. $10,000 principal reduction up to a 115% LTV
cap lowers the price decline by 10.47% and the incidence of default by 16.35% and has a
total cost of $1,917 per household.
    The first result to note about principal reduction is that it can be eective at mitigat-
ing price declines and foreclosures. At first blush, this may seem to contradict to micro-
econometric studies like Ganong and Noel (2019a) and Scharlemann and Shore (2016) who
find that HAMP principal forgiveness had no eect on default at the margin. However, if
we were to compare underwater households who receive principal reduction to those who
do not in our model, we would also find no dierence in short-run default rates, since the
policy does not bring households above water. Our model is thus entirely consistent with
their micro findings.
    The eectiveness of principal reductions is instead due to two equilibrium eects that
are absorbed into a constant or fixed eect in micro-econometric studies. First, the policy
aects default in the future because more households are above water than otherwise would
be as prices rise.. As agents are forward-looking, the reduction in future default feeds back
into a smaller price decline at the start of the crisis. Second, principal reductions act as an
indirect bailout to lenders, as households that receive a liquidity shock and default have a
smaller principal balance than they otherwise would have. Our equilibrium model suggests
that micro studies on the impact of principal forgiveness like Ganong and Noel (2019a)
and Scharlemann and Shore (2016) may understate the full impact of programs like HAMP
because they cannot account for the equilibrium impacts of the policy.
    The second result to note about principal reduction is that it is less cost eective than
the other policies we consider, as shown in Table 9. This is because principal forgiveness
is imperfectly targeted. Intuitively, the government cannot tell who will receive a liquidity
shock in the future and thus gives principal reduction to all households with su ciently
high LTV, which drives up the cost of the policy relative to a policy that targets households
conditional on default. The other two policies are better-targeted because they condition on
default: Equity injections cover a fraction of lender losses due to default, and government
purchases of distressed homes only occur in the event of a foreclosure. These policies thus
do not spend money to mitigate foreclosures that may not occur, while principal reduction
does.


6.4    Government Purchase of Distressed Houses
The final policy intervention we consider is a government facility to purchase distressed homes
and then slowly re-introduce them to the market. In our model, foreclosures create listings


                                              38
today but potential buyers are locked out of the market, which puts downward pressure on
prices. Slowing down the rate at which foreclosed properties are listed on the market for sale
could address this dynamic imbalance between supply and demand and lead to smaller price
declines and less default. This does not occur in equilibrium because competitive lenders do
not internalize the fact that by listing a property today they are creating more foreclosures
and lowering the price they can command for a foreclosure. This externality creates scope
for government intervention.
    We implement such an intervention within our model by assuming that the government
sets up a facility to purchase distressed homes at the price of Vtd so that lenders are indierent
between listing the property for sale and selling it to the government. The government then
re-introduces REOs into the market at the rate g . While the house is o the market, the
government pays per-period costs of md while keeping the home of the market, which makes
sense because as with lenders selling a foreclosure, the fact that the house is vacant implies
increased depreciation and thus higher maintenance costs. When a house is re-introduced
by the government back into the market at time T, the government sells the house to a
market-maker at a price VTd .
    Our results are reported in the final row of table Table 9. The policy is highly eective:
A rate of g = 1/52, corresponding to keeping the house o the market for an average of 1
year, leads to a 44.8% smaller national price decline and a 40.3% reduction in the number of
foreclosures. The total cost to the government is $2,150 per household. By contrast, Table
9 shows that a 50% lender bailout costs the government $2,175 per household but delivers
significantly smaller reductions in default and non-distressed prices. The policy is thus quite
cost-eective, even accounting for the government's high maintenance costs when they hold
homes o the market.
    The reason this policy intervention is highly eective is that it mitigates both the fore-
closure flag and lender rationing channels discussed in Section 4.34 It clearly mitigates the
foreclosure flag eect by directly addressing the dynamic imbalance of demand and supply
created by the foreclosure process, as described above. The lender rationing channel is also
weakened because of the interaction between the foreclosure flag and lender rationing ef-
fects: By weakening the foreclosure flag eect, there is less default and smaller bank losses,
which then mitigates the credit rationing by banks. The total result is significantly less
amplification during the crisis and a far smaller price-default spiral.
  34
    Recall that, even in the absence of any lender rationing, the foreclosure flag eect itself accounts for
22.2% of the total price decline.




                                                    39
7     Conclusion
This paper uses a structural analysis to show that foreclosures have important equilibrium
eects that exacerbate housing downturns and to analyze foreclosure mitigation policy. We
develop a quantitative search model of the housing market in which default erodes lender
balance sheets, lenders sell foreclosed homes at a discount due to high holding costs, and
homeowners who are foreclosed upon cannot immediately purchase another home. Lender
rationing and the impact of foreclosure flags on potential buyers' credit records reduce the
number of buyers relative to sellers, worsening seller outside options. Sellers, and particularly
REO sellers, become highly motivated to sell, while buyers become more choosey due to the
presence of distressed REO sellers oering properties at a discount. These eects create
downward pressure on non-distressed prices, which in turn leads to additional default and a
price-default spiral.
    In our quantitative analysis, these equilibrium eects prove crucial to match the empir-
ically observed declines in house prices prices and transaction volumes during the housing
crisis. Furthermore, the model with default is better able to match the the non-linearity in
boom size relative to bust size across cities relative to a model without default. The deteri-
oration in lender balance sheets generates a decline in non-distressed prices of 22.6 percent,
while the foreclosure flag and choosey buyer eects cause an additional 25.4 percent decline.
    The presence of sizable equilibrium eects of foreclosures opens the door to for foreclosure
mitigation policy to ameliorate a downturn, and we use our quantitative model to compare
several policies. The most cost eective policy we consider is a government intervention that
holds foreclosures o the market until demand rebounds, thereby rectifying the dynamic
imbalance of supply and demand caused by foreclosures. Lender equity injections are also
quite eective. The least cost eective policy is principal reduction as implemented by
HAMP, although it is more eective than a partial-equilibrium analysis would suggest since
it acts as a poorly-targeted bailout of lenders. Finally, slowing down foreclosures can be
counterproductive if households do not cure out of foreclosure quickly enough because it
lengthens the crisis, which osets the benefits of having fewer foreclosures on the market at
any one time. However, this policy can be eective if the cure rate is su ciently fast.
    Overall, our findings suggest that models of the housing market need to incorporate
features that allow for default to cause overshooting in a bust. Our findings also imply that
foreclosures and some foreclosure policies have far stronger eects than those implied by
micro studies that absorb the equilibrium eects into a constant or fixed eects. We hope
future work continues to refine our understanding of the equilibrium eects of foreclosures
and their role in shaping foreclosure policy.


                                               40
References
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2015). House Prices, Collateral, and Self-
Employment. Journal of Financial Economics 117 (2), 288­306.

Albrecht, J., A. Anderson, E. Smith, and S. Vroman (2007). Opportunistic Matching in
the Housing Market. International Economic Review 48 (2), 641­664.

Anenberg, E. (2016). Information Frictions and Housing Market Dynamics. International
Economic Review 57 (4), 1449­1479.

Anenberg, E. and E. Kung (2014). Estimates of the Size and Source of Price Declines Due
to Nearby Foreclosures. American Economic Review 104 (8), 2527­2551.

Begenau, J. (Forthcoming). Capital Requirements, Risk Choice, and Liquidity Provision
in a Business Cycle Model. Journal of Financial Economics .

Begenau, J., S. Bigio, and J. Majerovitz (2019). Banks Adjust Slowly: Evidence and
Lessons For Modeling. Working Paper.

Bhutta, N., J. Dokko, and H. Shan (2017). Consumer Ruthlessness and Mortgage Default
During the 2007 to 2009 Housing Bust. Journal of Finance 72 (6), 2433­2466.

Brevoort, K. P. and C. R. Cooper (2013). Foreclosure's Wake: The Credit Experiences of
Individuals Following Foreclosure. Real Estate Economics 41 (4), 747­792.

Campbell, J. Y., S. Giglio, and P. Pathak (2011). Forced Sales and House Prices. American
Economic Review 101 (5), 2108­31.

Chaney, T., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2012). The Collateral Channel: How Real Estate
Shocks Aect Corporate Investment. American Economic Review 102 (6), 2381­2409.

Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor (2015). A Quantitative Analysis of the U.S. Housing
and Mortgage Markets and the Foreclosure Crisis. Review of Economic Dynamics 18 (2),
165­184.

Clauretie, T. M. and N. Daneshvary (2009). Estimating the House Foreclosure Discount
Corrected for Spatial Price Interdependence and Endogeneity of Marketing Time. Real
Estate Economics 37 (1), 43­67.

Diamond, R., A. M. Guren, and R. Tan (2019). The Eect of Foreclosures on Homeowners,
Tenants, and Landlords. Working Paper.

Du e, D., N. Garleanu, and L. H. Pedersen (2007). Valuation in Over-the-Counter Markets.
Review of Financial Studies 20 (5), 1865­1900.

Elenev, V., T. Landvoigt, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2106). Phasing Out the GSEs. Journal
of Monetary Economics 81, 111­132.



                                          41
Elul, R., N. S. Souleles, S. Chomsisengphet, D. Glennon, and R. Hunt (2010). What
'Triggers' Mortgage Default? American Economic Review 100 (2), 490­4.

Foote, C. L., K. Gerardi, and P. S. Willen (2008). Negative Equity and Foreclosure: Theory
and Evidence. Journal of Urban Economics 64 (2), 234­245.

Fuster, A. and P. S. Willen (2017). Payment Size, Negative Equity, and Mortgage Default.
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9 (4), 167­191.

Ganong, P. and P. Noel (2019a). The Eect of Debt on Default and Consumption: Evidence
from Housing Policy in the Great Recession. Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Ganong, P. and P. Noel (2019b). Why Do Borrowers Default on Mortgages? A New Test
Using High-Frequency Data. Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Garriga, C. and A. Hedlund (2019). No Mortgage Debt, Consumption, and Illiquid Housing
Markets in the Great Recession. Working Paper.

Genesove, D. and L. Han (2012). Search and Matching in the Housing Market. Journal of
Urban Economics 72 (1), 31­45.

Gerardi, K., K. Herkenho, L. Ohanian, and P. S. Willen (2017). Unemployment, Negative
Equity, and Strategic Default. Working Paper.

Gerardi, K., P. S. Willen, E. Rosenblatt, and V. W. Yao (2015). Foreclosure Externalities:
New Evidence. Journal of Urban Economics 87, 42­56.

Greenwald, D. L., T. Landvoigt, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2018). Finanical Fragility With
SAM? Working Paper.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2013). The Determinants of Attitudes Toward
Strategic Default on Mortgages. The Journal of Finance 68 (4), 1473­1515.

Guren, A. (2018). House Price Momentum and Strategic Complementarity. Journal of
Political Economy 126 (3), 1172­1218.

Head, A., H. Lloyd-Ellis, and H. Sun (2014). Search, Liquidity, and the Dynamics of House
Prices and Construction. American Economic Review 104 (4), 1172­1210.

Hedlund, A. (2016a). Illiquidity and Its Discontents: Trading Delays and Foreclsoures in
the Housing Market. Journal of Monetary Economics 83, 1­13.

Hedlund, A. (2016b). The Cyclical Dynamics of Illiquid Housing , Debt, and Foreclosures.
Quantitative Economics 7 (1), 289­328.

Iacoviello, M. (2005). House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the
Business Cycle. American Economic Reivew 95 (3), 739­764.

Kaplan, G., K. Mitman, and G. L. Violante (2019). The Housing Boom and Bust: Model
Meets Evidence. Working Paper.

                                           42
Krainer, J. (2001). A Theory of Liquidity in Residential Real Estate Markets. Journal of
Urban Economics 49 (1), 32­53.
Lamont, O. and J. C. Stein (1999). Leverage and House-Price Dynamics in U.S. Cities.
RAND Journal of Economics 30 (3), 498­514.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2011). House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
Household Leverage Crisis. American Economic Review 101 (5), 2132­2156.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2014). What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment? Econo-
metrica 82 (6), 2197­2223.
Mian, A., A. Sufi, and F. Trebbi (2015). Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real Economy.
Journal of Finance 70 (6), 2587­2634.
Molloy, R. and H. Shan (2013). The Postforeclosure Experience of U.S. Households. Real
Estate Economics 41 (2), 225­254.
Ngai, L. R. and S. Tenreyro (2014). Hot and Cold Seasons in the Housing Market. American
Economic Review 104 (12), 3991­4026.
Novy-Marx, R. (2009). Hot and Cold Markets. Real Estate Economics 37 (1), 1­22.
Paixao, N. (2017). Housing Prices and Consumer Spending: The Bank Balance Sheet
Channel. Working Paper, Bank of Canada.
Paixao, N. (2019). Propogation of House Price Shocks Through the Banking System.
Working Paper, Bank of Canada.
Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2009). Momentum Traders in the Housing Market: Survey
Evidence and a Search Model. American Economic Review 99 (2), 406­411.
Scharlemann, T. C. and S. H. Shore (2016). The Eect of Negative Equity on Mortgage
Default: Evidence From HAMP's Principal Reduction Alternative. Review of Financial
Studies 29 (10), 2850­2883.
Shimer, R. and I. Werning (2007). Reservation Wages and Unemployment Insurance. Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 122 (3), 1145­1185.
Springer, T. (1996). Single-Family Housing Transactions: Seller Motivations, Price, and
Marketing Time. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 13, 237­254.
Veronesi, P. and L. Zingales (2010). Paulson's Gift. Journal of Financial Economics 97 (3),
339­368.
Wheaton, W. C. (1990). Vacancy, Search, and Prices in a Housing Market Matching Model.
Journal of Political Economy 98 (6), 1270­1292.
Williams, J. T. (1995). Pricing Real Assets With Costly Search. Review of Financial
Studies 8 (1), 55­90.


                                           43
