                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PUTTING GLOBAL GOVERNANCE IN ITS PLACE

                                          Dani Rodrik

                                      Working Paper 26213
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26213


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




This is a revised version of a paper prepared for the World Bank ABCDE conference on June
17-18, 2019 in Washington, D.C. I am grateful to the World Bank for financial support and to
Robert Cook, Robert Keohane, Robert Staiger, and especially Harlan Grant Cohen for very useful
feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Putting Global Governance in its Place
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 26213
August 2019
JEL No. F50,F60

                                          ABSTRACT

In a world economy that is highly integrated, most policies produce effects across the border.
This is often believed to be an argument for greater global governance, but the logic requires
scrutiny. There remains strong revealed demand for policy and institutional diversity among
nations, rooted in differences in historical, cultural, or development trajectories. The canonical
case for global governance is based on two set of circumstances. The first occurs when there is
global public good (GPG) and the second under "beggar-thy-neighbor" (BTN) policies. However,
the world economy is not a global commons, and virtually no economic policy has the nature of a
global public good (or bad). And while there are some important BTN policies, much of our
current discussions deal with policies that are not true BTNs. The policy failures that exist arise
not from weaknesses of global governance, but from distortions of domestic governance. As a
general rule, these domestic failures cannot be fixed through international agreements or
multilateral cooperation. The paper closes by discussing an alternative model of global
governance called "democracy-enhancing global governance."


Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 J.F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
                                  PUTTING GLOBAL GOVERNANCE IN ITS PLACE

                                               Dani Rodrik 1
                                          Harvard Kennedy School
                                               August 2019



      1. Introduction

          In a world economy that has become highly integrated, problems always seem to

require more international cooperation and better global governance. The populist backlash

and U.S. President Donald Trump's trade wars have added fuel to the economists', technocrats'

and commentariat's call for more internationalism. ""[V]irtually every problem destabilizing the

world in this plastic moment is global in nature and can be confronted only with a coalition that

is global..." wrote the New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman recently. 2 Or as Nemat

Shafik, then the time the deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund, put it

in 2013, "what happens anywhere affects everybody--and increasingly so. So it is pretty clear

that the world needs more, not less, international coordination and cooperation." 3 When the

European economics network VoxEU.org solicited advice from leading economists on how

address the frailties of the global financial system in the wake of the 2008 crisis, the proposed

solutions often took the form of tighter international rules administered by some kind of

technocracy: an international bankruptcy court, a world financial organization, an international



1
 This is a revised version of a paper prepared for the World Bank ABCDE conference on June 17-18, 2019 in
Washington, D.C. I am grateful to the World Bank for financial support and to Robert Cook, Robert Keohane,
Robert Staiger, and especially Harlan Grant Cohen for very useful feedback.

2
    https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/30/opinion/trump-climate-change.html.

3
    https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2015/09/28/04/53/sp120513.


                                                      -1-
bank charter, or an international lender of last resort. 4 Nationalism may seem ascendant in

politics. But global governance reigns in economics.


          It is tempting to think that greater interdependence requires more global governance,

but the logic requires scrutiny. On the one hand, interdependence blurs the distinction

between what is domestic and international. Virtually any domestic policy has some

implications on the other side of the border. On the other hand, there is strong revealed

demand for institutional diversity among nations, rooted in differences in historical, cultural, or

development trajectories. Today's U.S.-China trade conflict is the paradigmatic example of the

tensions that arise in the absence of a satisfactory solution to this dilemma. When should global

rules over-ride national differences and impose common solutions?


          Consider the following policies.

      1. educational policies

      2. highway speed limits

      3. gasoline taxes

      4. agricultural subsidies

      5. import tariffs on cars

      6. tax havens

In an economically interdependent world, each one of these policies produces spillovers -- or

cross-border externalities -- for other nations. The last three policies are typically considered

international, and subject to global governance. The first three are normally considered


4
    See http://voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/2544.


                                                  -2-
"domestic" policies, but they too have global implications. Educational policies can shape a

country's comparative advantage and will thereby influence its (and other countries') terms of

trade. Highway speed limits and gasoline taxes affect the domestic demand for oil and

therefore the price of oil on world markets. The presence of cross-border spillovers does not

seem like a sufficient condition for global governance.


       In fact it is not at all clear how the dividing line that is conventionally drawn between

the two sets of policies is drawn. Should we focus on the magnitude of cross-border spillovers?

This is an empirical matter requiring case-by-case analysis. For example, taxes on gasoline in the

U.S. and Europe likely have far greater impact on world markets than auto tariffs in small or

medium-sized countries. Should we ask instead whether there is harm to other nations? But

export subsidies on farm products are beneficial on net to the rest of the world, since they

deteriorate the subsidizing country's external terms of trade and improve the terms of trade of

the rest of the world. Perhaps we should focus on the stated objective of policy ­ domestic

versus international? Yet educational investments are often justified on the grounds of

increasing a country's global competitiveness, making them as international in this sense as

trade policies. None of these criteria does a good job of explaining why the first set of policies is

"domestic" and the second "international." The muddle of global governance is that many

policies have become "internationalized" through happenstance or the operation of political

lobbies (Rodrik 2018), rather than on account of principled distinctions.




                                                 -3-
         The canonical cases for global governance are based on two set of circumstances. 5 The

first occurs when there is global public good (GPG). The classic example is carbon control

policies in the presence of climate change. The second is represented by "beggar-thy-neighbor"

(BTN) policies. A BTN policy is one that produces an income transfer to the home economy from

the rest of the world while producing a global inefficiency as a by-product. Exploiting monopoly

power in a rare metal on global markets by restricting sales abroad would constitute an

example. 6


         Both of these circumstances provide impeccable arguments for global governance ­

disciplines on what countries can do on their own. However, their relevance to the burning

policy issues of the day is much more limited than is commonly realized. As I will show below,

the world economy is not a global commons, and virtually no economic policy has the nature of

a global public good (or bad). And while there are some important BTN policies, much of our

current discussions deal with policies that are not true BTNs. Subsidies, industrial policies,

employment-protecting tariffs, non-tariff measures that target health or social concerns, poor

financial regulations, inappropriate (excessively austere) fiscal policies, national Internet walls,

data localization policies are neither GPGs nor BTNs. Some of these are beggar-thyself policies;

others may produce domestic benefits, addressing real market distortions or legitimate social




5
 There is a rich analytical literature on the economics of trade agreements, which is complementary to my
discussion here. See Bagwell and Staiger (2001, 2004), Frieden et al. (2012), Grossman (2016) and the references
therein. See also Gallagher and Kozul-Wright (2019) for an articulation of a new set of principles for the future of
multilateralism and Cohen (2019) for an argument for "re-embedding" international trade law in domestic policy
priorities.

6
 In 2015 China lost a dispute in the WTO in which the country's export restrictions on rare earths had been
challenged. See https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/cases_e/ds431_e.htm.

                                                         -4-
objectives. The case for global governance in such policies, I will argue, is very weak, and

possibly outweighed by the risk that global oversight or regulation would backfire.


       None of this is to suggest that we live in a Panglossian world where all national policies

are for the best. The policy domains I have just lifted are certainly rife with failures. My

argument is that when such failures exist, they arise not from weaknesses of global governance,

but from distortions of domestic governance. As a general matter, these domestic failures

cannot be fixed through international agreements or multilateral cooperation. External

constraints may in fact aggravate domestic failures of governance, insofar as they empower

particular distributional coalitions at the expense of the broad public. Any international scheme

that purports to steer domestic policy in a more desirable direction must tread carefully. At the

end of this paper, I advance an alternative model of global governance that I call "democracy-

enhancing global governance." Unlike "globalization-enhancing global governance,"

democracy-enhancing global governance would leave most policy domains to national

regulation, with global oversight restricted to procedural safeguards ­ such as transparency,

accountability, use of scientific/economic evidence ­ intended to reinforce democratic

deliberation.


   1. The analytics of economic interdependence: the case for global governance


       It helps to have an explicit framework to discuss the issues that arise in the presence of

spillovers and to distinguish among different kinds of problems. Let us denote the home

country by h, and the generic foreign country by j, with associated policies (actions)  and  .

We express the utility functions in the form  =  ( ,   ) and   =   ( ,   ).


                                                 -5-
These utility functions capture the ideas that well-being at home and abroad is affected not

only by own policies, but also by (the sum total of) policies of foreign countries. That is:


                                       (.)              (.)
                                        
                                              0,       
                                                              0

These spillovers could be negative or positive, depending on the policy in question. When

countries act independently, maximizing their own utility and disregarding the effects of their

choices on other countries, we have the standard result that the resulting (Nash) equilibrium

will be inefficient. Policies with negative spillovers would be over-supplied, and policies with

positive spillovers will be under-supplied. Pigovian taxes and subsidies that enable the

internalization of these cross-border externalities are obviously impractical in this context.


         There are two benchmark cases where all countries could be made better off through

global rules that discipline a. I take them up in turn.


   (i)      Global public goods (GPGs)

         Suppose in addition to their direct, domestic effects home and foreign policies jointly

contribute to provide a global benefit (or damage), G, which is non-rival and from which

individual countries cannot be excluded. We write utility functions as


                                =  ( ,  ),               =    , ,

                                     =    ,                 = 1
                                                          

The weights  can be thought of capturing the relative size of each country, so that for an

identical set of a's, the contribution of each country to G is proportional to its size. When




                                                 -6-
countries are small (  0), they overlook the effect of their policies on G. Let's look at the

home country:


                   (. )    (. )  (. )     (. )
                        =      +       =          0
                                         


Since the effects on G are systematically discounted, a global public good will be under-

provided and a global public bad will be over-provided. The best known example of this is

greenhouse gas (GHG) emission, a global public bad in view of climate change. Policy here

                                                                                     (.)
consists of controls on GHG. Since such controls are costly at the domestic level (   
                                                                                           < 0)

while providing benefits only in terms of G, countries will have the incentive to minimize these

controls. A global agreement that capped domestic GHG emission levels would leave all

countries better off, assuming countries are sufficiently similar or the caps are appropriately

calibrated to individual country circumstances.


       When commentators describe world economy as a "global commons" or free trade as a

global public good, they have a similar argument in mind. But this is a misleading analogy.

Economic policies that are beneficial to the world economy also tend to be beneficial for the

home economy. They are primarily private, rather than public goods.


       Consider first trade policy. It could well be that open trade policies contribute to a global

public good: the benefits from trade may increase with the number of countries that practice

free trade. But the relevant question is whether a country that disregards this external benefit

would have the incentive to pursue globally sub-optimal trade policies. For a small country, the

answer is no. Free trade is the optimal policy for domestic reasons, regardless of other

                                                -7-
                                        (.)
countries' policies. In other words,   
                                              = 0 when tariffs and non-tariff barriers are set to zero

and  =  ( ,  ) is maximized at free trade. (I will take up the large country optimal tariff

                                                                 (.)
case later.) This is very different from the GHG case where      
                                                                       < 0 and home country wants

to set GHG controls ( ) at their lower limit. Countries trade not to confer benefits on their

partners, but to reap the domestic gains from trade. And when they forsake those gains from

trade, the problem is not with lack of global governance; the much larger failure lies at home,

with domestic governance.


       Much the same logic applies in many other policy domains where good economic policy

is its own reward. Consider financial markets. Prudential financial regulation ensures financial

intermediaries do not take on too much risk and financial instability is kept in check. When

financial centers pursue appropriate policies they enhance financial stability and soundness for

the global economy as a whole. But these centers have all the incentive in the world to adopt

such policies, since they will be the first to bear the costs of financial crises. The 2008 global

financial crisis may have been due to lax financial regulations in the U.S. But these policy

mistakes did not originate from the U.S. government's lack of concern for the global economy.

They were the result of a series of misjudgments with respect to the domestic consequences of

financial liberalization. U.S. regulators did not require greater cosmopolitanism; they needed a

better sense of the national interest.


       Similar arguments can be made for fiscal policy, tax policy, and regulation in general.

Excessive austerity can be damaging to the world economy, but the costs are borne first and

foremost at home. Inappropriate tax policies or poorly designed regulations hurt the home

                                                   -8-
economy in much greater measure than they affect other nations. In all these areas, policies

that sustain a healthy global economy are -- or should be, with appropriate domestic

governance -- in the national interests of each country. The extent to which global governance

can help fix domestic governance problems is a different question, to which I will turn later. The

point for now is that most standard economic policies cannot be considered to be GPGs.


    (ii)      Beggar-thy-neighbor policies (BTNs)


           BTN refers to policies where the adverse effects on other countries are not merely

incidental, but essential. These policies provide benefits at home only to the extent that they

harm other countries. 7 And they generate global inefficiency, a deadweight loss, to boot. A

well-known instance in trade policy is the so-called optimum tariff, whereby a large country can

manipulate its terms of trade by restricting its imports (or exports). Since other nations face

similar incentives, in the end all (or most) countries end up worse off by engaging in destructive

trade practices (Johnson 1953). This type of problem represents the second canonical case for

global governance.


           A two-country example follows, with home (h) and foreign (f). We write utility functions

as the sum of two components, a regular part that depends only on own policies,   ( ), and a

second part that captures the pure transfer component of the policy ( -  ), with (0) =




7
  In economics, the use of the term was popularized by Joan Robinson in 1937, who used it to refer to competitive
devaluations during the 1930s. See https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/whence-
cometh-beggar-thy-neighbor. To the extent that a country could improve its trade balance only at the expense of
other nations, such policies were indeed BTNs. But to the extent that competitive devaluations led to an increase
in the global money supply at a time of depression, they may also have had a positive total benefit.

                                                       -9-
0. We assume without loss of generality that the derivative of (. ) is positive. The full utility

functions for h and f are expressed as:


                                           =   ( ) + ( -  )

                                            =     - ( -  )

Note that the transfer component is zero-sum: whatever home gains from its policy comes at

the expense of losses to foreign, and vice versa. The first-order condition for home is:


                                     (. )     (. ) (. )
                                          =       +     = 0
                                                    

         (.)                                (.)
Since          > 0, optimality requires           < 0 in equilibrium. Under the standard assumption of
                                           


concavity of utility functions, the implication is that the level of  is higher than what it would

be in a situation without the transfer, or BTN component (Figure 1).


                           




                                                                      

                           Figure 1: The equilibrium level of  in BTN equilibrium



         Assume for simplicity that the two countries are identical. Then the analogous first-

order condition for f implies that  =  and (. ) = 0. In equilibrium, neither country is able

to extract transfers from the other. But in attempting to beggar each other, they are both


                                                      -10-
driven to inefficiently high levels of  and  . This is exactly what happens in the optimum

tariff case.


        Another example would be the use of mercantilist currency policies. Assume there is

generalized unemployment, and both countries would benefit by running a trade surplus. Each

country tries to undervalue its currency or follow other policies to improve its trade balance.

But one country's trade surplus is the other country's trade deficit. In the end, such efforts

offset each other. Neither country ends up with higher employment, but both suffer the

incidental costs of mercantilist policies.


        Since BTNs are negative-sum policies, there is a strong presumption that they should be

restrained using global rules. Note that in the two examples I have used above, it is also the

case that both countries are better off when their policy autonomy is restricted (by placing

ceilings on  and  ) compared to when they have full autonomy. Subject to the usual caveats

about commitment, these are the relatively easy cases for global governance. 8


        But there are other cases of BTN policies where one or more of the countries would be

worse off in the cooperative equilibrium. (Side payments from the beneficiaries to the losing

country would rule out such a possibility, but these are difficult to implement in a global

context.) In the optimum tariff game I discussed, in the presence of asymmetry it is possible for

one of the countries to prefer the Nash equilibrium to the cooperative equilibrium: a larger


8
 A commitment problem arises because each country would still like to deviate from the cooperative equilibrium
and resort to BTN policies. The issue of commitment also raises the question of why a cooperative outcome could
not be obtained through repeated-interaction incentives in dynamic games, instead of relying on an international
agreement or organization such as the WTO. Formal governance structures may have an advantage in that they
allow for coordination when there are multiple equilibria to select from and provide information on compliance in
settings with many players (see discussion in Grossman 2016).

                                                      -11-
country gains more from manipulating its terms of trade than a smaller one, and has more to

lose from international disciplines. The example of a global cartel, mentioned in the

introduction, is another example. Suppose a number of exporters of a key commodity have

cartelized and are facing a large number of small importers. A cooperative equilibrium that

prevented them from exercising monopoly power would definitely leave the cartel members

poorer. In this instance, there is no incentive for these countries to join any global governance

scheme.


       A second, similar example is that of pure tax havens. A pure tax haven is a jurisdiction

that applies a very low corporate tax rate for the sole purpose of enabling international

corporations to engage in tax evasion. It is a BTN policy because it undermines the tax base of

countries and shifts the global tax burden towards labor, a poorer group, without stimulating

physical investment. Pure tax havens shift paper profits to low-tax jurisdictions, not physical

capital (Tørsløv, Wier, and Zucman 2018). In this case too, global governance that prevented tax

competition would leave some countries, namely the pure tax havens, worse off. They would

be deprived of the revenues they generate by attracting a very large base of paper profits at

very low tax rates. An analogous case can be made for personal income or wealth tax havens. A

global registry that would identify ultimate owners of bank accounts in all financial jurisdictions

would assist tax administration and collection and benefit most countries of the world. But the

tax havens would lose out.


       Whether they make all countries better off or not, the demands that BTN policies make

on global governance are rather limited. That is because relatively few policies fall under this



                                               -12-
rubric. In fact, I have mentioned here all the straightforward examples of BTN economic policies

I can think of: optimum tariffs, international monopolies or cartels, trade-balance mercantilism,

and pure tax havens (for corporate and personal income). 9 The vast majority of economic

policies that are contentious and come under international scrutiny are not BTNs, even though

they are frequently presented as such ­ just as the global economy is often misleadingly viewed

as a global commons.


    2. The weak case for global governance: Policies that are neither GPGs nor BTNs

        Consider the following two policies:

    (a) R&D subsidies in a country that imports technology-intensive goods; and

    (b) an import ban on goods produced with slave labor.


Both policies create negative cross-border spillovers. The first improves technological

capabilities in the home economy and can be expected to have an adverse terms-of-trade

impact on the rest of the world. This is because as the country becomes better at producing

technologically advanced goods, its demand for imports of such goods fall. The second policy

has a direct adverse economic impact on exporters of slave-made goods. In both cases, current

practice is that such policies are not regulated internationally. Countries are left free to do what

they please in both domains. My guess is that this conforms to the intuition of most analysts




9
 There is also a wide range of circumstances with imperfect competition where governments may want to shift
rents from foreign to domestic firms. Policies used in such cases sometimes look like BTN policies, but the presence
of imperfect competition means that their global efficiency consequences can be quite different from standard
BTN policies. For example, when a country subsidizes its oligopolist (say Airbus) to shift rents from a foreign
oligopolist (Boeing), the rest of the world benefits through lower prices. This is analogous to the case discussed
below in section 2(i).

                                                       -13-
with respect to what constitutes an appropriate dividing line between domestic and

international spheres of regulation.


       I will argue in this section that a large number of policies that global policy makers do try

to bring under global governance are precisely of the same nature as one or the other of the

two examples just mentioned. In particular, they have the following characteristics:


   (a) they either do not create global inefficiency; or when they do

   (b) it is the domestic economy that bears the direct economic costs.


Technology subsidies are in category (a), assuming there are knowledge spillovers (even if these

spillovers are purely domestic). The reason global governance is not believed to be appropriate

in this instance is presumably that there is an economic justification for the policy in question

and the presence of cross-border spillovers is not grounds on its own for limiting what each

nation can do independently. The import ban is in category (b). The reason for allowing a

country wide latitude in this case is different: an import ban might be economically inefficient,

but it is the home country that pays the economic price for it first and foremost. Effectively, the

home country trades off the economic cost against the value of upholding a moral standard

against slavery. It does not seem fitting for an international organization or a global governance

regime to second guess the appropriateness of this tradeoff.


       Yet many other policies that are routinely internationalized are no different. I will

examine them under two headings, (i) enrich-thy-neighbor policies, and (ii) policies with

ambiguous efficiency implications.



                                               -14-
       (i)     Non-BTN policies: Enrich-thy-neighbor policies


       These are policies which produce positive aggregate effects on the rest of the world and

are yet contentious globally. This seems paradoxical, and it is. There is one significant category

of policies that fit this description: subsidies on exportables. Whether on agricultural products

or manufactured goods, export subsidies are considered to be a no-no internationally. This is

puzzling since export subsidies are an economic "gift" to the rest of the world. True, some

foreign countries may lose, but this does not alter the fact that the aggregate effect on the rest

of the world is positive.


       Formally, consider a world with two foreign countries, f and g. Denoting the policy of

the home country as  as before, their utility functions take the following form:


                 =    ,   and   =   ( ,  ),


                       (.)              (.)
               with   
                             > 0 and   
                                              < 0.


As the partial derivatives indicate, we assume an increase in  has asymmetric effects abroad.

Country f benefits, while country g loses. When  stands for an export subsidy, we know that

the sum of these two effects of opposite sign has to be positive. That is because the export

subsidy deteriorated the home country's terms of trade, and therefore improves the terms of

trade of the rest of the world in aggregate (f and g taken together). The asymmetric effects in

turn would be due to the pattern of comparative advantage across countries. Country g may

have a comparative advantage structure similar to the home country, so that the terms of trade

of g and of the home country move together. So agricultural export subsidies, for example, will


                                                 -15-
make net exporters of agricultural products in the rest of the world worse off, while making net

importers better off.


       There are three arguments for why export subsidies should nevertheless be globally

disciplined, none of which is very compelling. First, it is the case that some foreign countries

lose. Members of the Cairns group of large agricultural exporters have made their case loudly

and successfully within the GATT/WTO regime in the case of agricultural subsidies. But this is a

curious argument insofar as there are multitudes of policies that are left under national

prerogative, but likewise produce asymmetric effects abroad. These include policies which are

roundly applauded by economists and technocrats as appropriate policies. Consider unilateral

import liberalization as a blatant example. When a large country unilaterally reduces its import

barriers, it normally incurs a terms-of-trade loss. More to the point, foreign countries that share

this country's comparative advantage pattern also experience a terms-of-trade loss. (When I

increase my imports of textiles and autos, driving their relative prices up on world markets, all

other net importers of textiles and autos suffer too.) And in their case, there is no

compensating increase in gains from trade. So some foreign countries are definitely left worse

off. To my knowledge, this has never been used as an argument for placing global limits on

countries' ability to unilaterally liberalize their trade regimes.


       The second argument is that subsidies, unlike unilateral import liberalization, are

globally inefficient. This justification for global governance has to do with the economic

desirability of subsidies in general, and not with the incidence of their external effects. The

trouble here is that it is difficult to take such a categorical stance against the use of subsidies.



                                                 -16-
There may be genuine learning externalities associated with exporting which the subsidizing

country aims to reap. Or there may be social or political objectives that are equally justifiable

on broader grounds, even if not strictly economically. Just as the moral stance reflected in the

import ban on slave-produced goods cannot be second-guessed by other countries, it may not

be appropriate for foreign countries to question whether a particular social objective is valid or

best addressed through subsidies. I will scrutinize these issues at greater length in the next

subsection. What can be said unambiguously is that when the subsidies do not serve a real

economic purpose, unlike BTNs their most immediate costs are shouldered by domestic

taxpayers and consumers.


           The third argument is that subsidies (and similar policies) are "unfair" because they

undermine level playing fields in global trade. This argument is based on the view that all

nations should compete on an even basis. 10 But what constitutes a level playing field, like

fairness, is very much in the eye of the beholder. For example, developing nations have long

made the argument, not entirely unreasonably, that subsidies (like lax patent rules) serve to

compensate for the disadvantages of backwardness, and in any case are practices that

advanced nations themselves pursued when they were poorer. In other words, they make trade

fairer rather than less so. Of course, if global agreement can be reached on what is "fair," it

makes sense to pursue common standards. But often such common ground will be lacking. In

those cases, it would be inappropriate to seek global disciplines.




10
     I am grateful to Robert Cook for reminding me of this argument.

                                                         -17-
         This is not to say that "unfair trade" is an empty and useless concept. When nations face

trade transactions that they think undermine domestic moral codes or norms of fairness, an

argument could be made that they should be free to regulate them accordingly. 11 The

difference is between living by one's own moral standards and imposing them on others.


         (ii)    Non-BTN spillovers: Policies with ambiguous domestic efficiency implications


         We finally consider policies that produce adverse spillovers to other countries, but are

used not for BTN purposes but for domestic reasons. These domestic reasons might be

economic or non-economic, well-grounded or not. There is a very wide variety of such policies

that are either already regulated internationally or frequently come under international

scrutiny. Here is a partial listing:

     ·   "weak" intellectual property rights protections;

     ·   industrial policies that do not involve export subsidies, such as domestic subsidies, local

         content requirements, "trade-related investment measures, etc.;

     ·   bans on GMOs, hormone-fed beef, and other similar "health" measures;

     ·   "excessive" fiscal austerity;

     ·   "lax" financial regulation;

     ·   import protection to prop up employment in certain industries or regions;

     ·   "very low" levels corporate taxation (as in Ireland where there may be effects on

         domestic capital formation, not pure tax havens such as Cayman Islands);



11
  I provide a concrete example in my proposal for an anti-social dumping clause in Rodrik (2019). This proposal
seeks to marry national autonomy in upholding domestic social bargains with the global procedural restraints
discussed below.

                                                       -18-
   ·   data localization, local-cloud policies, and other Internet-nationalizing policies.

       The domestic economic effects of all these policies ex ante are either negative or

ambiguous. And they typically generate negative spillovers for other countries. All of this may

suggest a rationale for global governance in these areas. The difficulty is that, as in the export

subsidy case, there are strong countervailing argument that cannot be dismissed. First, there

may indeed be market failures of distortions at home that justify the use of such policies, as

second-best remedies even if not first-best ones. It is not obvious that trade negotiators or

international bureaucrats are better placed than domestic legislatures and policy makers to

make the right call in complex cases. Second, there may be overwhelming non-economic

considerations -- social, environmental, health, national security or moral ­ that trump

economic costs and benefits. Once again, the relevant trade-offs are better evaluated at the

national level, within pre-existing democratic decision-making bodies, than via delegation to

international agencies.


       The primary argument for global governance in these cases, one that economists are

especially fond of making, is that global rules can prevent countries from using "beggar thyself"

policies by correcting domestic political failures. A more sophisticated political-science version

is provided in Keohane, Macedo, and Moravcsik (2009). It is a version of the standard

delegation argument. Essentially, it views external constraints acting as a counterweight to

special interests or rent-seeking lobbies. Trade agreements, for example, allow governments to

say "no" to their protectionist lobbies at home: "we would love to raise tariffs on this product,

but WTO rules do not allow us to do so."




                                                -19-
       There are three counter-arguments. First, non-standard, heterodox policies can have

economic justification in second-best contexts (Rodrik 2008). Global rules or bureaucracies

cannot reliably distinguish between "beggar thyself" and economically desirable policies. This is

especially true in policy domains that require significant local knowledge, as with industrial

policies or financial regulations. Second, even when there is strong presumption that countries

are engaged in "beggar thyself" policies, democracies should be allowed to make their own

"mistakes." For example, the European Union may be deluded in banning GMOs or hormone-

fed beef, but allowing supranational bodies to pass judgement in such matters undermines

both democracy and the legitimacy of global governance arrangements. Third, and perhaps

most importantly, there is no presumption that global governance institutions are more

immune to capture by special interests than domestic policymaking. Indeed, large corporations,

international banks, and big pharma have exercised disproportionate influence on global

economic governance. It would be naïve to presume that they have prioritized the public

interest over their particular interest in shaping global agreements in line with their needs.


       I have developed the last point in Rodrik (2018) in the context of trade agreements. The

conventional view of trade agreements is that they offer welcome relief against protectionist

interests at home: inefficient import-competing firms and labor unions. When trade

agreements were largely about import tariffs and quotas -- that is before the 1980s ­ this made

a lot of sense. Multilateral trade negotiations were about lowering these barriers, which meant

going against what protectionist interests at home wanted. But after the establishment of the

WTO in 1995, and especially with the mushrooming of regional trade agreements after the

1990s, the political economy of trade agreements began to look very different. The new-style

                                               -20-
agreements increasingly focused on domestic rules and regulations, such as intellectual

property rights, investor rights, health and sanitary regulations, subsidies, and so on.


       Unlike in the case of tariffs and quotas, there is no natural benchmark that readily

allows us to judge whether a regulatory standard is excessive or protectionist. Different

national assessments of risk ­ safety, environmental, health -- and varying conceptions of how

business should relate to its stakeholders ­ employees, suppliers, consumers, local

communities ­ produce different standards, none obviously superior to others. In other words,

regulatory standards are public goods over which different nations have different preferences.

An optimal global governance scheme would trade off the benefits of expanding market

integration (by reducing regulatory diversity) against the costs of excessive harmonization. But

it is difficult to know where that optimal point may lie. Asking trade negotiators do perform this

task adequately across a wide variety of policy domains seems unrealistic.


       And this is before we allow for the political influence of internationally oriented special

interest lobbies, which have played a critical role in these new domains, by shaping the

formulation of global intellectual property regulations, investor arbitration clauses, banking

standards and many others. Public information in the U.S. on lobbying for trade issues shows

that pharmaceutical manufacturing firms and PhRMA (the industry association) top the list by a

wide margin. Other significant contributors are auto manufacturers, milk and dairy producers,

textiles and fabrics firms, information technology firms, and the entertainment industry. Labor

unions such as United Steelworkers and AFL-CIO, which are traditionally associated with

protectionist motives, tend to lag considerably behind these industry-based groups.



                                                -21-
       These considerations suggest a different political economy model than the one

economists have long been partial to. The domestic game that is played is not one between a

free trading government and protectionist interests, with international commitments serving to

tie the government's hand against protectionism. It is one where large international firms

capture the international policy making process to design global governance regimes in IPRs,

banking, investment rules, etc., that are highly partial to their own interests. Unlike in the

conventional model, the rent-seekers here are not the traditional protectionists. They are

pharmaceutical companies seeking tighter patent rules, financial institutions that want to limit

ability of countries to manage capital flows, or multinational companies that seek special

tribunals to enforce claims against host governments. In this setting, trade agreements serve to

empower special interests, rather than rein them in.


   3. Democracy-enhancing global economic governance


       Whether international agreements can systematically alter domestic political equilibria

in a desirable direction is a question with no clear-cut answer in theory. The recent evidence

from trade agreements, reviewed briefly in the previous section, is not encouraging. Moreover,

using external restraints to shape domestic policy has a certain cost in terms of democratic

legitimacy: it reinforces nativist populists' message of sovereignty being ceded to cosmopolitan

technocrats. It should not be up to the "global community" to tell individual nations how they

ought to weight competing domestic goals and priorities.


       This doesn't preclude a global conversation over the nature of diverse benefits and

harms to the parties. Such conversations can be helpful in reducing international


                                                -22-
misunderstanding about the objective of policies, and sometime in establishing new behavioral

norms. They can also enable some Coasian bargains to be struck if the losses incurred by other

nations do exceed domestic benefits.


        The question I have tried to answer in this paper is: what are the circumstances under

which countries should enter into binding international agreements? A somewhat different

question relates to the form that these agreements should take ­ not just which policies should

be covered, but also what types of domestic policy processes should be encouraged or

discouraged. The article I mentioned above by Keohane et al. (2009) argues that multilateral

agreements help democracies function better.12 While I disagree with this conclusion as a

general rule (see e.g., Rodrik 2018), it is possible to turn their argument on its head, and use it

as a normative proposition (about how things should be) instead of a positive one (about how

things are). Accordingly we can envisage an alternative conception of global economic

governance that directly targets potential domestic governance failures, without presuming

either that the appropriate national policies are known ex ante, or that global governance can

have a significant impact. I call this democracy-enhancing global governance (DEGG), after

Keohane et al. (2009).


        We can usefully distinguish DEGG from "globalization-enhancing global governance"

(GEGG), which comes closer to the spirit of prevailing practice in the world economy today.

Under GEGG we can justify any and all external rules that restrict domestic policy autonomy if

the result is to minimize transactions costs associated with national borders. Under DEGG we


12
  At least one of the authors (Keohane) seems to have changed his mind subsequently (see Colgan and Keohane
2017).

                                                    -23-
would imposes only those, mostly procedural, obligations that enhance domestic deliberation

or are consistent with democratic delegation.


       I have in mind procedural requirements designed to enhance the quality of domestic

policy making. Examples of such requirements would be global disciplines pertaining to

transparency, broad representation of stakeholders, accountability, and use of

scientific/economic evidence in domestic proceedings. These procedural requirements would

not prejudge what the end result might be ­ whether a country might impose a tariff, subsidy

or any other "beggar thyself" policy.


       Disciplines of this type are already in use in the WTO to some extent. The Agreements

on Safeguards and Anti-Dumping specify domestic procedures that need to be followed when a

government contemplates restricting imports from trade partners. Similarly the SPS Agreement

explicitly requires the use of scientific evidence when health concerns are at issue. Procedural

rules of this kind can be used much more extensively and to greater effect to enhance the

quality of domestic decision-making. For example, anti-dumping rules would more effectively

identify WTO violations that reduce economic welfare if they required that consumer and

producer interests that stand to be adversely affected by the imposition of import duties take

part in domestic proceedings. Similarly, subsidy rules would exhibit greater alignment with

economic efficiency if they required explicit economic cost-benefit analyses (static and

dynamic).


         We should not exaggerate the positive contribution such requirements can make to

domestic decision-making. Consider for example Trump's national security argument for hiking


                                                -24-
tariffs on steel and other imports. This is a classic beggar-thyself policy. WTO principles in this

area are vague and remain largely untested in practice. On the one hand, the relevant text

seems to open the door very wide by saying "Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed ... to

prevent any contracting party from taking any action which it considers necessary for the

protection of its essential security interests." On the other hand, in a recent ruling in a case not

involving the U.S. the WTO has adopted the position that it can review national decisions in this

area and judge their appropriateness. Predictably, the U.S. has criticized this decision.


       One can imagine more explicit rules about the process the U.S. (or any other country)

must go through before the national-security case is established. For example, has the

government prepared a public report, with input from economists and national security

experts, which lays out the case in favor? Have the domestic opponents of the policy been

given the chance to make the case against? Nevertheless, it is doubtful that any WTO approach

would make a difference to Trump's trade follies. But at least it might deny Trump (and other

nativist politicians) the grounds for the habitual complaint that the WTO and other

international bodies are trampling on national sovereignty.


   4. Concluding remarks


       International agreements are contracts in which nations freely enter. And since they are

voluntary contracts, there would seem little basis to question them on the basis of loss of

national autonomy or democratic legitimacy. But this approach begs the question of why states

enter into such contracts in the first place. To have democratic legitimacy, international

agreements have to pass political and economic tests: they must produce broad benefits and


                                                -25-
be consistent with democratic delegation (impose restraints that enhance democratic

functioning). By developing principled arguments for global economic governance, we can

clarify the set of circumstances under which such contracts are broadly desirable ­ as well as

distinguish these circumstances from instances where the contractual nature of international

agreement is used as a cloak to hide the privileging of particular special interests.


        When, for example, U.S. trade negotiators obtain TRIPS concessions from another

country in return for opening the U.S. market to that country's exports of garments, they

effectively trade off gains to pharma against concentrated losses on some segments of the

domestic labor market. How do we think about the appropriateness of such a contract?

Fundamental economic arguments of the type I have examined here are critical for supplying

appropriate justifications. In the presence of BTN/GPG considerations, the contract could be

win-win. In their absence, what superficially appears to be win-win ­ a mutual exchange of

market access -- is essentially a policy that induces a first-order redistribution at home.

International agreements would have more democratic legitimacy at home in the first instance

than in the second.


       Of course, even in BTN/GPG cases, there is no guarantee that democracies will solve

their domestic political problems and reach appropriate international bargains. The U.S.

withdrawal from the Paris climate agreement is a notable example. Such problems are yet

another reflection of one of the key arguments in this paper: Most policy mishaps in the world

economy today occur due to failures of national governance, not due to lack of international




                                                -26-
cooperation.13 To take yet another American example, Trump's national security tariffs are

economically harmful not because they damage other nations; they are harmful because they

impose substantial costs directly on the U.S. economy.


         Conventional wisdom on global governance relies on international coordination failures

arising from global public goods or beggar-thy-neighbor policies. When the troubles originate

with beggar-thyself policies instead, or legitimate grounds for diversity in economic policies,

this perspective is no longer helpful. For such circumstances, we need to update our thinking

and adopt a different approach to global cooperation. Instead of emphasizing the

harmonization of policies or removal of (real or perceived) trade barriers, this different

approach would acknowledge the demand for policy space by independent nations. It would

target democratic decision-making norms in addition to the the gains from market access.




13
  The word "today" is important in this sentence. It is possible to envisage situations where failure in international
cooperation plays a much more significant role. Trade and macroeconomic policies during the 1930s provide an
example. Similarly, a future world where statist/nationalist governments pursue a wide range of BTN policies is not
unimaginable.

                                                        -27-
REFERENCES

Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger, "Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty and International
Economic Institutions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2001.

Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger, The Economics of the World Trading System, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 2004.

Cohen, Harlan Grant, "What is International Trade Law For?" American Journal of International
Law, Vol. 113, April 2019.

Colgan, Jeff D., and Robert O. Keohane, "The Liberal Order Is Rigged," Foreign Affairs, May/June
2017.

Frieden, Jeffry, Michael Pettis, Dani Rodrik, and Ernesto Zedillo After the Fall: The Future of
Global Cooperation, Geneva Reports on the Global Economy, International Center for Monetary
and Banking Studies, Geneva, Switzerland, July 2012.

Gallagher, Kevin P., and Richard Kozul-Wright, A New Multilateralism for Shared Prosperity:
Geneva Principles for a Global Green New Deal, Boston University Global Development Policy
Center and UNCTAD, 2019.

Grossman, Gene, "The Purpose of Trade Agreements," Princeton University, March 2016.

Johnson, Harry G., "Optimum Tariffs and Retaliation," Review of Economic Studies, 21 (2), 1953.

Keohane, Robert O., Stephen Macedo, and Andrew Moravcsik, "Democracy-Enhancing
Multilateralism," International Organization, 63, Winter 2009.

Rodrik, Dani, "Second-Best Institutions," American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings,
May 2008.

Rodrik, Dani, "What Do Trade Agreements Really Do?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol.
32, No. 2, Spring 2018.

Rodrik, Dani, "Towards A More Inclusive Globalization: An Anti-Social Dumping Scheme,"
Economics for Inclusive Prosperity Policy Brief No. 9, February 2019 https://econfip.org/policy-
brief/towards-a-more-inclusive-globalization-an-anti-social-dumping-scheme/#.

Tørsløv, Thomas, Ludvig Wier, and Gabriel Zucman, "The Missing Profits of Nations," NBER
working paper 24701, August 2018.




                                              -28-
