                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DYNAMIC SOCIAL INTERACTIONS AND HEALTH RISK BEHAVIOR

                                         Tiziano Arduini
                                          Alberto Bisin
                                           Onur Özgür
                                       Eleonora Patacchini

                                       Working Paper 26223
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26223


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




We are grateful to Steven Durlauf, Matt Jackson, David Levine for their extensive comments and
suggestions at different stages. We also thank Larry Blume, Pierre-André Chiappori, Aureo De
Paula, Marcel Fafchamps, Bryan Graham, Bob Lucas, Jen Overbeck, Tom Sargent, José
Scheinkman, Giorgio Topa, and seminar participants at Yale, UPenn, NYU, Chicago, Cornell,
Queens, University of Toronto, University of Queensland, Melbourne Business School,
Université Laval, Australian National University, University of Western Australia, Workshop on
Social Identity and Social Interactions in Economics in Quebec City, and the Australasian
Economic Theory Workshop in Canberra. Özgür thanks the Economics Department at Sciences
Po in Paris, where a big part of this research was done, for its hospitality. Özgür is also grateful
for financial support to Melbourne Business School through MBS Competitive Grant schemes in
2013-2017, to "La Chaire du Canada en Économie des Politiques Sociales et des Ressources
Humaines" at Université Laval, and to SSHRC, FQRSC, and IFM2. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Tiziano Arduini, Alberto Bisin, Onur Özgür, and Eleonora Patacchini. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dynamic Social Interactions and Health Risk Behavior
Tiziano Arduini, Alberto Bisin, Onur Özgür, and Eleonora Patacchini
NBER Working Paper No. 26223
September 2019
JEL No. C18,C33,C62,C63,C73,I12

                                         ABSTRACT

We study risky behavior of adolescents. Concentrating on smoking and alcohol use, we
structurally estimate a dynamic social interaction model in the context of students' school
networks included in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). The
model allows for forward-looking behavior of agents, addiction effects, and social interactions in
the form of preferences for conformity in the social network. We find strong evidence for forward
looking dynamics and addiction effects. We also find that social interactions in the estimated
dynamic model are quantitatively large. A misspecified static model would fit data substantially
worse, while producing a much smaller estimate of the social interaction effect. With the
estimated dynamic model, a temporary shock to students' preferences in the 10th grade has
effects on their behavior in grades 10, 11, 12, with estimated social multipliers 1:53, 1:03, and
0:76, respectively. The multiplier effect of a permanent shock is much larger, up to 3:7 in grade
12. Moreover (semi-) elasticities of a permanent change in the availability of alcohol or
cigarettes at home on child risky behavior implied by the dynamic equilibrium are 25%, 63%, and
79%, in grades 10, 11, 12, respectively.

Tiziano Arduini                                 Onur Özgür
Department of Economics                         Melbourne Business School
University of Bologna                           onur.ozgur@mbs.edu
Piazza Scaravilli 2
Bologna 40126                                   Eleonora Patacchini
Italy                                           Department of Economics
iziano.arduini@unibo.it                         Cornell University
                                                430 Uris Hall
Alberto Bisin                                   Ithaca, NY 14853
Department of Economics                         ep454@cornell.edu
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu
1        Introduction

Smoking and alcohol use are widespread among adolescents. According to the 2018 National
Youth Tobacco Survey, more than 1 in 4 high school students and about 1 in 14 middle school
students had used a tobacco product in the past 30 days.1 Smoking and alcohol are a serious
policy concern in that they involve severe risks in terms of health outcomes. The World Health
Organization's Global Health Risks Report 2009 establishes that tobacco and alcohol account for,
respectively, 10.7 and 6.7% of the global burden of disease and injury in high income countries,
as measured in disability-adjusted life years (DALYs); see WHO (2009), Table 2. Furthermore,
smoking and especially alcohol are responsible for a large amount of socio-economic costs, in
terms of, e.g., poor academic performance (Renna, 2007), earnings and unemployment (Kenkel
and Ribar, 1994; Mullahy and Sindelar, 1996; Terza, 2002), and criminal victimization (French
and Maclean, 2006).
        The empirical literature on risky health behavior in economics and in the social sciences
emphasizes several fundamental aspects of smoking and alcohol use. First of all, they respond to
dynamic incentives, such as, e.g., future price changes and anticipated future consumption, and
have an addictive component (Becker, Grossman, and Murphy, 1991; Chaloupka, 1991; Waters
and Sloan, 1995). Furthermore, they are social behaviors, in the sense that they depend on the
behavior of relevant peers (Argys and Rees, 2008; Lundborg, 2006; Duncan et al., 2005; Balsa
and Diaz, 2018).2
        In this paper, we study the smoking and alcohol consumption decisions of adolescents. In
accordance with the empirical literature, we account for the dynamic forward-looking aspect of
the decision problem, allowing adolescents to consider the addictive characteristics of tobacco and
alcohol in evaluating the consequences of their behavior. Furthermore, we embed the dynamic
choice of adolescents regarding alcohol and smoking use in a school environment characterized
by rich social interactions. The joint consideration of dynamic choice and social interactions
highlights interesting novel dimensions of the choice problem, allowing students e.g., to anticipate
a change in their social network after high-school, which in turn may affect the importance of
peer effects over schooling age.
        More specifically, we formulate and structurally estimate a dynamic social interactions model.
    1
     The National Survey on Drug Use and Health reports that, in 2017, about 19% of underage people (ages 12-20)
were current alcohol users, and about 11.9% of the underage were binge drinkers.
   2
     See Cawley and Ruhm (2011) and Kenkel and Sindelar (2011) for extensive surveys.



                                                       2
Agents' preferences over choices at any time depend on their own previous choices, to capture
habits and addiction. Agents interact in their social reference group, the social network, and
display preference externalities: each individual's preferences depend on the current choices of
the agents in his/her network, to capture preferences for conformity to the social reference group.
This dynamic interaction structure induces each individual's choice to depend on previous choices
and current preference shocks of all other individuals in his/her social network.3 We bring the
model to data in the context of students' school networks included in the Add Health. The data
collected by this survey includes information about each student's health-risk behavior as well as
his/her social network, repeatedly, in distinct school-years. We use the panel dimension of the
data to structurally estimate our dynamic social interaction model. We estimate the system of
linear policy rules describing the equilibrium. In turn, the equilibrium characterization of the
dynamic game allows us to back out the structural preference parameters from our estimates of
the policy rules.
    There are well-known inferential problems in the study of social interactions.4 In our context,
three main issues arise due to: (i) the endogeneity of previous choices as explanatory variables
for current choice, in the absence of any restrictions on the intertemporal correlation structure of
errors, (ii) the existence of common shocks or common unobserved factors affecting all individuals'
choices in a network, independently of social interactions, and (iii) the endogeneity of the network.
All these issues translate into correlation between the regressors and the errors. For all three
issues, we offer solutions that allow us to construct a consistent estimator in our environment by
using the moment restrictions imposed by the dynamic equilibrium.
    Our empirical analysis confirms the main thrust of our model regarding smoking and alcohol
use in the adolescent population. The preference parameters driving the addiction effect and
the social interaction effect are estimated both to be significantly different from 0. Furthermore,
a significant forward looking component characterizes students' decision making: namely, the
discount rate also is positive and significant. Indeed, we measure a relevant bias associated
with estimating (i) a mis-specified myopic model (which allows for addiction but not for forward
looking choice); as well as (ii) a mis-specified static model (with no addiction nor forward looking
behavior). Notably, the static model produces a much smaller estimate of the social interaction
   3
     Formally, the model is reduced to a dynamic game which, under our assumptions, we show has a unique
Subgame Perfect Equilibrium. We characterize equilibrium behavior as a system of linear non-stationary Markovian
policy rules, for each individual and in each time period.
   4
     See e.g., Blume et al. (2015), Brock and Durlauf (2001b), and Manski (2008).



                                                       3
effect.5 As for social interactions, we estimate sizable quantitative effects, as measured by the
implied social multiplier and by the induced correlation between the students' choices across
the network.6 More precisely, the social multiplier, in our context, has a fundamental dynamic
component: a temporary (one-period) shock to agents' preferences in the 10th grade has effects
on their behaviors in grades 10, 11, 12, with multipliers 1.53, 1.03, and 0.76, respectively. The
multiplier of a permanent shock in grade 10 is 1.55 in the same grade, 2.6 in grade 11, and 3.68 in
grade 12. Finally, the same-period multiplier effect of a temporary shock in the different grades
encodes the importance of the number of periods to the end of school in students' choice. In this
respect, our estimates imply that the same-period social multiplier in grade 12 (the last year of
high-school) is about 1.7, whereas it is 1.56 and 1.53, respectively, in grades 11 and 10. This
is evidence that students anticipate a change in their social network after high-school and this
affects the importance of peer effects over schooling age: as the time to the end of high-school
increases, the students' policy functions weigh more heavily future shocks and the current shock
has a smaller effect.
    We also implement a validation exercise of our empirical strategy and our structural estimates.
We use the structural estimates to make out-of-sample predictions of students' equilibrium be-
havior in networks that are not included in the estimation sample. More precisely, we use the
structural parameters off of our estimation network sample consisting of grades 10, 11, and 12 to
predict equilibrium behavior for students in the network sample consisting of grades 7, 8, and 9.
We compare predictions and actual choice data to validate the model and demonstrate that the
model performs very well in the validation exercise.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1 places the paper in context
vis-`
    a-vis the related literature. Section 2 presents the structural model of dynamic health risk
choices with network interactions. Section 3 describes the Add Health data set we use to estimate
the model. Section 4 describes the empirical implementation of the model. Section 5 presents
our main empirical findings, model validation outcomes, as well as our results regarding the
social multiplier and cross-sectional behavioral correlation effects, obtained using actual student
networks. Section 6 investigates the sensitivity of the results to an alternative definition of peers.
    5
      The empirical analysis demonstrates also the importance of controlling for endogeneity, hence allowing for
selection into the social network. Neglecting the endogeneity of the social network leads to a large significant
downward bias in the estimate of addiction effects and an upward bias in the estimate of conformity effects.
    6
      The social multiplier measures the amplification on individual actions of the effects of an exogenous shock due
to peer effects. It is the standard metric adopted for social interactions. Similar results are obtained also using as
a measure of social interactions the correlation between students' choices in each period and the average level of
those of their peers at different social distances (smallest number of links between them in the network).


                                                          4
Finally, Section 7 concludes.


1.1      Related Literature

As we noted in the Introduction, risky health behaviors have been extensively studied in economics
and more generally in the social sciences. We refer to Cawley and Ruhm (2011) and Kenkel and
Sindelar (2011) for extensive and detailed surveys of the literature. A fundamental aspect of
both the theoretical and the empirical literatures in economics involves i) distinguishing rational
addiction models, as introduced by Becker and Murphy (1988) and developed by Orphanides and
Zervos (1995), from behavioral models, as in Gruber and Kosegi (2001), Bernheim and Rangel
(2004) and others; ii) dealing with the inferential problems plaguing the empirical study of social
interactions, as noticed by Manski (1993) and addressed by Blume et al. (2015), Brock and
Durlauf (2001b) and many others.
       With respect to rational and behavioral models of addiction, it should be noted that in both
classes of models agents respond to dynamic incentives, such as, e.g., future price changes and
anticipated future consumption. But the implied responses are different along several dimen-
sions. Agents' choices in behavioral models are driven by preferences for immediate gratification,
impulsivity, and cue-triggered addiction which have no role in models of rational addiction. The
distinction between rational and behavioral addiction manifest itself most clearly, therefore, in
high frequency decisions, over days. It is much less relevant when studying, as in our case, low
frequency decisions, over years. For this reason we postulate rational agents in our analysis.
       With respect to inference in social interactions models, as we noted in the Introduction, we
try and address the main issues in the literature: (i) the endogeneity of previous choices as
explanatory variables for current choice, in the absence of any restrictions on the intertemporal
correlation structure of errors, (ii) the existence of common shocks or common unobserved factors
affecting all individuals' choices in a network, independently of social interactions, and (iii) the
endogeneity of the network. First of all, regarding (i) we instrument previous choices, using the
characteristics of connected individuals in the social network as well as own lagged characteristics.
In the absence of dynamics, the quest for valid instruments is conducted necessarily at the cross-
sectional level and exclusion restrictions are translated into necessary conditions on the structure
of the adjacency matrix.7 In our dynamic environment, we are not restricted to the cross-section.
   7
    The characteristics of friends and friends of friends are valid instruments under appropriate restrictions on the
structure of the adjacency matrix; see e.g. Bramoull´  e et al. (2009), Calvo-Armengol et al. (2009).



                                                         5
In particular, we have access, for each period, to the strictly exogenous lagged variables from the
information set in the previous periods. These variables are informative for the lagged choice
variables by virtue of the intertemporal linkages formed by the moment restrictions of dynamic
equilibrium of our social interactions model. To sum up, exploiting the equilibrium restrictions
that jointly employ interactions in "space" as well as rational expectations interactions in "time"
provides us with much richer possibilities for identification. As for (ii), we tackle the issue by
including network fixed effects. Because in the Add Health data networks are small (composed
on average of 25 students, with 10 as the median), this strategy reasonably accounts for the
presence of unobserved factors common to groups of friends. Finally, regarding (iii), to control
for the endogeneity due to selection into the friendship network, we add a Heckman-correction
term to the structural equations we estimate as also recommended by Blume et al. (2015). More
precisely, we estimate an extended version of our model, by adopting an approach developed by
Qu and Lee (2015), in which we explicitly account for a possible correlation between unobserved
factors jointly affecting both network formation and equilibrium outcomes.8
       From a theoretical point of view the main novelty in the analysis of this paper consists in
the study of the theoretical properties of equilibrium in an economy displaying both dynamic
forward-looking agents and social interactions. In this respect, a related model is introduced in
Reiff (2018), to characterize the theoretical properties of addiction in a dynamic forward-looking
model with social interactions. Social interactions, however, are modeled in a reduced form, by
having agents' preferences depend on the average action in the economy, without a specification
of the structure of interactions on the network. Differently than in our model, therefore, in
Reiff (2018) agents need not anticipate the effects of their actions on those of their peers in
their decision problems. Various theoretical properties of models of social interactions in linear
                                      ¨ ur, Bisin, and Bramoull´
dynamic economies are also studied in Ozg¨                       e (2019). In the current paper,
however, the analysis of social interactions is extended to allow for a general network topology.
This is important in particular because it changes identification conditions. More specifically,
   8
     A growing literature on social interactions has resorted to modeling the formation of social networks, to provide
a more satisfactory solution to iii); see e.g., Apicella, Marlowe, Fowler, and Christakis (2012), Badev (2018), de
Paula, Richards-Shubik, and Tamer (2018), Hsieh and Lee (2015), Sheng (2018), Mele (2017a,b). Empirical work
along these lines also exploits Add Health data. Embedding network formation in a fully specified dynamic forward-
looking choice model is theoretically daunting. Mele (2017a,b), for instance, estimates a network formation model to
fit the observed networks' statistical properties, such as, e.g. homophily. But the paper does not study equilibrium
choices in the network. Badev (2018), while estimating a network formation model in the context of smoking choice,
restricts the analysis to a static choice model (though the network is allowed to change following an evolutionary
process). For this reason, to be able to allow for dynamic choice, in this paper we take the simpler but admittedly
reduced form approach of estimating a Heckman-correction term.


                                                          6
an incomplete network structure provides a source of non-linearity (intransitive triads) that can
be exploited for identification purposes (Bramoull´
                                                  e et al., 2009; Calvo-Armengol et al., 2009) in
addition to lagged values of exogenous variables as suggested by the moment restrictions of the
dynamic equilibrium.
    In terms of the empirical analysis, the main contribution of this paper still consists in estimat-
ing structurally a model which allows jointly for both dynamic forward-looking agents and social
interactions. Indeed, most studies of risky health behaviors have examined either peer group
effets or addiction and dynamic effects; see the literature surveyed by Cawley and Ruhm (2011)
and Kenkel and Sindelar (2011), and, more recently, e.g., Nakajima (2007), Card and Giuliano
(2013), Eisenberg et al. (2014), Lee et al. (2014) and Hsieh and Van Kippersluis (2018). On this
dimension, the closest paper to ours is Dahl, Løoken, and Mogstad (2014), on the influence of
peers in the take up of social programs (specifically, paid paternity leave in Norway). Using in-
formation transmission as the channel for social interactions, Dahl, Løoken, and Mogstad (2014)
estimates "snowball effects", that is, peer effects which have a dynamic component as in our
dynamic social multiplier. The analysis however does not allow for forward-looking behavior in
the dynamic choice of agents, and the dynamics of peer effects is due to the exogenous spreading
of interactions over the network.


2    Dynamic Interactions on Networks

In this section, we introduce the theoretical structure we shall adopt in the paper to study dynamic
interactions on networks. Agents make choices over time. Their preferences over choices at any
time t depend on their own previous choices at t - 1. In the context of health risk behavior
we study in this paper, this dependence represents the costs associated to behavioural changes
due, e.g., to habits and addictions. Agents interact in their social reference group, the social
network, and display preference externalities: each agent's preferences at any time t depend
on the current choices of agents in her network. In the context of health risk behavior, this
effect represents agents preferences for conformity with the social reference group. This dynamic
interaction structure induces each agent's optimal choice to depend on all other agents' previous
choices and current preference shocks.




                                                  7
2.1      The model

The economy is populated by a finite number of agents i = 1, . . . , N for t = 1, . . . , T periods.
Each agent i chooses an action yit at time t after having observed a preference shock it  .9 Let
yt and t denote the corresponding N -dimensional vectors stacking all agents. Let  := (t ) :=
(it )i=1,...,N, t1 be the stochastic process of agents' preference shocks.
       The economy's social network is represented by an N × N matrix G = [gij ], where gij indicates
the friendship relationship between i and j . We consider a directed network, in which each agent
interacts directly with her friends, and friendship of i with j does not imply friendship of j with
i. Following the convention in the social networks literature, i) gij > 0 if i nominates j as one of
her friends, otherwise gij = 0; ii)        j   gij = 1; iii) gii = 0.10
       The preferences of an agent i at time t are represented by the utility function


                        ui (yit-1 , yt , t , G) := -1 (yit-1 - yit )2 - 2 (it - yit )2                            (1)
                                                               N
                                                      -3           gij (yjt - yit )2 ,
                                                            j =1


where 1 , 2 , 3  0 are parameters. The utility function ui represents the trade-offs that each
agent i faces in her choice at time t. Each agent i obtains utility from matching her individual
choice yit with her previous choice yit-1 , her preference shock it , and with the current choices of
her peers {yjt }j :gij =0 . We refer to 1 as the addiction effect, to 2 as the own effect, and to 3
as the peer effect. While (1 , 2 , 3 ) are restricted to be homogeneous across agents, preference
heterogeneity is captured in the formulation of the stochastic processes it .11
       Agents maximize expected present discounted utility, with discount rate  < 1. Before her
choice at time t, each agent observes i) the history of previous choices, yt-1 = (y0 , y1 , . . . , yt-1 ),
and ii) the history of preference shocks, t = (1 , . . . , t ) (including the period-t realization).
   9
      See Appendix A for the formal introduction of the model, where all the technical assumptions are well-specified.
  10
      By assuming a directed network, the matrix G is asymmetric. None of our theoretical results, however, hinge
on this assumption. That is, they hold also in the case of a symmetric netwok structure.
   11
      While we model preferences for conformity directly as a preference externality, we intend this as a reduced
form of models of behavior in groups that induce indirect preferences for conformity, as e.g., Jones (1984) , Cole et
al. (1992), Bernheim (1994), and Peski (2007).




                                                           8
2.2        Equilibrium

We consider Subgame Perfect Nash equilibria of this economy. At a Subgame Perfect Nash
equilibrium, agents make optimal choices simultaneously at each time t. The equilibrium is
                                   }N such that for all i = 1, . . . , N and for all (yt-1 ,  t ),
represented by a family of maps {yi i=1

                                                                T
                                 t-1
                       yit   y         ,   t
                                                argmaxyit Y E          t-1 ui (yit-1 , yt , t , G)           (2)
                                                                t=1


for (y0 , 1 ) given.
         The economy displays a unique Subgame Perfect Equilibrium.12 The first order condition for
agent i's problem can be written as


                             yt = 1 Bt yt-1 + 2 Bt (Dt + t ) ,               t = 1, ..., T,                  (3)


where (y0 , 1 ) is given and the N × N matrix Bt and the N × 1 matrix Dt can be computed
recursively: Bt , t < T depends only on the future equilibrium coefficient matrices (B ) >t ; while
Dt represents the discounted sum of the effects of expected future  's,  > t.13


3         Data

Our data source is the Add Health, a dataset on adolescents' behavior in the United States. The
dataset collects self-reported demographic and behavioral characteristics from students in grades
7-12 from a nationally representative sample of roughly 130 private and public schools in years
1994-95.14 Every student attending the sampled schools on the interview day was asked to com-
plete a questionnaire (in-school questionnaire) containing questions on respondents' demographic
    12
      In Appendix A, we formally state and prove the equilibrium existence and uniqueness result, as well as the
details of recursive algorithm to compute equilibria. Uniqueness requires 1 + 2 > 0 to anchor agents' preferences
on their own private types or past choices. Clearly, without such an anchor, actions are driven only by social
interactions, own past behavior and types have no effect on the outcomes, and a large multiplicity of equilibria
would arise.
  13
      See Appendices B and C for closed form characterizations of Bt and Dt , as well as a recursive algorithm to
compute them.
  14
     The Add Health is a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry,
Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by
grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,
with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Information on how to obtain the Add
Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support
was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis.



                                                           9
and basic family background characteristics. A subset of students randomly selected from the ros-
ters of the sampled schools was then asked to complete at home a longer questionnaire containing
more sensitive individual and household information (in-home questionnaire), including detailed
questions about risky behaviors. In 16 randomly sampled schools, all students are interviewed
at home (the so-called saturated sample). Our analysis focusses on this data. Specifically, we
restrict our sample to include all students in the schools where information on risky behaviors is
collected for the entire school.15
       A unique feature of the Add Health data is that students are asked to identify their best
friends from a school roster, so that the geometry of the friendship networks within each school is
observed.16 The nominations are asked in two waves of the survey (wave I and wave II) one year
apart. The demographic and behavioral characteristics of the nominated friends of each of the
students in the sample are also observed. As a result, each student's information is collected twice,
in two waves in consecutive grades. Hence the sample has a panel dimension. In our analysis,
we use Wave II to measure the students' risky behavior a time t and the network topology, and
wave I to get information on the students' risky behavior at time t - 1. In Section 6, we show the
robustness of our results when adopting as network definitions the network topology at wave I.17
       We focus our analysis on smoking and alcohol use, which are the most common risky behaviors
among teenagers. We focus on students who declare having tried smoking and alcohol to avoid
the difficult and arbitrary classification of adolescents as "consumers" or "non-consumers." To
measure smoking, we use the answers to the question "During the past 30 days, on the days you
smoked, how many cigarettes did you smoke each day?". To measure alcohol consumption, we use
the most similar question: "Think of all the times you have had a drink during the past 12 months.
How many drinks did you usually have each time?". We construct an index of risky behavior
for each individual by first standardizing each component (cigarette and alcohol consumption) in
[0,1] and then averaging. An higher value of the index is interpreted as a riskier health choice.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of the teenagers in our sample by cigarette consumption, alcohol
consumption, and the composite index. The distributions have a mode (of about 40% of students)
  15
     This is done to avoid the complex inferential issues due to the missing observations in the friendship data for
the schools where a random sampling scheme is adopted.
  16
     The number of nominations is limited to five males and five females, but the limit is not binding not even by
gender. Less than 1 percent of the students in our sample report a list of ten best friends, less than 3 percent
report a list of 5 boys, and roughly 4 percent a list of 5 girls.
  17
     In the saturated sample, about 30 percent of the wave I nominations are not confirmed in wave II and about
30 percent of new nominations appear in Wave II.




                                                        10
corresponding to minimal consumption of cigarettes and alcohol.18
       Our set of control variables includes the variables indicated by the literature (see e.g., Cawley
and Ruhm, 2011; Lee et al., 2014) as determinants of teenagers' risky behavior, such as age,
gender, parental education, race, and indicators of the social structure of families as well as
variables measuring the susceptibility of a teenager to engage in risky behavior (whether alcohol
or cigarettes are easily available at home and whether the child receives a weekly allowance
from the parents).192021 Finally, we include height, since it has been indicated as a predictor of
participation in social activities, such as team sports (see Persico, Postlewaite, and Silverman,
2004).22 The uniqueness of our data where both respondents and friends are interviewed allows us
to control for peers' characteristics, thus disentangling the effects of endogenous from exogenous
effects. More precisely peers' characteristics are defined as the average value of the above controls
over the nominated friends.
       The sample counts 2336 students, about 543 of which are in middle schools (grades 7, 8, and
9) and 1793 in high-schools. We use the (larger) sample of high school students to structurally
estimate our model and the sample of middle school students for its validation. In the sample
of high school students without missing values in the variables (1759 out of 1793 students),
there are 552 students who do not indicate any best friend in the nomination roster. In Table
G1, we report summary statistics for the entire sample (Panel (a))), for the sample without
observations with missing values (Panel (b)) and for the sample with no isolates (Panel (c)). It
appears that the composition of the sample is roughly unaffected, thus revealing that the average
  18
      About 40 percent of students smoke one cigarette or less and/or have one drink or less.
  19
      In the wave I in-home questionnaire students are asked, for each parent, to select how far each of their
biological parents went in their education, with possible answers: "never went to school", "not graduate from high
school","high school graduate","graduated from college or a university", "professional training beyond a four-year
college". If the information is available for both residential parent, we select the father level of education. We
construct a variable "Parents College degree", which is coded as 1 if the parent is "graduated from college or a
university" or "professional training beyond a four-year college". The base category is "never went to school".
   20
      From the wave I in-home questionnaire, we construct a variable "Two-parents family" using the respondent'
answers about household composition. In particular, this variable is coded as 1 if students report to have two
parents (both biological or not) that are currently living in their household, and 0 otherwise.
   21
      Students are asked to answer yes or no to the questions "Are cigarettes easily available to you in your home?"
and "Is alcohol easily available to you in your home?". We construct a variable "Alcohol/tobacco at home", which
is coded as 1 if the respondent answers yes in at least one of the questions above, and 0 otherwise. We construct
a variable "Pocket money", from student responses to the question: "How much is your allowance each week?
If you don't receive your allowance weekly, how much would it be each week?". The three questions together
measure the accessibility to alcohol and tobacco, either directly (i.e. stealing a cigarette from the mother's purse)
or indirectly, by buying them and are also related with the price elasticities of demand for cigarettes (see e.g.,
Gallet and List, 2003; Cook and More, 2000). We measure these variables in both wave I and Wave II, from the
in-home questionnaire.
   22
      The respondents' height in feet and inches is available in both wave II and wave I in-home questionnaire.



                                                         11
student who do not indicate any best friend and are not nominated by anyone is not dissimilar
from the average student who names at least one best friend. Because a smaller sample size
substantially decreases computing time in the estimation of our model, we focus our analysis
on students who are connected in a social network and show the robustness of our main results
when including isolated individuals in Section 6. Our final sample of high school students counts
1207 individuals (Table G1, Panel (c)). Consistently with the epidemiological literature (see e.g.,
Malone et al., 2012) which find persistence of alcohol and tobacco consumption after initiation,
our risky behavior index increases from wave I to wave II given the young age of students (from
14 to 20 with an average of 17 in wave II. Girls make up about 50 percent of the sample.
Around 60 percent of the sample is White, 11 percent is Black or African American, 18 percent
is Hispanic or Latino, and the reminder is Asian or with unclear racial background. The average
height in the sample is 67 feet and the average allowance around 8 dollar per week. Finally,
26 percent of our adolescents have cigarettes or alcohol easily available at home. Regarding
student family background, about 73 percent of the adolescents in our sample have two parents
living in the household and roughly 25 percent have parents who are college graduates or above.
These percentages are in line with data from other national representative surveys. We report
in Table G2 in Appendix G information from the 1994 Current Population Survey (CPS) that is
re-weighted to match the age distribution of the Add Heath sample. As shown, the Add Health
population is broadly similar to the U.S. population as calculated from the CPS.23


4         Empirical Methodology

We use the panel dimension of our data to structurally estimate our dynamic social interac-
tion model. The structural system of equations we estimate is the first order condition system
describing the equilibrium, Equation 3,


                                yt = 1 Bt yt-1 + 2 Bt (Dt + t ) , t = 1, ..., T.


which expresses the vector of outcomes yt as a function of the outcomes in the previous period,
yt-1 , and contemporaneous variables (including expectations about the future).
         In our empirical exercise, the empirical counterpart of this equation system at time t = T is
constructed by considering students at grade 12 in wave II and the same individuals in grade 11
    23
         The IPUMS-CPS database is freely available since 1962. See Flood et al. (2018) for further information.


                                                           12
at wave I. In other words, we use outcomes of 12th grade students as yT and outcomes of the
same students in the 11th grade as yT -1 . The empirical counterpart of the system at t = T - 1
is then constructed by considering individuals in grade 11 in wave II and the same individuals in
grade 10 in wave I; and so on until t = T - 4 with students in 8th grade (wave II) and the 7th
(wave I). In Table 1, we summarize the structure of our sample.
   We estimate Equation 3 at t = T , t = T - 1 and t = T - 2 with data referring to high school
students (grades 10th to 12th). We then exploit the structural equation at t = T - 3 and t = T - 4
with data referring to middle school students (grades 7th to 9th) to validate the model.
   Equation 3 depends on the structure of the stochastic process of preference shocks T , which
captures the heterogeneity across agents in the model. In our empirical exercise, we implement
heterogeneous preference shocks as follows. Let the index k = 1, ..., K account for the k -th distinct
component of individual i's observable characteristics (e.g. age, gender, parent's education) and
      (k)
let xit denote its value for agent i at time t. The preference shock it is allowed to depend on
individual i's characteristics and on those of the member of her network. It is decomposed as
follows:

                             K               K    N
                                     (k)                      (k)
                  it :=           k xit +              k gij xjt +           uit ,                (4)
                            k=1             k=1 j =1                  Unobserved component
                            Observed exogenous heterogeneity (ait )


where k and k are parameters. In matrix form:


                                       t = Xt  + GXt  + ut ,                                      (5)


where  and  are K × 1 vectors of parameters, Xt is an N × K matrix, and t = 1, . . . , T .


4.1     Identification

In this section, we derive conditions under which the dynamic model with social interaction we
have introduced is identified when the number of individuals N , the horizon of the economy T ,
and the social structure G, are fixed and known to the econometrician.
   The structural equation system defining the equilibrium of the dynamic social interaction
economy is obtained by substituting the equation for the preference shocks, Equation 5, into the




                                                       13
first order condition system, Equation 3:


                   yt = 1 Bt yt-1 + 2 Bt (Dx
                                           t + Xt  + GXt  ) + t ,               t = 1, 2, . . . , T           (6)


where the conditional expectations in Dt are conveniently split into an observable and an unob-
servable component, respectively denoted Dx      u                u
                                          t and Dt and t = 2 Bt (Dt + ut ).

       The parameters of the economy are the utility parameters (1 , 2 , 3 ), the discount factor  ,
the own and social effects parameters  = (1 , . . . , K ) and  = (1 , . . . , K ) . Utility functions
are unique up to positive affine transformations and hence (1 , 2 , 3 ) are normalized so that

  i i    = 1. We assume the following standard conditions:

Exogeneity: E [us | Xt ] = 0, for any s, t = 1, . . . , T ;

Full rank: the moment matrix generated by the elements of {XT , XT -1 , XT -2 } has full rank.

       Exogeneity requires that observable covariates and unobservables are orthogonal, contempora-
neously and intertemporally. Full rank requires lack of multicollinearity and enough intertemporal
variation in the observable covariates. We also assume that

Regularity: there exists k  {1, . . . , K } such that 1 2 (k + k ) = 0.

       This assumption requires that the lagged variables from the information set in period t - 1,
{Xt-1 , Xt-2 , . . . , X0 , y0 }, are potentially informative for the lagged choice variable yt-1 , which
is the endogeneous variable, in the structural equation for period t. Importantly, all these as-
sumptions are consistent with substantial correlation over time and across the network, both in
observables and unobservables.
       Under these assumptions, the structural equations of our dynamic model with social interac-
tion, Equation 6, for T  2, are identified.24 The proof of this identification result proceeds in two
steps: i) we prove that the coefficients of the structural equation, Equation 6, can be consistently
estimated, and ii) we show that the map from the structural parameters (1 , 2 , 3 , , ,  ) to the
coefficients of Equation 6 is injective. We provide here the main arguments and a general discus-
sion of how we can implement step i) of the identification result. Technical arguments needed for
proving i) and a description of the recursive algorithm for step ii) are detailed in Appendix D.
  24
       More precisely,
                                        Fp (y, X) = Fp (y, X)  p = p ;
where p = (1 , 2 , 3 , , ,  ) and Fp (y, X) is the joint probability distribution of observables (y, X) induced by
the parameters p .


                                                       14
       Consider the system in Equation 6 at t = T, T - 1. Because Dt contains expectations about
future shocks, DT = 0. The system in 6 can be reduced to


              yT   = 1 BT yT -1 + 2 BT (XT  + GXT ) + T ,                                           (7)

            yT -1 = 1 BT -1 yT -2 + 2 BT -1 (XT  + GXT ) + 2 BT -1 Dx
                                                                    T -1 + T -1 .                   (8)


       The endogeneity of yT -1 in Equation 7 and of yT -2 in Equation 8 requires to find suitable
instrumental variables, qT -1 and qT -2 . Consider selecting qt = [Xt , GXt ], t = T -1, T . Predicted
values of yt-1 are formed by projecting them on the space spanned by the set of instrumential
variables qt-1 , t = T - 1, T . These are valid instruments by construction since: (i) Regularity
implies E [qt-1 yt-1 ] = 0, t = T - 1, T ; (ii) Full rank implies explanatory variables are not
collinear; (iii) Exogeneity guarantees that exclusion restrictions are satisfied, i.e., E [qt-1 t ] = 0,
t = T - 1, T . Finally, Equation 7 is independent of  and hence the condition T  2 is necessary
to identify it.
       The set of instruments qt , t = T - 1, T is larger than necessary allowing for flexibility and
power in empirical implementation. More specifically, our dynamic model with social interactions
can be identified using the dynamic equilibrium restriction imposed by the model with only past
variables as instruments, qt-1 = [Xt-1 ]. The model can also be identified with only the topology
of the social network, qt-1 = [GXt-1 ], though this requires some extra regularity conditions on
the network, e.g., the linear independence of the powers of G, as in Bramoull´
                                                                             e et al. (2009).


4.2      Estimation

Because of the dynamic recursive structure of the theoretical framework, we can jointly estimate
the reduced-form equilibrium equations 6, for t = T, T - 1, T - 2 (as in Table 1). In particular,
we implement a nonlinear optimal Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimator (Hansen
(1982) and Cameron and Trivedi (2005)).25 The definition of the instrument matrix is based on
our identification result and it is detailed in Appendix E. We consider two modelling strategies.
First, we estimate the model assuming exogeneity of the network G. Because of the dynamic
recursive structure of the theoretical framework, we can jointly estimate the reduced-form equilib-
rium equations 6, for t = T, T - 1, T - 2 (as in Table 1). Second, we tackle a possible endogeneity
of the network by implementing a two-step procedure `
                                                    a la Heckman, as recommended by Blume
  25
       See Appendix E for details on the GMM procedure.



                                                     15
et al. (2015).26 Specifically, we estimate an extended version of our model in which we explicitly
account for a possible correlation between unobserved factors jointly affecting both network for-
mation and equilibrium outcomes. To this end, we adapt an approach developed by Qu and Lee
(2015) for the estimation of a spatial autoregressive model with geographical data.
    In our context, the approach consists in modeling friendship ties between students using a
standard dyadic model of link formation (see, e.g., Fafchamps and Gubert (2007)). Let gij denote
the probability that two students i and j are linked as friends. We postulate a linear probability
model in terms of the distance between the agents in terms of their characteristics, [xk    k
                                                                                       i , xj ], for
k = 1, ..., K :
                                                                 (k)      (k)
                                      gij = 0 +            k |xi       - xj | + ij                          (9)
                                                       k

where                                                 
                                                        2 j = k
                                                        
                                         E (ij ik ) =            .
                                                       = 0 j = k

The selection effect is the correlation between unobservable characteristics determining link for-
mation ij and the unobservable characteristics uit in the preference shock it in equation 4. It
is assumed to be homogeneous across agents:


                                            E (uit ij ) = u , j = i.


Under these assumptions and linearity of the conditional expectation of uit given ij , E (uit |i2 , . . . , in ) =
t , where  = u 2 and  =                             Equation 6 can then be rewritten as:27
                     t                    j =i ij


                  yt = 1 Bt yt-1 + 2 Bt (Dx
                                          t + Xt  + GXt ) + 2 Bt (t ) + et ,                               (10)


where et = 2 Bt     t   with   t   = (ut - t ), t = (1 , ...n ) and the term t captures the selectivity
bias.
    We implement a two-stage estimation procedure of equation 10:

Stage 1 Estimate t from an OLS regression of 9;
  26
     Alternative avenues to address this issue would embed a network formation game into our dynamic recursive
behavioral model. We reserve such challenging avenues for future research.
  27
     Observe that normality is not required. Linearity of the conditional expectation of uit given ij suffices.
For example, exponential and uniform distributed errors also satisfy the requirement. See also the discussion of
Assumption 2 in Qu and Lee (2015).




                                                            16
Stage 2 Estimate by nonlinear optimal GMM the reduced-form equilibrium equations 10 for
           t = T, T - 1, T - 2, after replacing t with its estimated counterpart in Stage 1, t .28

         Inference is however complicated in this estimation procedure because the selectivity term is
a generated regressor from a previous estimation and no closed form solution is available for the
nonlinear optimal GMM standard errors estimates. We use bootstrapped standard errors with
1000 replications. Because of the inherent structural dependency of network data, the design of
the resampling scheme needs special consideration. The residuals in the vector ^
                                                                               et are not i.i.d.,
and thus one cannot sample with replacement from this vector. We thus use a residual bootstrap
procedure, resampling on the structural errors             t   which are assumed to be i.i.d.29 The extended
model 9-10 is identified even if the xk
                                      i variables used in the link formation and in the outcome
equation completely overlap, as in our case (see Goldsmith-Pinkham and Imbens (2013), and
Hsieh and Lee (2015)).30


5         Empirical network effects

Estimating our structural model of dynamic interaction on networks allows us to recover individ-
ual preferences from health risk behavior data. The main preference parameters in the model are
the discount rate  , the addiction effect parameter 1 , the own effect parameter 2 , and the peer
                                                                                                 3
effects parameter 3 , which we normalize without loss of generality so that                      i=1   i = 1. In the
specifications in which the network is endogenous, we also estimate the selectivity parameter  ,
a measure of the importance of unobservables leading individuals both to risky behavior and to
form friendship ties.
         Table 2 presents the estimates of the structural parameters: in Column 1 the network G is
assumed to be exogenous, while in Column 2 network formation is assumed to satisfy the linear
dyadic structure in equation 9.
    28
     In this stage we use the same instrument matrix of the exogenous network case detailed in Appendix E.
    29
     This procedure is commonly used in spatial econometrics; see e.g., Anselin (1990). In practice, having in hand
                    et one can derive the estimates of the structural errors from ^t = B-
the residual vector ^                                                                         1
                                                                                             t ^et . These estimates are
then resampled school by school.
  30
     Observe that the way identification is achieved, however, is not by functional form as in the traditional Heckman
selection model (that is based on the use of a 0-1 dependent variable in the first stage). The identification strategy
here exploits non-linearities specific to the network structure of our model. In our approach, the dyad-specific
regressors used in the first stage (the network formation stage) are expressed in absolute values of differences of
                              (k)    (k)
individual characteristics, |xi - xj |. These differences do not appear in the outcome equation. Finding pure
"excluded variables" is notoriously difficult in environments like ours.




                                                          17
       The estimate for  is significant and relatively stable, independently of whether network
formation is endogenized. The point estimate is low but not abnormally so with respect to the
results in the experimental literature; see e.g., Frederick, Lowenstein, and O'Donoghue (2002).
Most importantly, the peer effect 3 and the addiction effect 1 are also significant; they are
similar in size, but they are 2-3 times larger (with respect to the own effect 2 ) when controlling for
the endogeneity of network formation. The selectivity parameter  is small and not significantly
different from 0. The validation exercise we implement next in Section 5.1 gives however statistical
support to our approach to control for the endogeneity of the network. Interestingly, the negative
sign of the point estimate for  is consistent with the presence of unobservables which lead
individuals to form friendship ties while reducing their utility for risky behavior.31


5.1      Out-of-sample Validation

In this section, we implement a model validation exercise of the structural estimates of our
dynamic recursive model, comparing out-of-sample predicted equilibrium behavior to actual be-
havioral data across different networks not employed in the estimation sample. We believe that
by demonstrating that our dynamic model's predictions perform well when applied to pertinent
new data, this validation exercise would give the reader more confidence that a mechanism of
social interactions (the underlying structure) is uncovered from the data rather than imposed on
the data.
       To fullfil this objective, we follow an approach inspired by Todd and Wolpin (2006).32 More
precisely, as we explain in Section 4.2, we first estimate the structural parameters using the
(larger) sample of students in grades 10, 11, and 12 under two specifications: (i) under the
exogeneity of the network G, using the reduced-form equilibrium equations 6 jointly, for t =
T, T - 1, T - 2, by linking the structural equations and the sample as in Table 1; and (ii) under
the possible endogeneity of the network G, using the reduced-form equilibrium equations 10
jointly, for t = T, T - 1, T - 2, once again by linking the structural equations and the sample
as in Table 1 and by explicitly accounting for a possible correlation between unobserved factors
jointly affecting both network formation and equilibrium outcomes. Those parameter estimates
under both specifications are reported in Table 2.
  31
    This could be the case if, for example, individuals practice a sport together with their peers.
  32
    In the context of a randomized social experiment in Mexico, Todd and Wolpin (2006) estimate a dynamic
model without using post-program data and then compare the model's predictions about program impacts to the
experimental impact estimates.



                                                    18
   Next, we predict equilibrium risky behavior index for students in the hold-out sample con-
sisting of grades 7, 8, and 9. Specifically, (i) under the exogeneity of the network G, we use
the reduced-form equilibrium equations 6 jointly, for t = T - 3, T - 4, by linking the structural
equations and the sample as in Table 1, and (ii) under the possible endogeneity of the network
G, we use the reduced-form equilibrium equations 10 jointly, for t = T - 3, T - 4, once again
by linking the structural equations and the sample as in Table 1. For both specifications, the
predicted student behaviors are generated recursively, using the estimated parameters in Table 2,
the baseline controls (and network G) for grades 7, 8 and 9, and students' initial risky behavior
index values for t = T - 5, observed in the data.
   Finally, we compare the predictions of our dynamic model for grades 8 and 9 to the actual
behavioral choices of those adolescents observed in the data. Further, comparing the out-of-
sample predictions obtained through the exogenous and endogenous network estimates allows us
to statistically discriminate between the two modeling strategies.
   Figure 2 presents the distributions of actual and predicted risky behavior index values. The
distribution of the behaviors generated by the dynamic model, using parameter estimates in Table
2, are close to the distribution of the actual risky behavior index values, particularly so for the
estimates controlling for the endogeneity of the network. The Pseudo-R2 scores, computed as
Corr2 (y, y
          ^), where y is the observed and y
                                          ^ the predicted behavior, are equal to 0.0917 and 0.1952
for the exogenous and the endogenous network estimates, respectively.
   Table 3 reports the comparison of mean predicted and mean actual risky behavior index values
for the overall sample and for several subgroups defined by gender, race, parental education, and
others. Mean predicted values are close to the actual values in the data, for the whole sample and
all the chosen sub-groups; again particularly so when predictions are obtained from the estimates
allowing for endogeneity of the network. Indeed, for the specification allowing for endogeneity
of the network, the p-values for t-tests for differences between predicted and actual means are
uniformly higher across subgroups and we never reject the zero null.
   We believe that the results presented in Figure 2 and in Table 3 deliver enough confidence
in our dynamic model and produce a clear ranking of the goodness of fit of predictions for the
two competing estimates in favor of controlling for network endogeneity. We therefore proceed
to study further the implications of our structural estimates, with the endogenous network case
as the baseline.




                                                19
5.2       Social Multiplier

The social multiplier is a measure of the amplification of the effects of an exogenous shock on
individual actions which is due to peer effects. It is a fundamental metric used to represent
the implications of peer effects. In this section, we report on the social multiplier implied by
our baseline structural estimates, allowing for endogeneity in network formation. Importantly,
the social multiplier, in our context, has a fundamental dynamic component: a shock to agents'
preferences in the 10th grade has effects on their behavior in all grades 10, 11, and 12.
       Consider an exogenous shock to i,t , say by i,t =  > 0, for all agents i. This shock
could represent, e.g., the outcome of a policy geared towards affecting students' behavior directly
or indirectly through information or preferences. Consider first the case in which the shock is
temporary at t, that is, preferences are now shocked once at any given grade t. From the structural
equation 3 at t, the total change on the risky behavior index at t, accounting for peer interaction
effects in the network at equilibrium, is yt = 2  Bt 1, where 1 is the N × 1 matrix of ones.
The direct effect, abstracting from peer effects, that is, for 3 = 0, would be yt |direct = 2  1.
Therefore, we define the multiplier of an exogenous preference shock at t on behavior at t as

                                                     yt
                                           mt,t =                 = Bt 1.
                                                    yt |direct

Iterating the structural equation 3 for  = t, . . . , T , we trace out the effects of an exogenous
preference shock at t on behavior at all  > t:

                                                 -t
                                     y       =  1   2 (Bt × · · · × B ) 1;


and the (dynamic forward-looking) social multiplier of an exogenous preference shock at t on
behavior at  is

                                                   -t
                                        mt,     = 1   (Bt × · · · × B ) 1                      (11)


for any period  = t, . . . , T .33
       Similarly, for a permanent shock from time t to the end-time  , we can compute the multiplier
  33
       Please see Appendix F for detailed derivation of the dynamic social multiplier.




                                                          20
effect as:
                                            
                                                 -s                       ~s
                              mt,     =         1   (B × · · · × Bs ) 1 + D                                   (12)
                                          s=t


       The sample means of multiplier values (m
                                              ¯ t, ) for the baseline estimated parameter values,
with endogenous network, are reported in Table 4. In Figure 3 the instantaneous multiplier m
                                                                                           ¯ t,t
is reported for t = 10, 11, 12 and for both a temporary and a permanent shock.
       Several interesting properties of the calibrated multipliers are worth noticing. First of all, the
multiplier effects of a temporary preference shock at t decline over time: mt, decreases with  , for
all t. For instance, a temporary shock at t = 10 has multiplier 1.53, 1.03, and 0.76, respectively
at  = 10, 11, 12. The multiplier of permanent shocks instead increase over time. A permament
shock in grade 10 has multiplier 1.55 in the same grade, 2.6 in grade 11, and 3.68 in grade
12. Furthermore, permanent shocks have larger multiplier effects than temporary shocks, both
instantaneously and over time.34 Perhaps most interestingly, the same-period multiplier effect
decreases with the number of periods to the end of high-school T : m
                                                                   ¯ 10,10 < m
                                                                             ¯ 11,11 < m
                                                                                       ¯ 12,12 .
This is the case for both temporary and permanent shocks. In the case of temporary shocks, our
estimates imply that the same-period social multiplier in grade 12 (the last year of high-school)
is about 1.7, whereas it is 1.56 and 1.53, respectively, in grades 11 and 10. The same-period
multiplier effects in the different grades encode the importance of the number of periods to the
end of school in students' choice. Our estimates, therefore, are evidence that students anticipate
a change in their social network after high-school and that this affects the importance of peer
effects over schooling age: as the time to the end of high-school T - t increases, the students'
policy functions weigh more heavily future shocks and the current shock has a smaller effect.
       Multiplier effects operate also through an expectations channel: forward-looking agents change
their contemporaneous behavior in response to an anticipated shock in the future. Namely, we
can compute the multiplier effect of an exogenous preference shock at a future date t on behavior
at  < t:


                                                mt,         ~t
                                                       = Bt D                                                 (13)

      ~ t capture the sum of the expected effects on period  marginal utility of a unit future
where D
  34
     Note that, obviously, a permanent shock at T = 12 is equivalent to a temporary shock and hence the multipliers
are the same.



                                                        21
shock that is anticipated to change the random component of preferences, t .35
       In Table 5, we report the expected multiplier effects, in grade 10, 11 and 12 , induced by an
anticipated shock to the preferences of all agents in grade 12; that is, we report the multipliers
mt, for t = 12 and  = 10, 11, 12. In anticipation of an increased preference for risky behavior
in grade 12 agents increase risky behavior in grade 11 (m
                                                        ¯ 12,11 = 0.0540) and decrease it slightly
             ¯ 12,10 = -0.0055). These effects are subtle but can be intuitively be explained as
in grade 10 (m
follows. In grade 10, agents anticipate that they will increase risky behavior at 12 and anticipate
that so will do all their peers in the network (m
                                                ¯ 12,12 = 1.7132). This entails an adjustment cost
in terms of utility, because the addiction effect penalizes behavioral changes over time. As a
consequence, with strictly concave preferences, the agents will have an incentive to smooth these
adjustment costs over time, increasing risky behavior starting from grade 10 and then in grade 11
and 12 as well. Interestingly, however, a compensating effect could dominate in grade 10 inducing
the agents to decrease risky behavior first in grade 10 and then to increase in grades 11 and 12.
This occurs in particular at the estimated parameter values, and more generally when peer effects
are particularly strong, that is, 3 is relatively large. Indeed, peer effects induce agents to engage
in more risky behavior than their own preferences would induce them to in grade 12; the more so
the stronger the peer effects. That is, generally yi,12 > i,12 ; and this also implies an adjustment
cost in terms of utility for the agents. The negative multiplier in grade 10, therefore, is the result
of the trade-off between smoothing the adjustment costs via the addiction channel and via the
own preference channel in the presence of large peer effects.36
       The salience of the social multiplier dynamics implied by our estimates can be illustrated by
comparing the different (semi-) elasticities of a change in the availability of alcohol or cigarettes
at home on child risky behavior implied by the direct effect (E (y12 )/E (y12 ) |direct ) versus
the equilibrium effect (E (y12 )/E (y12 )).37 Thus, 12th graders adolescents that have alcohol or
  35   ~ t 's can be computed recursively. The explicit formula for D
       D                                                            ~ t =  -1 Dt is given using
                                   t
                    Dt     :=             s-t   - 1 diag (t,s-1 - t,s ) (t,s-1 - t,s )
                                 s=t+1

                                + diag (t,s ) ¯s - t,s
                                         N
                                - 3          diag G·k N diag (N k·,t,s - t,s ) (k,t,s 1 - t,s )                (14)
                                       k=1

Please see Appendix F for the explicit derivation of the multiplier formulas recursively.
  36
     Simulations of the anticipation effect at different values of the parameters, which we do not report, validate
this intuition regarding the occurrance of a negative multiplier in grade 10.
  37
     For all the computations we report the sample means of the semi-elasticities. Semi-elasticity is the percentage



                                                            22
tobacco easily available at home (directly) increase their risky behavior index by roughly 44%
(with respect to adolescents that do not have alcohol or tobacco easily available at home). This
effect almost doubles when we consider network peer effects in equilibrium (roughly 78%). Please
refer to Table 7 for analogous results for the simulated (semi-) elasticities of a temporary as well
as a permanent change in the availability of alcohol or cigarettes at home in any given grade
on child risky behavior implied by the direct effect versus the equilibrium effect on behaviors in
grades 10, 11, and 12.


5.3    Static and myopic bias

The main thrust of our theoretical analysis consists in modeling health risk behavior as the
outcome of dynamic choice by forward looking agents. Empirically, the dynamic choice component
of this approach is validated by the fact that the addiction effect 1 is estimated to be significantly
different than 0. The forward looking (as opposed to myopic) component of this approach is
instead validated by the fact that the discount rate  is estimated to be significantly different
than 0.
    To better gauge at the relevance of dynamic forward looking behavior, in this section we
measure the bias associated to estimating (i) a mis-specified myopic model, obtained by restricting
the structural equation 3 by imposing  = 0; (ii) a mis-specified static model, obtained restricting
the structural equation 3 by imposing  = 1 = 0. We then compare the resulting parameter
estimates and goodness of fit of these models with those of our dynamic baseline model with no
restrictions. All models are estimated controlling for the endogeneity of the network. Results are
reported in Table 8 and Figure 6. Table 8 compares the parameter estimates across specifications.
The striking feature is that while the static model produces an estimate of the peer effect 3 which
is small, about a half of the own effect 2 , in the dynamic model, the peer effect estimate is on the
contrary more than twice as large as the own effect. Furthermore, the sign of the selectivity effect
parameter is positive in the static model estimates and negative in the dynamic model estimates.
On the other hand, the estimates of the preference parameters obtained from the myopic model
are in line with those associated with the dynamic baseline. Nonetheless, the performance of the
two models is different, as shown in Figure 6.38 Figure 6 compares the fit of the three models
change in a function relative to an absolute change in its parameter. Algebraically, the semi-elasticity of a function
f at point x is f (x)
                f (x)
                      = d ln f (x)
                            dx
                                   .
  38
     Observe that the point estimate of the selectivity parameter is of the opposite sign and especially of much
larger magnitude in the myopic model estimates with respect to the dynamic baseline. In fact, the bias associated



                                                         23
with the data. It plots the actual data and the predictions that are obtained when using different
models. It appears that the predictions of the dynamic baseline model are closer to the actual data
than the predictions of both the static and the myopic models. Indeed, the pseudo-R2 is equal
to 0.3190, 0.2488 and 0.0571 for the dynamic, the myopic and the static models, respectively.
    In addition to this evidence, observe that the restrictions imposed by both the static and the
myopic models induce a dramatic bias in the estimation of the social multipliers. Firstly, as can
be seen immediately from the construction of the multiplier measures in (11), (13) and (12), a
misspecified static model cannot generate any intertemporal multiplier effects since the link across
two consecutive periods is broken by setting 1 = 0. Second and perhaps more importantly, if
a shock in question has not realized yet but will in the future, forward-looking agents anticipate
that shock and change their contemporaneous behavior accordingly. However, myopic agents
do not care about their future behavioral paths and consequently do not change their behavior
accordingly. For a misspecified myopic model, as   0, |BT - Bt |  0 for any period t, and the
model becomes one of a sequence of myopic period economies. Consequently, the instantaneous
multiplier effect generated under this specification is constant across periods, yielding a bias,
which is increasing in the time-to-end T - t, relative to our benchmark dynamic specification.


5.4    Spatial Correlation

We conclude our investigation by looking at the performance of our model in terms of spatial
correlation, which is a traditional metric used to represent the implications of peer effects in terms
of the spillovers they induce. We demonstrate that the correlations between risky behavior of
agents at different social distances predicted by our dynamic model (with endogenous network
formation) track very closely the correlations in the actual data.
    In order to do that, we introduce a linear order along which space, and hence distance between
agents, is defined. Let the social distance between any pair of students be characterized by the
smallest number of links establishing a connection between them. Formally, we construct a
minimum-path algorithm that maps any given network G into a series of geodesic adjacency
matrices Gk , k = 1, 2, . . . , d(G), where Gk is the matrix of agents who can reach each other
through a shortest path of length at least k and d(G) is the diameter of the entire friendship
network G.39 We then pick the the largest network component in our sample which consists of
to the myopic model with respect to our dynamic baseline model appears especially in the estimated effects of the
conditioning characteristics, which we report in Table G4 in Appendix G.
  39
     The geodesic adjacency matrices are weighted by the number of connections each student has.


                                                       24
286 students and whose diameter is 24.40 Figure 4 presents the actual series of geodesic student
adjaceny matrices Gk of increasing social distance with k = 1, 5, 10, and 20, obtained using our
algorithm, starting with the largest student network component in our sample. As is apparent in
the Figure, and is consistent with theory, Gk first gets denser as k increases and later becomes
sparse, as k gets closer to the diameter of the entire network component.
         Using this definition of social distance between students, we follow an approach similar to
that of Todd and Wolpin (2006) to predict the individual equilibrium paths of risky behavior
of students by using the reduced-form equilibrium equations 10 jointly, for t = T, T - 1, T - 2,
once again by linking the structural equations and the sample as in Table 1, and with parameters
calibrated using the baseline estimates from Table 2, Column 2. Then, we compute the correlation
between students' choices in each period and the average level of those of their peers at different
social distances, as represented by adjacency matrix Gk , k = 1, 2, . . . , d(G).41 Figure 5 reports
the results with 95 percent confidence interval, showing that spatial correlation declines quickly
and is effectively zero at and after social distance k = 3. The trends in the estimated and actual
correlations are remarkably similar.


6         Robustness

In our analysis, we control for a possible endogeneity of the social network by implementing a
Heckman correction procedure. In this section, we investigate the sensitivity of the results to
an alternative definition of peers, which does not require dealing with network endogeneity. We
experiment by defining as peers all students of the same gender within the same grade at a school.
This definition is grounded on the sociological literature documenting that adolescents are more
likely to have same gender friends (see, e.g. McPherson, 2001). We inspect the validity of this
hypothesis in our data in Figure 8. Figure 8 depicts friendship linkages in the larger network in
our data (286 nodes with diameter 24) by using different colors for nodes indicating students of
different gender. The picture reveals that indeed social interactions are assortative by gender.
    40
     A component of a network is a nonempty subnetwork in which every two nodes belonging to it are connected
to each other by paths, and which is connected to no additional nodes outside of the subnetwork. The diameter of
a network is the shortest distance between the two most distant nodes in the network.
  41
     Our method of internal validation works by predicting students' risky behavior indices at different time periods.
The setup is the same as the one used in Section 5.1. In particular, predicted behaviors are generated recursively
for each grade starting from grade 10 (t = T - 2) and going up to grade 12 (t = T ). We use the actual and the
predicted dependent variables to construct the correlation between each individual choice and the average level of
individual's peers' choices at different social distances represented by k.



                                                         25
                    ~ = [~
       Formally,let G    gij ] be the "new" interaction network,
                                  
                                       1
                                  
                                     |NG
                                       ~ (i)|
                                              ,   if i and j have the same gender
                          g
                          ~ij =                                                                              (15)
                                        0,        otherwise.

where |NG ~ (i)| denotes the number of friends (of the same gender) that agent i has. Hence

the social term GX~ t , in the preference shock decomposition in equation (5), is an average, for
each agent i, of the covariates of all other agents of the same gender. Note also that as in our
benchmark dynamic model, student i is removed (i.e. g
                                                    ~ii = 0) when the average risky behavior
index of same-gender students is computed from the school-grade distribution. While this is a
much coarser network definition, it has the advantage of being exogenous. Infact, when parents
choose the school for their children, they are unlikely to be aware of how the intensity of risky
behavior by gender vary by grade within a particular school. The idea is to treat the composition
of students by grade and gender within a school as quasi-random and to use this quasi-random
variation to identify peer effects.42 We show that the the variation in the average risky behavior
of same grade and gender school mates is unrelated to the variation in a number of predetermined
student characteristics in Table G5 in Appendix G. We consider the same controls as the baseline
specification listed in Table G1. We run separate regressions with each of these variables as
alternate dependent variables, and add school fixed effects to control for differences in average
student characteristics across schools as well as for other aspects of school quality. As shown in the
table, none of the estimated correlations appear to be significantly different from zero, supporting
the notion that our model specification identifies an exogenous source of variation. We estimate
the model using the same strategy of Subsection 4.2. Specifically, we use the nonlinear optimal
GMM estimator detailed in Appendix E, and replacing network fixed effects with school fixed
effects.43
       Results are reported in Table 9. The first column reports results of the estimated coefficients
in the original sample using both middle and high school students. The second column report
the estimated coefficients of the model using our regression sample (high school students). The
  42
     This approach has been first proposed by Hoxby (2000b) to estimate the impact of class size, and subsequently
widely used in studying peer effects in education (e.g. Angrist and Lang (2004); Friesen and Krauth (2007);
Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2002); Lavy and Schlosser (2011); Lavy, Paserman, and Schlosser (2012); Olivetti,
Patacchini, and Zenou (2018)). Also, Patacchini and Zenou (2016) use a similar approach to investigate the impact
of peer religiosity in the intergenerational transmission of religion.
  43
     The matrix of instruments for the GMM estimation is defined as the one that we used in Section 4.2 with G  ~
instead of G. Details are shown in Appendix E.



                                                       26
estimates of the preference parameters of the model confirm the salience of our theoretical model:
the presence of the dynamic choice component is validated by the fact that the estimate of
the addiction effect 1 remains positive and significantly different than 0; the forward looking
component is validated by the fact that the discount rate  also remains positive and significantly
different than 0; and the importance of the peer effect component is reflected in the positive and
significant estimate 3 . Perhaps unsurprisingly, the magnitudes of the effects are different due to
the different definition of peers. Notably, the estimated peer effect is much smaller, perhaps a
consequence of a less precisely specified network.
    Finally, we further perform two robustness checks. We estimate our dynamic model when
considering the friendship nominations at wave I (rather than wave II) and when including also
students who do not nominate any best friend and are not nominated by anyone. Table G6 in
Appendix G reports the estimates of the structural parameters for these two cases: the network
with wave I friendship nominations (Column 1), and the sample including isolated individuals
(Column 2). For each robustness exercise the network is assumed to be endogenous. Results
remains qualitatively unchanged when compared with the baseline estimates reported in Table
2.44


7      Concluding Remarks

Dynamic social interactions provide a rationale for several important phenomena at the intersec-
tion of economics and sociology. The theoretical and empirical study of economies with long-lived
social interactions has been hindered by both mathematical and conceptual problems.
    In this paper, we show how some of these obstacles can be overcome while studying the risky
behavior of adolescents. We formulate and structurally estimate a dynamic social interaction
model in the context of students' school networks included in Add Health. The equilibrium
characterization of the dynamic game allows us to offer solutions to the well-known inferential
problems in the study of social interactions. We construct a consistent estimator in our envi-
ronment, by using the moment restrictions imposed by the dynamic equilibrium to back out the
structural preference parameters. Our empirical analysis confirms the main thrust of our exercise
regarding smoking and alcohol use in the adolescent population. We find strong evidence for
forward looking dynamics, addiction effects, and social interaction effects. Social interactions in
   44
      When we include isolated individuals in the sample we also add in the specification a dummy, which indicates
if an individual is isolated or not.


                                                       27
the estimated dynamic model are indeed quantitatively large.
   These results have important policy implications. The importance of social interactions for
policy analysis relies on the fact that when social interactions are quantitatively important, well-
targeted policy interventions at a smaller scale might have much larger effects at the aggregate
through the social multiplier channel for those interactions. In this respect, we show that a
misspecified static model would a much smaller estimate of the social interaction effect than the
dynamic model. Furthermore, our empirical analysis implies that the effects of policy interven-
tions to affect adolescents' risky behavior display over time, indeed increase over time when policy
interventions are permanent. Finally, it also implies that the design of policy interventions should
depend on the students' network structure and should consider the dynamics of the network itself,
as students anticipate its natural breaks.




                                                28
References

Aliprantis, D., and Border, K. C. (2006), Infinite Dimensional Analysis, third edition.
  Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Altonji, J.G., Elder, T.E. and C.R. Taber (2005), "Selection on observed and unobserved
  variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools," Journal of Political Economy 113,
  151-184.

Anselin, L. (1990), "Some Robust Approach to Testing and Estimation in Spatial Economet-
  rics," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 20, 141-163.

Angrist, J.D. and K. Lang (2004),"Does school integration generate peer effects? Evidence
  from Boston's Metco program," American Economic Review 94, 1613-1634.

Apicella, C. L., Marlowe, F. W., Fowler, J. H., and Christakis, N. A. (1994), "Social
  Networks and Cooperation in Hunter-gatherers," Nature, 481 (7382), 497-501.

Argys, L.M. and Rees, D.I. (2008), "Searching for Peer Group Effects: A Test of the Contagion
  Hypothesis," Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (3), 442­58.

Attanasio, O., A. Barr, J. C. Cardenas, G. Genicot, and C. Meghir (2012), "Risk Pool-
  ing, Risk Preferences, and Social Networks," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  4 (2), 134-167.

Axtell, R., S. Durlauf, J.M. Epstein, R. Hammond, B. Klemens, J. Parker, Z. Song,
  T. Valente, and H.P. Young (2006): "Social Influences and Smoking Behavior: Final Re-
  port to the American Legacy Foundation," mimeo, Center on Social and Economic Dynamics,
  The Brookings Institution.

Babb S., Malarcher A., Schauer G., Asman K., Jamal A. (2017): `Quitting Smoking
  Among Adults United States, 20002015," MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;65:14571464.
  DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6552a1External

Badev, A. (2015), "Discrete Games in Endogenous Networks: Theory and Policy," Unpublished
  manuscript, Federal Reserve Board, Washington D.C.

Balsa, A., Daz, C. (2018): "Social interactions in health behaviors and conditions.," Oxford
  Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance. Oxford University Press.

                                              29
Battaglini, M. and Patacchini, E. (2016), "Influencing Connected Legislators," CEPR Dis-
  cussion paper DP11571.

Becker, G.S. and Murphy, K. M. (1988): "A Theory of Rational Addiction," Journal of
  Political Economy, 96, (4), 675­700.

Becker, G.S., Grossman, M., and Murphy, K. M. (1994): "An Empirical Analysis of
  Cigarette Addiction," American Economic Review, 84, 3, 396­418.

Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., and Jackson, M. O. (eds.) (2011): Handbook of Social Economics,
  Vol. 1A, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 339­416.

Bernheim, B. D. (1994), "A Theory of Conformity," Journal of Political Economy, 102, 841-877.

Bernheim, B. D. and Rangel, A. (1994), "Addiction and Cue-Triggered Decion Processes,"
  American Economic Review, 94, (5), 1558­90.

Blume, L. E., Brock, W. A., Durlauf, S. N., and Jayaraman, R. (2015), "Linear Social
  Interactions Models," Journal of Political Economy, 123, 2, 446-496.

        ´, Y., Djebbari, H., and Fortin, B. (2009), "Identification of Peer Effects through
Bramoulle
  Social Networks," Journal of Econometrics, 150, 41-55.

        ´, V. Boucher, Y., Djebbari, H., and Fortin, B. (2014), "Do Peers Affect
Bramoulle
  Student Achievement? Evidence from Canada Using Group Size Variation," Journal of Applied
  Econometrics, 29, 91-109.

Broadhead, R.S., Heckathorn, D. D., Weakliem, D. L., Anthony, D. L., Madray,
  H., Mills, R. J. (1998), "Harnessing Peer Networks as an Instrument for AIDS Prevention:
  Results from a Peer-driven Intervention," Public Health Reports, 113 (Suppl. 1): 42-57.

Brock, W. and Durlauf, S. (2001b), "Interactions-Based Models," in J. Heckman and E.
  Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. V, North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Calvo-Armengol, T., E. Patacchini and Y. Zenou (2009), "Peer Effects and Social Net-
  works in Education", Review of Economic Studies, 76, 4, 1239-1267.

Cameron, A. C. and Trivedi, P. K. (2005), Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications,
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

                                              30
Card, D. and Giuliano, L. (2013), "Peer Effects and Multiple Equilibria in the Risky Behavior
  of Friends," Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 4, 1130-1149.

Carpenter, C. and Dobkin, C. (2011), "The Minimum Legal Drinking Age and Public
  Health," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25, 2, 133-156.

Case, A. (1991), " Spatial Patterns in Household Demand," Econometrica, 59, 4, 953-965.

Cawley, J. and Ruhm, C. J. (2011), "The Economics of Risky Health Behaviors," in Mark V.
  Pauly, Thomas G. Mcguire and Pedro P. Barros (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, Vol.
  2, North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2016), Tobacco Use Among
                                  ae' United States, 2011-2015., Morbidity and Mortality
  Middle and High School Students ^
  Weekly Report, April 15, 2016, 65 (14), 361-367, http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/
  wr/mm6514a1.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2016), Global Adult Tobacco
  Survey (GATS) Atlas (2015), Atlanta, GA, http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/global/gtss/
  tobacco_atlas

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2014), The Health Consequences
  of Smoking - 50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General, Atlanta: U.S., http:
  //www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/sgr/50th-anniversary/index.htm

Chaloupka, F.J. (1991), "Rational Addictive Behavior and Cigarette Smoking," Journal of
  Political Economy, 99 (4), 722­42.

Chandrasekhar, A. G. and Lewis, R. (2016), "Econometrics of Sampled Networks," mimeo
  Stanford University.

Cole, H. L., Mailath, G. J. and Postlewaite, A. (1992), "Social Norms, Savings Behaviour,
  and Growth," Journal of Political Economy, 100, 1092-1125.

Cook, Philip J., and Michael J. Moore. (2000), "Alcohol," In A.J. Culyer and J.P Newhouse
  (eds.) Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1. (New York: Elsevier), pp. 1629-1674.

Cutler, D. M. and Glaeser, E. L. (2007), "Social Interactions and Smoking," mimeo Harvard
  University and NBER working paper No. 13477.

                                              31
Dahl, G., Løken, K., and Mogstad, M. (2014), "Peer Effects in Program Participation,"
  American Economic Review, 104 (7), 2049-2074.

Dao, J. M., McQuown, S. C., Loughlin, S. E., Belluzzi, J. D., and Leslie, F. M.
  (2014), "Nicotine alters limbic function in adolescent rat by a 5-HT1A receptor mechanism,"
  Neuropsychopharmacology, 36(7), 1319.

Duncan, G.J., Boisjoly, J., Kremer, M., Levy, D.M., and Eccles, J. (2005), "Peer
  Effects in Drug Use and Sex among College Students", Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology,
  33 (3), 375­85.

Eisenberg, D., Golberstein, E., and Whitlock, J. L. (2014), "Peer effects on risky be-
  haviors: New evidence from college roommate assignments," Journal of health economics, 33,
  126-138.

Fafchamps, M. and Gubert, F. (2007), "The Formation of Risk Sharing Networks," Journal
  of Development Economics, 83 (2), 326-350.

Flood S., King M., Rodgers R., Ruggles S., and Warren J. R. (2018), Integrated Public
  Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset], Minneapolis, MN:
  IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0

Frederick, S., G. Lowestein, and T. O'Donoghue (2002), "Time Discounting and Time
  Preference: A Critical Review," Journal of Economic Literature, 40 (2), 351-401.

French, M.T. and Maclean, J.C. (2006), "Underage Alcohol Use, Delinquency, and Criminal
  Activity," Health Economics, 15, 1261­81.

Friesen, J. and B. Krauth (2007), "Sorting and inequality in Canadian schools," Journal of
  Public Economics 91, 2185-2212.

Gallet, C. and List, J. A. (2003), "Cigarette Demand: A Meta Analysis of Elasticities, "
  Health Economics, 12, 821-835.

Gaviria, A., and Raphael, S. (2001), "School-based Peer Effects and Juvenile Behavior, "
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(2), 257-268.




                                               32
Glaeser, E. and J. Scheinkman (2003), "Non-Market Interactions," in Advances in Economics
  and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eight World Congress, Vol. I, (M. Dewatripont,
  L.P. Hansen, and S. Turnovsky, eds.), Cambridge University Press, 339-369.

Glaeser, E. and J. Scheinkman (2001), "Measuring Social Interactions," in S. Durlauf and
  P. Young (Eds.), Social Dynamics, Brookings Institution Press and MIT Press, Cambridge,
  MA.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., and Imbens, G.W. (2013), "Social Networks and the Identification
  of Peer Effects, " Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 31(3), 253-264.

Graham, B. S. (2017), "An Econometric Model of Link Formation With Degree Heterogeneity,"
  Econometrica, 85 (4), 1033-1063.

Graham, B. S. (2008), "Identifying Social Interactions through Excess Variance Contrasts,"
  Econometrica, 76, 643-660.

Graham, B. S., and Hahn, J. (2005), "Identification and Estimation of the Linear-in-Means
  Model of Social Interactions," Economics Letters , 88,1,1-6.

Gruber, J. and Kosegi, B. (2001), "Is Addiction Rational? Theory and Evidence," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 116, (4), 1261­303.

Hansen, L. P. (1982), "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estima-
  tors," Econometrica, 1029-1054.

Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F. and S.G. Rivkin (2002), "Inferring program effects for special
  populations: Does special education raise achievement for students with disabilities?" Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 84, 584-599.

Horn, R. A. and Johnson, C. R. (2013), Matrix Analysis, second edition, Cambridge: Cam-
  bridge University Press.

Hoxby, C. M. (2000a), "The Effects Of Class Size On Student Achievement: New Evidence
  From Population Variation," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 4, 1239-1285.

Hoxby, C. M. (2000b), "Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Varia-
  tion," NBER Working Paper 7867.


                                              33
Hsieh, C-S. and Lee, L. F. (2015), "A Social Interactions Model with Endogenous Friendship
  Formation and Selectivity," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 31 (2), 301-319.

Hsieh, C. S., and Van Kippersluis, H. (2018), `Smoking initiation: Peers and personality,"
  Quantitative Economics, 9(2), 825-863.

Jackson, M. O. (2014), "Networks in the Understanding of Economic Behaviors," Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 28, 4, 3-22.

Jones, S. R. G. (1984), The Economics of Conformism, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Johnson, R. A. and Wichern, D. W. (2002), Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, 6th
  edition, Prentice Hall. Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Kandel, D. B. (1978), "Homophily, Selection, and Socialization in Adolescent Friendships,"
  American Journal of Sociology, 84, 427-436.

Katz, L., Kling, A. and Liebman, J. (2001), "Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Early
  Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI, 607-
  654.

Kelejian, H. H. and Prucha, I. R. (1999), "A Generalized Moments Estimator for the
  Autoregressive Parameter in a Spatial Model," International Economic Review, 40, 509-533.

Kendel, D.S. and Ribar, D. (1994), "Alcohol Consumption and Young Adults' Socioeconomic
  Status," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity - Micro, 119­61.

Kendel, D.S. and Sindelar, J. (2011), "Economics of Health Behavior and Addictions: Con-
  temporary Issues and Policy Implications,"in S. Glied and P.C. Smith (eds.), The Oxford Hand-
  book of Health Economics, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Kling, J., Ludwig, J. and Katz, L. (2005), "Neighborhood Effects on Crime for Female and
  Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 120(1), 87-130.

Koopmans, T. (1953), "Identification Problems in Economic Model Construction," In Studies
  in Econometric Method, edited by W. C. Hood and T. Koopmans, 27- 48. New York: Wiley.




                                                34
Koopmans, T. C. and Reiersøl, O. (1950), "The Identification of Structural Characteristics,"
  Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 21.

Koopmans, T. C.. Rubin, H., and Leipnik, R. B. (1950), "Measuring the Equation Systems
  of Dynamic Economics," Chapter II of Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models (T.
  C. Koopmans, ed.),New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1950 (Cowles Commission Monograph
  No.10)

Krauth, B. V. (2006), "Simulation-based estimation of peer effects," Journal of Econometrics,
  133, 243-271.

Kremer, M. and Levy, D. (2008), "Peer Effects and Alcohol Use among College Students,"
  The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22,3, 189-206.

Lavy, V., Paserman, D. and A. Schlosser (2012), "Inside the black box of ability peer
  effects: Evidence from variation in low achievers in the classroom," Economic Journal 122,
  208-237.

Lavy, V. and A. Schlosser (2011), "Mechanisms and impacts of gender peer effects at
  school,"American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3, 1-33.

Lee, L. F. (2003), "Best spatial two-stage least squares estimators for a spatial autoregressive
  model with autoregressive disturbances", Econometric Reviews, 22, 307-335.

Lee, L. F., Li, J., and Lin, X. (2014), "Binary choice models with social network under
  heterogeneous rational expectations", Review of Economics and Statistics, 96 (3), 402-417.

Liu, X. and L.F. Lee (2010), "GMM Estimation of Social Interaction Models with Centrality,",
  Journal of Econometrics, 159, 99-115.

Liu, X., Patacchini, E., and Rainone, E. (2017), "Peer effects in Bed Time Decisions among
  Adolescents: a Social Network Model with Sampled Data,", forthcoming in The Econometric
  Journal.

Ludwig, J., Hirschfeld, P. and Duncan, G. (2001), " Urban Poverty and Juvenile Crime:
  Evidence from a Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  CXVI (2), 665-679.



                                              35
Lundborg (2006), " Having the Wrong Friends? Peer Effects in Adolescent Substance Use,"
  Journal of Health Economics, 25 (2), 214­33.

McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., and Cook, J. M. (2001), "Birds of a feather: Homophily
  in social network," Annual review of sociology, 27(1), 415-444.

Malone, P. S., Northrup, T. F., Masyn, K. E., Lamis, D. A., and Lamont, A. E.
  (2012), "Initiation and persistence of alcohol use in United States Black, Hispanic, and White
  male and female youth," Addictive behaviors, 37(3), 299-305.

Manski, C. (1993), "Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 60, 531-42.

Manski, C. (2008), Identification for Prediction and Decision, Harvard University Press, Cam-
  bridge.

Matzkin, R. (2007), "Nonparametric Identification," In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 6, ed.
  J. Heckman and E. Leamer. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Mayer, A. and Puller, S. L. (2008), "The Old Boy (and Girl) Network: Social Network
  Formation On University Campuses," Journal of Public Economics, 92, 329-347.

Mele, A. (2017a), "A Structural Model of Dense Network Formation," Econometrica, 85, 3,
  825-850.

Mele, A. (2017b), "Segregation in Social Networks: A Structural Approach," working paper,
  Johns Hopkins University.

Moffitt, R. A. (2001), "Policy Interventions, Low-Level equilibria, and Social Interactions," in
  S. Durlauf and P. Young (Eds.), Social Dynamics, Brookings Institution Press and MIT Press,
  Cambridge, MA.

Mokdad, A. H., Marks, J. S., Stroup, D. F., and Gerberding, J. L. (2004), "Actual
  Causes of Death in the United States, 2000", JAMA, 291 (10), March 10, 1238-1245.

Mokdad, A. H., Marks, J. S., Stroup, D. F., and Gerberding, J. L. (2005), "Correction:
  Actual Causes of Death in the United States, 2000.", JAMA, 293 (3).




                                               36
Moody, J., (2001), "Race, School Integration, and Friendship Segregation in America", Ameri-
  can Journal of Sociology, 107, 3, 679­716.

Mullahy, J. and Sindelar, J.L., (1996), "Employment, Unemployment, and Problem Drink-
  ing", Journal of Health Economics, 15, 3, 409­34.

Nakajima, R. (2007), "Measuring Peer Effects on Youth Smoking Behavior", Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 74, 897-935.

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) (2006), "Underage
  Drinking,", Alcohol Alert, 67, http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/AA67/AA67.htm

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) (2015), "2015 Na-
  tional Survey on Drug Use and Health,", available at https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/
  default/files/NSDUH-TrendBreak-2015.pdf

Neyman, J. and Scott, E. L. (1948), "Consistent Estimates Based on Partially Consistent
  Observations", Econometrica, 16(1), 1-32.

Olivetti, C., Patacchini, E. and Y. Zenou (2018). "Mothers, Peers and Gender-Role Iden-
  tity", mimeo Cornell University.

Orphanides, A. and Zervos, D. (1948), "Rational Addiction with Learning and Regret",
  Journal of Political Economy, 103, (4), 739­58.

¨ u
Ozg                                ´, Y. (2019), " Dynamic Linear Economies with Social
    ¨ r, O., Bisin, A. and Bramoulle
  Interactions," mimeo Melbourne Business School, and NYU.

Patacchini, E., Rainone, E., and Zenou, Y. (2011), "Dynamic Aspects of Teenage Friend-
  ships and Educational Attainment," CEPR working paper DP8223.

Patacchini, E., and Y. Zenou (2016), "Social networks and parental behavior in the intergen-
  erational transmission of religion," Quantitative Economics 7(3), 969-995.

          ` Richards-Shubik, S., and Tamer, E. (2018), "Identifying Preferences in
de Paula, A.,
  Networks with Bounded Degree," forthcoming in Econometrica, CeMMAP Working Paper
  54/16.




                                               37
Persico, N., Postlewaite, A., and Silverman, D. (2004), "The Effect of Adolescent Expe-
  rience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height," Journal of Political Economy, 112
  (5), 1019-1053.

Peski, M. (2007), "Complementarities, Group Formation, and Preferences for Similarity,"
  mimeo.

Qu, X. and Lee, L. (2015), "Estimating a spatial autoregressive model with an endogenous
  spatial weight matrix," Journal of Econometrics, 184 (2), 209-232.

Reiff, J. (2018), "A Model of Addiction and Social Interactions," forthcoming in Economic
  Inquiry.

Renna, F. (2001), "The Economic Cost of Teen Drinking: Late Graduation and Lowered Earn-
  ings," Health Economics, 16, 407­19.

Robert, C. and G. Casella (2004), Monte Carlo Statistical Methods, 2nd ed, Springer-Verlag,
  New York.

Sacerdote, B. (2001), "Peer Effects with Random Assignments: Results from Dartmouth
  Roommates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 681-704.

Saluter, Arlene F., (1994), Marital Status and Living Arrangements: March 1994, U.S.
  Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports, Series P20-484, U.S. Government Printing
  Office, Washington, DC, 1996.

Sheng, S. (2018), "A Structural Econometric Analysis of Network Formation Games Through
  Subnetworks," forthcoming in Econometrica, mimeo UCLA.

Stocker, C. M. and Youngblade, L. (1999), "Marital Conflict and Parental Hostility: Links
  with Children's Sibling and Peer Relationships," Journal of Family Psychology, 13(4), 598-609.

Terza, J.V. (2002), "Alcohol Abuse and Employment: A Second Look," Journal of Applied
  Econometrics, 17, 393­404.

Todd, P. E. and Wolpin, K. I. (2006), "Assessing the Impact of a School Subsidy Program in
  Mexico: Using a Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic Behavioral Model of Child Schooling
  and Fertility," American Economic Review, 96 (5), 1384-1417.


                                              38
U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human
  Services (2015), "2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2015", 8th ed., Appendix 9,
  http://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/appendix-9/

Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1994), Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications,
  Cambridge University Press.

Waters, T.M. and Sloan, F.A. (1995), "Why Do People Drink? Test of the Rational Addic-
  tion Model," Applied Economics, 27 (5), 727­36 .

World Health Organization (2009), WHO Global Health Risks, 2009, https://www.who.
  int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/GlobalHealthRisks_report_full.pdf

World Health Organization (2012), WHO Global Report: Mortality Attributable to Tobacco,
  2012, http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/44815/1/9789241564434_eng.pdf

World Health Organization (2014), WHO Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health,
  2014,    http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/publications/global_alcohol_report/
  msb_gsr_2014_1.pdf?ua=1




                                             39
Figures and Tables


        Figure 1: Distribution of students by alcohol and cigarette consumption




This figure graphs the empirical densities of alcohol consumption, cigarette consumption and the risky behavior
index. Densities are smoothed using a kernel density estimator.




                                                      40
 Figure 2: Distributions of actual and predicted values of the risky behavior index




This figure graphs the distributions of actual and predicted values of the risky behavior index. we predict equilibrium
risky behavior index for students in the hold-out sample consisting of grades 7, 8, and 9. Specifically, (i) under
the exogeneity of the network G, we use the reduced-form equilibrium equations 6 jointly, for t = T - 3, T - 4,
by linking the structural equations and the sample as in Table 1, and (ii) under the possible endogeneity of the
network G, we use the reduced-form equilibrium equations 10 jointly, for t = T - 3, T - 4, once again by linking
the structural equations and the sample as in Table 1. For both specifications, the predicted student behaviors are
generated recursively, using the estimated parameters in Table 2, the baseline controls (and network G) for grades
7, 8 and 9, and students' initial risky behavior index values for t = T - 5, observed in the data.



                     Table 1: Linking the structural equations and the sample

                                YT -5       YT -4        YT -3            YT -2            YT -1          YT
    Eq'n   3   at   t=T                                                                   g11 WI        g12 WII
    Eq'n   3   at   t=T   -1                                            g10 WI            g11 WII
    Eq'n   3   at   t=T   -2                             g9 WI          g10 WII
    Eq'n   3   at   t=T   -3              g8 WI          g9 WII
    Eq'n   3   at   t=T   -4   g7 WI      g8 WII

    This table summarizes the structure of our sample.




                                                           41
          Figure 3: Temporary and permanent instantaneous multiplier effects




This figure illustrates temporary and permanent instantaneous multiplier effects. The sample means of dynamic
multiplier values are computed across grades using actual parameter estimates from Table 2 column 2. Here, we
plot the permanent effect relative to the temporary effect.


                        Figure 4: Adjacency matrices by social distance




This figure graphs the actual series of geodesic student adjaceny matrices Gk of increasing social distance with
k = 1, 5, 10, and 20, obtained using our algorithm, starting with the largest student network component in our
sample.




                                                      42
                       Figure 5: Behavioral corrrelation and social distance




This figure illustrates the correlation between students' choices in each period and the average level of those of
their peers at different social distances, as represented by adjacency matrix Gk , k = 1, 2, . . . , d(G). Our method of
internal validation works by predicting students' risky behavior indices at different time periods. The setup is the
same as the one used in Section 5.1. We use the reduced-form equilibrium equations 10 jointly, for t = T - 3, T - 4,
by linking the structural equations and the sample as in Table 1. In particular, predicted behaviors are generated
recursively for each grade starting from grade 10 (t = T - 2) and going up to grade 12 (t = T ). Predicted values
for dynamic model are obtained by equation 10 with parameters calibrated using the values of Table 2 Column
2. We use the actual and the predicted dependent variables to construct the correlation between each individual
choice and the average level of individual's peers' choices at different social distances represented by k. Dotted
lines represents 95 percent confidence interval for the estimated correlations.




                                                          43
 Figure 6: Distributions of actual and predicted values of the risky behavior index




This figure graphs distributions of actual and predicted values of the risky behavior index. In particular, predicted
behaviors are generated recursively for each grade starting from grade 10 (t = T - 2) and going up to grade 12
(t = T ). Predicted values for the dynamic baseline model are obtained by the structural model 10 with parameters
calibrated using the values of Table 2 Column 2. Predicted values for the myopic and static model are obtained by
the structural model 10 with parameters calibrated using the values of Table 8 Column 3 and 4.




                                                         44
                       Figure 7: Behavioral correlation and social distance




This figure illustrates the correlation between students' choices in each period and the average level of those of
their peers at different social distances, as represented by adjacency matrix Gk , k = 1, 2, . . . , d(G). Our method of
internal validation works by predicting students' risky behavior indices at different time periods. The setup is the
same as the one used in Section 5.1. We use the reduced-form equilibrium equations 10 jointly, for t = T - 3, T - 4,
by linking the structural equations and the sample as in Table 1. In particular, predicted behaviors are generated
recursively for each grade starting from grade 10 (t = T - 2) and going up to grade 12 (t = T ). Predicted values
for dynamic model are obtained by equation 10 with parameters calibrated using the values of Table 2 Column 2.
Predicted values for myopic and static model are obtained by equation 10 with parameters calibrated using values
of Table 8 columns 1 and 2.




                                                          45
                                    Figure 8: Gender assortativeness




This figure depicts friendship linkages in the larger network in our data (286 nodes with diameter 24) by using
different colors for nodes indicating students of different gender. The picture reveals that indeed social interactions
are assortative by gender. Nodes represented by a light blue (resp., purple) dot correspond to female students
(resp., male students).Sizes of nodes are proportional to individuals' risky index levels.




                                                          46
                                   Table 2: Dynamic recursive model

                Dep. Var. Risky Behavior Index          Exogenous network         Endogenous network
                                                                (1)                       (2)
                Addiction effect (1 )                       0.3692***                 0.4299***
                                                             (0.0095)                  (0.1552)
                Own effect (2 )                             0.3499***                 0.1538***
                                                             (0.0170)                  (0.0210)
                Peer effect (3 )                            0.2809***                  0.4163**
                                                             (0.0172)                  (0.1665)
                Discount factor ( )                         0.5038***                  0.4925**
                                                             (0.0640)                  (0.2017)
                Selectivity ( )                                                         -0.0620
                                                                                       (0.5942)
                Student characteristics                          Yes                      Yes
                Peers' characteristics                           Yes                      Yes
                Networks fixed effects                           Yes                      Yes
                N. Obs.                                         1,207                    1,207

                This table reports GMM estimates of the structural models 6 and 10. In Column 1
                the network G is assumed to be exogenous, while in Column 2 network formation is
                assumed to satisfy the linear dyadic structure in equation 9. Students' characteristics are
                listed in Table G1. The peers' characteristics are calculated as friends' averages of the
                included variables. Heteroskedasticity-robust numerical standard errors in parentheses.
                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                         Table 3: Model validation

                                                         Model                                Model
                                        Data       Exogenous network         p-value    Endogenous network    p-value
Overall                                0.0720            0.0612              0.3717           0.0719          0.9932
                                      (0.1649)          (0.1673)                             (0.1040)
If female = 1                          0.1027            0.0550              0.0533           0.0684          0.1064
                                      (0.1856)          (0.1753)                             (0.1178)
If Parent college degree = 1           0.0952            0.0573              0.0385           0.0757          0.2259
                                      (0.1839)          (0.1631)                             (0.1154)
If two-parents = 1                     0.0924            0.0588              0.0721           0.0736           0.261
                                      (0.1806)          (0.1550)                             (0.1142)
If Black or African American=1         0.1366            0.0665              0.1384           0.1153          0.6291
                                      (0.2322)          (0.1505)                             (0.1170)
If pocket money = 1                    0.0932            0.0648              0.0932           0.0799          0.3656
                                      (0.1784)          (0.1635)                             (0.1129)
If Alcohol/tobacco at home = 1         0.0847            0.0141              0.2674           0.0362          0.3642
                                      (0.2038)          (0.1705)                             (0.0929)
If height > median                     0.1116            0.0690              0.0758           0.0791          0.1358
                                      (0.1963)          (0.1539)                             (0.1128)

N. Obs.                                  381                381                381                381

This table reports the comparison of mean predicted and mean actual risky behavior index values for the
overall sample and for several subgroups defined by gender, race, parental education, and others. Means
and standard deviations (in parentheses) of observed and predicted risky behavior index are reported. The
reported p-values refer to zero null t-tests for differences in means between observed and simulated risky
behavior.


                                                           47
                                 Table 4: The multiplier

                              m
                              ¯ 10,10    m
                                         ¯ 10,11    m
                                                    ¯ 10,12   m
                                                              ¯ 11,11   m
                                                                        ¯ 11,12    m
                                                                                   ¯ 12,12
      Temporary shock         1.5312     1.0293     0.7581    1.5638    1.1517     1.7132
      Permanent shock         1.5523     2.6070     3.6767    1.6177    2.9042     1.7132

      This table reports the sample means of multiplier values (m
                                                                ¯ t, ) for the baseline
      estimated parameter values, with endogenous network in Table 2, Column 2.


                        Table 5: The expectation multiplier

   m
   ¯ 12,10                                   m
                                             ¯ 12,11                                   m
                                                                                       ¯ 12,12
   -0.006                                    0.054                                     1.7132

   This table reports the sample means of multiplier values (m¯ t, ) in grade 10, 11
   and 12 induced by an anticipated shock to the preferences of all agents in grade
   12, calibrated to the baseline estimated parameters with endogenous network in
   Table 2, Column 2.


Table 6: The expectation multiplier - under different parameter values

a2 = 0.1     3 = 0.8(1 = 1 - 2 - 3 )            3 = 0.7       3 = 0.6     3 = 0.5         3 = 0.4
 m
 ¯ 12,10             -0.089                     -0.089        -0.067      -0.048          -0.0346
 m
 ¯ 12,11             -0.633                     -0.275        -0.090       0.004            0.052
 m
 ¯ 12,12                5                       3.3333          2.5          2             1.6667
a2 = 0.2     3 = 0.6(1 = 1 - 2 - 3 )            3 = 0.5       3 = 0.4     3 = 0.3         3 = 0.2
 m
 ¯ 12,10             -0.023                     -0.014        -0.006      -0.001           -0.001
 m
 ¯ 12,11              0.059                      0.109        0.135        0.146            0.148
 m
 ¯ 12,12               2.5                         2          1.6667      1.4286             1.25
a2 = 0.4     3 = 0.5(1 = 1 - 2 - 3 )            3 = 0.4       3 = 0.3     3 = 0.2         3 = 0.1
 m
 ¯ 12,10              0.024                      0.035        0.043        0.048           0.050
 m
 ¯ 12,11              0.201                      0.227        0.238        0.240           0.238
 m
 ¯ 12,12             1.6667                     1.4286         1.25       1.1111              1
 a3 = 0      1 = 0.1(2 = 1 - 1 - 3 )            1 = 0.2       1 = 0.3     1 = 0.4         1 = 0.5
 m
 ¯ 12,10              0.007                      0.019        0.031        0.038           0.038
 m
 ¯ 12,11              0.082                      0.137        0.172        0.192           0.198
 m
 ¯ 12,12                1                          1             1           1                1
 a3 = 0      1 = 0.6(2 = 1 - 1 - 3 )            1 = 0.7       1 = 0.8     1 = 0.9
 m
 ¯ 12,10             0.0299                      0.013        -0.011      -0.031
 m
 ¯ 12,11              0.192                      0.172        0.137        0.082
 m
 ¯ 12,12                1                          1             1           1

This table reports the simulated sample means of expectation multiplier values (m
                                                                                ¯ t, ) with actual
school networks G and with  = 0.99.


                                               48
Table 7: The (semi-) elasticities of "availability of alcohol or cigarettes at home"

                             10 on 10      10 on 11      10 on 12      11 on 11      11 on 12      12 on 12
   Temporary shock
     Direct Effect             0.0492       0.0212          0.0091      0.2014         0.0866        0.4393
   Equilibrium Effect          0.0996       0.0736          0.0556      0.3398         0.2580        0.7895
   Permanent shock
     Direct Effect             0.0492       0.0704          0.0795      0.0004         0.2880        0.4393
   Equilibrium Effect          0.0996       0.1757          0.2502      0.3399         0.6301        0.7895

   This table reports the sample means of the (semi-) elasticities of a change of "availability of alcohol
   or cigarettes at home" on child risky behavior implied by the direct effect versus the equilibrium
   effect for the baseline estimated parameter values, with endogenous network in Table 2, Column
   2.




              Table 8: Myopic and static vs. dynamic baseline estimates

       Dep. Var. Risky Behavior Index                           Endogenous network
                                              Myopic          Static          Dynamic baseline
                                               =0           1 = 0,  = 0
                                                 (1)            (2)                   (3)
       Addiction effect (1 )                 0.4233***           -               0.4299***
                                              (0.1225)                             (0.1552)
       Own effect (2 )                       0.1468***      0.6453***            0.1538***
                                              (0.0134)       (0.0999)              (0.0210)
       Peer effect (3 )                      0.4299***      0.3547***             0.4163**
                                              (0.1347)       (0.0999)              (0.1665)
       Discount factor ( )                        -              -                0.4925**
                                                                                   (0.2017)
       Selectivity ( )                         0.2615         0.0888                -0.0620
                                              (1.1107)       (0.1680)              (0.5942)
       Student characteristics                  Yes             Yes                   Yes
       Peers' characteristics                   Yes             Yes                   Yes
       Networks fixed effects                   Yes             Yes                   Yes
       N. Obs.                                 1,207           1,207                 1,207

       This table reports GMM estimates of the structural model 10. In Column 1 we restrict the model
       by setting  = 0, while in Column 2 we restrict the model by setting 1 = 0 and  = 0. Column
       3 reports baseline estimates presented in Table 2 Column 2. Students' characteristics are listed in
       Table G1. The peers' characteristics are calculated as friends' averages of the included variables.
       Heteroskedasticity-robust numerical standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       49
         Table 9: Alternative definition of peers

Dep. Var. Risky Behavior Index
                                        All Sample      Regression Sample
                                            (1)                 (2)
Addiction effect (1 )                   0.4139***           0.2937***
                                         (0.0002)            (0.0174)
Own effect (2 )                         0.3260***           0.3603***
                                         (0.0003)            (0.0265)
Peer effect (3 )                        0.2601***           0.3460***
                                         (0.0004)            (0.0381)
Discount factor ( )                     0.4210***           0.5206***
                                         (0.0009)            (0.0833)
Student characteristics                     Yes                Yes
Peers' characteristics                      Yes                Yes
School fixed effects                        Yes                Yes
N. Obs.                                    1,759              1,207

This table reports GMM estimates of the structural models using the al-
ternative definition of peers defined in 15 (Column 1). In Column 2 we
condition the estimation to the sample used in the baseline estimation
(Table 2). Students' characteristics are listed in Table G1. The peers'
characteristics are calculated as friends' averages of the included variables.
Heteroskedasticity-robust numerical standard errors in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                     50
Technical Appendix

A        Formal Model

A dynamic linear economy with social interactions is populated by a finite number of agents i = 1, . . . , N .
Agents live for the whole duration of the economy t = 1, . . . , T . Each agent i chooses an action yit at
time t from a closed and convex set Y  R after having observed a preference shock it    R,
a closed and convex set of possible types (we denote with yt  Y and t   the corresponding N -
dimensional vectors stacking all agents).45 Let  := (t ) := (it )i=1,...,N, t1 be the stochastic process of
agents' types, which is assumed, with no loss of generality, to be defined, on the canonical probability
space (, F , P), where  := (1 , 2 , · · · ) : t  N , t = 1, 2, · · · , T                    is the space of sample paths. The
sequence (F1 , F2 , · · · , FT ) of Borel sub- -fields of F is a filtration in (, F ), that is F1  F2  · · ·  F .
Finally, the process  = (1 , 2 , · · · , T ) is adapted to the filtration (Ft : t  1), that is, for each t, t is
measurable with respect to Ft . Finally, P : F  [0, 1] is a probability measure where P ((1 , . . . , t 
A) := P ({   : (1 , . . . , t )  A}), all A  Ft .
       The social network is represented by an N × N matrix G = [gij ], where gij indicates the friendship
relationship between i and j . Following the convention in the social networks literature, G has a main
diagonal of zeros. We consider row-normalized G's, i.e., if i nominates j as one of his friends, then gij > 0,
otherwise gij = 0, and         j   gij = 1. In other words, we consider a directed network, in which each agent
interacts directly with his friends, and friendship of i with j does not imply friendship of j with i.
       The instantaneous preferences of an agent i  N are represented by the utility function


                            ui (yit-1 , yt , t , G)   := -1 (yit-1 - yit )2 - 2 (it - yit )2                           (A.1)
                                                                    N
                                                            -3          gij (yjt - yit )2
                                                                 j =1


and 1 , 2 , 3  0 are parameters. We require that either 1 or 2 be strictly positive.
       The precise timing of events is as follows: Before each agent's time t choice, the history of previous
choices, yt-1 = (y0 , y1 , . . . , yt-1 ), and the history of preference shocks, t = (1 , . . . , t ) (including the
period-t realization), are observed by all agents. After time t choices are made, yt = (yit )N
                                                                                             i=1 becomes

common knowledge and the economy moves to time t + 1.
       Each agent i chooses strategy yi = (yit ), where for each t, yit : Yt × t  Y , to maximize

                                          T
                                     E          t-1 ui (yit-1 , yt , t , G) (y0 , 1 )                                  (A.2)
                                         t=1


given {yj }j =i , the strategies of other agents, and any finite initial history (y0 , 1 )  Y × .
  45
       All of our results are easily extended to the case in which choice and type variables are multidimensional.


                                                               51
Definition A. 1 A Subgame Perfect Equilibrium of a dynamic linear conformity economy is a family of
        N
maps {yi }i=1 such that for all i = 1, . . . , N and for all (yt-1 , t )  Yt × t

                                                     T
              
             yit yt-1 , t  argmaxyit Y E                    t-1 ui (yit-1 , yit , {yjt
                                                                                    
                                                                                       }j =i , t , G) (y0 , 1 )      (A.3)
                                                     t=1



B        Proof of Proposition 1 (Existence and Uniqueness):

Proposition 1 (Equilibrium Existence and Uniqueness) Consider a dynamic linear economy with
social interactions and preferences for conformity, with 1 + 2 > 0. There exists a unique subgame perfect
equilibrium. Individuals' equilibrium choices at time T are uniquely determined by

                                                           -1
                                 yT = [T I - 3 G]               × (1 yT -1 + 2 T )                                   (B.1)
                                                BT


where BT := [bijT ] is an N × N matrix of equilibrium coefficients. For any t = 1, . . . , T - 1, individuals'
optimal choices in equilibrium are uniquely given by


                                      yt = Bt (1 yt-1 + 2 t + 2 Dt ) .                                               (B.2)


Each Bt , t < T , depends only on the future equilibrium coefficient matrices (B ) >t and is computed
recursively as the unique fixed point of contraction maps induced by the first-order conditions of problem
(A.3).

    Proof:     - Step 1: Existence and uniqueness at t = T . Let any history of previous choices, yT -1 =
(y0 , y1 , . . . , yT -1 ) and of preference shocks, T = (1 , . . . , T ), and other agents' choices (yjT )j =i be given.
Agent i solves
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                       N                          
                       max -1 (yiT -1 - yiT )2 - 2 (iT - yiT )2 - 3                           gij (yjT - yiT )2      (B.3)
                      yiT Y                                                                                       
                                                                                       j =1


The first order condition
                                                                                                     
                                                                           N
                       2 1 (yiT -1 - yiT ) + 2 (iT - yiT ) + 3                   gij (yjT - yiT ) = 0
                                                                          j =1


implies that                                                                                   
                                                                                 N
                                yiT = -
                                      T
                                        1
                                         1 yiT -1 + 2 iT + 3                          gij yjT                        (B.4)
                                                                               j =1

where T := 1 + 2 + 3 > 0. This choice is feasible (in Y ) since it is a convex combination of elements of

                                                                52
Y , a convex set by assumption. The objective function (B.3) is strictly concave in yiT , thus the right-hand
side of (B.4) is the unique optimizer.
    Let B be the class of bounded FT -measurable functions y : (Y × )T  Y . The right hand side of
(B.4) can be seen as an operator, call it F OCiT , that maps any given collection f = {fj } of bounded and
FT -measurable functions in B to the FT -measurable function F OCiT (f ), defined as
                                                                                                          
                                                                                    N
                  F OCiT (f )(yT -1 , T ) := -
                                             T
                                               1
                                                1 yiT -1 + iT + 3                        gij fj (yT -1 , T )   (B.5)
                                                                                  j =1


F OCiT is a self-map for any i. Thus, the map F OCT := (F OCiT )i : Bn  Bn . Endow both B
and Bn with the sup norm which makes (Bn , || · || ) a Banach space. Showing the existence of an
equilibrium in the continuation given history (yT -1 , T ) is equivalent to finding the fixed point of the
operator F OCT := (F OCiT )i : Bn  Bn . To that end, we show next that the map F OCT is a contraction
             ^  Bn . We have for all yT -1 , T
map. Pick f, f

                                                       ^
                        F OCiT (f ) yT -1 , T - F OCiT f                 yT -1 , T
                                                                              N
                                     = -
                                       T
                                         1
                                           1 yiT -1 + iT + 3                        gij fj (yT -1 , T )
                                                                             j =1
                                                                     N
                                     - 1 yiT -1 - iT - 3                       ^
                                                                           gij f j (y
                                                                                      T -1 T
                                                                                          , )
                                                                    j =1
                                                   N
                                            3                                      ^
                                     =                    gij    fj (yT -1 , T ) - f j (y
                                                                                          T -1 T
                                                                                              , )
                                            T      j =1


                  3
The coefficient   T    < 1 since either 1 or 2 is nonzero by assumption. But then the expression in the
last line

                                                 N
                                            3                                     ^
                                                        gij     fj (yT -1 , T ) - f j (y
                                                                                         T -1 T
                                                                                             , )
                                            T   j =1
                                                    N
                                            3                                   ^
                                                          gij fj (yT -1 , T ) - fj (y
                                                                                      T -1 T
                                                                                          , )
                                            T      j =1
                                                    N
                                            3                      ^
                                                          gij fj - fj
                                            T      j =1
                                                                             

                                            3           ^
                                                     f -f
                                            T                   


Hence F OCT is a contraction mapping on (Bn , || · || ). Thus, by Banach Fixed Point Theorem (see e.g.,
Aliprantis and Border (2006), p.95), F OCT has a unique fixed point f  in Bn .



                                                          53
       Consider now Bc the subset of B that includes families of bounded measurable linear maps as in
                                                                                                              
                f : yt-1 , t  Y s.t.                                                                          
                                                                                                              
                                N                   N            T        N
         Bc :=  f (yt-1 , t ) = j =1 cj yj,t-1 + j =1 dj j,t +  =t+1 j =1 ej, -t E [j, |t ]                          (B.6)
                                                                                                              
                with c , d , e  0 and       N                T                                                
                                            j =1 cj + dj +    =t+1 ej, -t  1
                                                                                                              
                       j   j j


where each element is a linear combination of one-period before history, current and expected future
preference shocks. Thanks to the linearity and inequality constraints, Bn                        n
                                                                        c is a closed subset of B and

that F OCT in (B.4) maps Bn
                          c into itself. Since F OCT is a contraction mapping, its unique fixed point

then lies necessarily in Bn
                          c . Moreover, the existence of the unique fixed point for F OCT in (B.4) written

in matrix form


                                          T yT = 1 yT -1 + 2 T + 3 GyT                                               (B.7)


is equivalent to the invertibility of this matrix equation.46 Hence, the equilibrium choices vector takes the
form

                                                          -1
                                    yT = [T I - 3 G]           × (1 yT -1 + 2 T )                                    (B.8)
                                                    BT


This proves that the statement of the Proposition is true for the last period (1-period economies). Next,
we demonstrate that this result holds for any finite-horizon, T -period economy. Hence, the rest of the
proof will use an induction argument. In any period t = 1, . . . , T - 1, future equilibrium policy matrices
Bt+1 , . . . , BT are known. The first-order condition for agent i's problem takes the form

                                                                    N
            0   =    1 (yi,t-1 - yi,t ) + 2 (i,t - yi,t ) + 3              gij (yj,t - yi,t )
                                                                    j =1
                            T
                                                                    yi, -1   yi,                              yi,
                    +E               -t    - 1 (yi, -1 - yi, )             -                + 2 (i, - yi, )
                           =t+1
                                                                    yi,t     yi,t                             yi,t
                           N
                                                     yj,    yi,
                    - 3          gij (yj, - yi, )         -                                                          (B.9)
                          j =1
                                                     yi,t   yi,t

  46                                           3
       Another way to see this is that since   T
                                                    < 1, T I - 3 G is invertible. See Case (1991), footnote 5.




                                                               54
By iterating through future policy functions, we can write y , for  = t + 1, . . . , T , as


             y       = B [1 y -1 + 2  + 2 D ]
                       2
                     = 1 (B × B -1 ) y -2 + 1 2 B × B -1 ( -1 + D -1 ) + 2 B ( + D )
                     .
                     .
                     .
                                                                   
                           -t                                             -s
                     =    1       (B × · · · × Bt+1 ) yt +               1   2 (B × · · · × Bs ) (s + Ds )                     (B.10)
                                                                 s=t+1
                                                                                    -s+1 terms


Define t, , for any  = t + 1, . . . , T , as

                                                            -t
                                                     t, := 1   B × . . . × Bt+1                                                (B.11)


with the convention that t,t := IN , the identity matrix. Using this latter, one can obtain the intertemporal
partial derivatives as

                                      yj,             -t
                                                   = 1   Bj ·, × · · · × B·i,t+1 = ji,t,                                       (B.12)
                                      yi,t

where Bj ·, denotes the j 'th row of the N × N matrix B and B·i,t+1 denotes the i'th column of the
N × N matrix Bt+1 , and ji,t, denotes the entry at the j 'th row and i'th column of the N × N matrix
t, . Similarly, define t, , for any  = t + 1, . . . , T , as

                                                      
                                       t, :=                 -s
                                                            1   (B × · · · × Bs ) ¯s + Ds                                      (B.13)
                                                   s=t+1


with the convention that t,t := 0N , the N × 1 matrix of zeros, and where for notational simplicity, ¯s is
the expected value of s , conditional on period-t information. The first-order condition is linear hence we
know that the total coefficient of yj,t is going to be given by the cross partial derivative of the objective
function with respect to yj,t and yi,t , i.e.,

                                               T                                          2                       2
                                                                                                       
      ii,t   := 1 + 2 + 3 +                            -t    1          (yi, -1 - yi, )       + 2           yi,
                                           =t+1
                                                                   yi,t                                yi,t
                                          N                                2
                                                         yk,    yi,
                                    +3         gik            -
                                                         yi,t   yi,t
                                         k=1
                 =       1 + 2 + 3                                                                                             (B.14)
                          T                                                                   N
                                                                   2                2                                      2
                 +                 -t 1 (ii,t, -1 - ii,t, ) + 2 (ii,t, ) + 3                        gik (ki,t, - ii,t, )
                          =t+1                                                                k=1




                                                                      55
Similarly, for any j = i,

                                             T
                                                                                     
            ij,t    := 3 gij -                          -t 1         (yi, -1 - yi, )      (yi, -1 - yi, )
                                            =t+1
                                                                yj,t                 yi,t
                                              
                       +   2              yi,      yi,
                                     yj,t     yi,t
                                       N
                                                      yk,    yi,         yk,    yi,
                           +3               gik            -                  -
                                                      yj,t   yj,t        yi,t   yi,t
                                     k=1
                       =   3 gij                                                                            (B.15)
                               T
                       -                 -t 1 (ij,t, -1 - ij,t, ) (ii,t, -1 - ii,t, ) + 2 ij,t, ii,t,
                            =t+1
                                   N
                       +   3             gik (kj,t, - ij,t, ) (ki,t, - ii,t, )
                                   k=1


Let diag (A) be the N × N diagonal matrix whose non-zero entries are the diagonal elements of the matrix
A. So, in matrix form the matrix t is defined in two-steps as

                               T
            ~t
                   := -                  -t 1 diag (t, -1 - t, ) (t, -1 - t, ) + 2 diag (t, ) t,
                             =t+1
                               N
                   +       3         diag (G·k N ) diag (N k·,t, - t, ) (N k·,t, - t, )                     (B.16)
                               k=1


where N is an N × 1 column-vector of ones and N is an 1 × N row-vector of ones; G·k is the k 'th column
of the N × N matrix G; k·,t, is the k 'th row of the N × N matrix t, . Now,


                               t         := 3 G + (1 + 2 + 3 ) IN + ~ t - 2 diag ~t                         (B.17)


    Finally, let Dt capture the sum of the effects on the current period (period t) marginal utility of future
 's. Dt 's can be computed recursively beginning with t = T , setting DT = 0, N × 1 vector of zeros (no
future period). Then, for t < T , let Dt be defined as

                                                  T
                   2 Di,t       := 2                      -t   - 1 (i,t, -1 - i,t, ) (ii,t, -1 - ii,t, )
                                               =t+1

                                           + ¯i, - i,t, ii,t,
                                                  N
                                           - 3          gik (k,t, - i,t, ) (ki,t, - ii,t, )
                                                  k=1




                                                                    56
Hence, in matrix form

                               T
                   Dt   :=             -t   - 1 diag (t, -1 - t, ) (t, -1 - t, )
                              =t+1

                             + diag (t, ) ¯ - t,
                                     N
                             - 3         diag (G·k N ) diag (N k·,t, - t, ) (k,t, 1 - t, )            (B.18)
                                   k=1


where 1 is an N × 1 column vector of ones. For t = T - 1, this translates into
      Now define


                                                  ¯ t := diag(t )
                                                  

and
                                                  ¯ :=  - 
                                                          ¯t
                                                   t   t


using which we can rewrite the system of first-order conditions in matrix form as

                                   ¯ t yt = 1 yt-1 + 2 t + 2 Dt + 
                                                                  ¯ y                                 (B.19)
                                                                   t t



As we did in the beginning of the proof for the final period, the right hand side of (B.19) can be seen as an
operator, call it F OCit , that maps any given collection f = {fj } of bounded and Ft -measurable functions
in B to the Ft -measurable function F OCit (f ). Hence, showing the existence of a linear equilibrium policy
for the first period of a T - t + 1-period economy is equivalent to finding the fixed point of the operator
F OCit . Using straightforward modifications of the arguments in the proof for the last period, F OCit is a
contraction mapping and that it maps the closed subset Bn     n
                                                        c of B into itself; hence its unique fixed point

then lies necessarily in Bn
                          c . Thus, the equilibrium choice vector is linear in period t - 1 choices, period-t

shocks, and future expected shocks. Moreover, the existence of the unique fixed point for F OCt in (B.19)
is equivalent to the invertibility of this matrix equation. Hence, the equilibrium choices vector takes the
form

                                   ¯t - 
                                        ¯ y = y
                                         t t 1 t-1 + 2 t + 2 Dt                                       (B.20)


and the optimal policy then is given by

                                                 -1
                              yt = ¯t - ¯             (1 yt-1 + 2 t + 2 Dt )                          (B.21)
                                          t

                                            Bt


where Bt := [bij,t ] is an N × N matrix of equilibrium coefficients for period t. Therefore, in any period



                                                         57
t = 1, . . . , T - 1, the system of first-order conditions in matrix form can be written as

                                  ¯t - 
                                       ¯ y = [ y
                                        t t   1 t-1 + 2 t + 2 Dt ]                                (B.22)


and the optimal policy then is given by

                                                -1
                                yt = ¯t - ¯          (1 yt-1 + 2 t + 2 Dt ) ;                     (B.23)
                                            t

                                         Bt


which concludes the proof of the Proposition. In the next section of this appendix we provide a recursive
algorithm to compute  ¯ t, ¯ (and hence B =     ¯t -  ¯ , and D .
                            t              t           t         t




C      Recursive Algorithm

Below is the recursive algorithm that follows the steps of the recursive characterization argument of the
last section. We use this algorithm to compute the equilibrium policy weights when we simulate our model.

    1. Compute BT from the last period (T = 12), assuming that DT = 0 is the N × 1 vector of zeros.

    2. Define ¯t := Xt  + GXt  +  N as the N × 1 vector of non-stochastic part of period-t shocks, for
       all t = 8, . . . , 12.

    3. Let t = 11.

    4. Compute t,t+1 , . . . , t,T using equation (F.1).

    5. Compute t,t+1 , . . . , t,T using equation ( B.13).

    6. Compute t using (B.17).

    7. Compute Dt using (B.18).

    8. Compute ¯ t := diag(t ) and ¯ :=  - diag( ).
                                    t   t       t


    9. Compute Bt from (B.21).

  10. Let t = t - 1. If t = 8 then go to Step 3. Otherwise Stop.



D      Proof of Identification

Proposition 2 Suppose that T  2, and Full Rank, Exogeneity, and Regularity assumptions of Section
4.1 are satisfied. Then, our dynamic linear economy with social interactions is identified.



                                                         58
   Proof: : Based on the equilibrium characterization in Proposition 1 and using the decomposition in
(4) and (5), the following reduced-form equations hold

                                                                   K
                                      -1                                                (k )
            yT   =   [T I - 3 G]           × 1 yT -1 + 2                 (k I + k G) xT + uT
                                                                   k=1

                                           -1                       K
       yT -1     =   ¯ T -1 - ¯                 1 yT -2 + 2
                                                                                         (k )
                                                                         (k I + k G) xT -1 + uT -1           + DT -1
                                T -1
                                                                   k=1


We split the term DT -1 that includes the conditional expectations given period-T - 1 information into
                                                                                                K                  (k)
observable and unobservable (by the econometrician) parts, namely, E                            k=1   (k I + k G) xT | XT -1
and E uT | uT -1 . Agents observe both X and u and these two are not correlated by the Exogeneity
                                      K                      (k)
Assumption. Furthermore, E            k=1   (k I + k G) xT | XT -1 is a function of XT -1 which is known by
the econometrician. Hence, using the definition of DT -1 in equation (B.18) in Appendix B and letting
¯x := E   K                 (k)   T -1       ¯u := E uT | uT -1 ,
 T        k=1 (k I + k G) xT | X       and    T



            DT -1    :=   Dx       u
                           T -1 + DT -1


                     =       - 1 diag (IN - 1 BT ) -BT ¯T
                                                        x
                                                          + diag (1 BT ) ¯T
                                                                          x
                                                                            - BT ¯T
                                                                                  x


                                N
                          - 3         diag (G·l N ) 1 diag (N Bl·,T - BT ) (BT ¯T
                                                                                x
                                                                                  )l,· 1 - BT ¯T
                                                                                               x

                                l=1


                     +       - 1 diag (IN - 1 BT ) -BT ¯T
                                                        u
                                                          + diag (1 BT ) ¯T
                                                                          u
                                                                            - BT ¯T
                                                                                  u


                                N
                          - 3         diag (G·l N ) 1 diag (N Bl·,T - BT ) (BT ¯T
                                                                                u
                                                                                  )l,· 1 - BT ¯T
                                                                                               u

                                l=1


Substituting these back into the reduced-form equation for T - 1 above, we get the following system of
linear simultaneous econometric equations with N endogenous variables on the right hand side of each
equation,

                                                   K
                                                                           (k )
            yT   = 1 BT yT -1 + 2 BT                    (k I + k G) xT            + T                                    (D.1)
                                                  k=1
             T   = BT 2 uT .
                                                         K
                                                                                  (k)              x
        yT -1    = 1 BT -1 yT -2 + 2 BT -1                   (k I + k G) xT -1          + 2 BT -1 DT -1 + T -1           (D.2)
                                                     k=1
                                                     u
        T -1     = BT -1 2 uT-1 +           BT -1 2 DT -1 .



where the error terms T -1 , T are known linear combinations of own and friends' current unobservables
and expectations of future unobservables.



                                                             59
       The endogeneity of yT -1 in equation (D.1) and of yT -2 in equation (D.2) require us to find suitable
instrumental variables zT -1 and zT -2 . Thanks to the Regularity Assumption, one of the characteristic
                                                                                                    (k )
dimensions does affect the individual choice yit , either through direct own effects k xit , or through social
                (k )
effect k Gi xt . Assume for simplicity of presentation that it is the former. The argument for the latter is
                                               (k)
identical. Hence, we can define zit := xit for t = T - 1, T - 2. This way, we have N instruments for each
period. Predicted values of yt , t = T - 1, T - 2, are formed by projecting them on to the space spanned by
the set of instrumential variables zt , t = T - 1, T - 2. These are valid instruments by construction since:

   1. They are uncorrelated with the errors, hence satisfy exclusion restrictions: Thanks to the Exogeneity
         Assumption and using iterated expectations, for t = T

                                                              (k)
                       E [T | zT -1 ]   = 2 BT E [ uT | xT -1 ]
                                                                                    (k)              (k)
                                        = 2 BT E [ E [ uT | X1 , . . . , XT -1 ] | xT -1 ] = E [0 | xT -1 ] = 0


         and for t = T - 1, similar arguments lead to

                                                                       u                                   (k)
                        E [T -1 | zT -2 ]   = 2 BT -1 E [ E [ uT -1 + DT -1 | X1 , . . . , XT -1 ] | xT -1 ]



         Note that t is a linear function of two sets of variables: ut and E [u |ut ], with   t + 1. By
         the Exogeneity Assumption, we have E [ut |xt-1 ] = 0 and, since E [u |ut ] is a function of ut ,
         E [E [u |ut ] |xt-1 ] = 0.

   2. They are informative about the explanatory variable, i.e. E [zT -1 yT -1 ] = 0, thanks to 2 k = 0 by
         the Regularity Assumption.

Moreover, they are not collinear with Xt , t = T - 1, T , thanks to the Full Rank Assumption. With T  2,
we can consistently estimate BT and BT -1 using the constructed instrumental variables.
       So far, we have demonstrated that we can estimate the reduced form equilibrium coefficients con-
sistently under the stated assumptions. In the second part, we show that the map from the utility
parameters into the reduced form coefficients is injective. Consider now two sets of structural parameters
 = (1 , 2 , 3 , , ) and  = (1 , 2 , 3 ,  ,  ) leading to the same reduced form in equation (7).47
Coefficient estimates would imply


                        1 BT ( ) yT -1 = 1 BT ( ) yT -1             =     1 BT ( ) = 1 BT ( )
  47
    If needed, one can simply add a constant term to the structural equations to make the comparison with the
previous works easier. This addition would not alter any of the results or the proof argument.




                                                             60
                                                                      -1                             -1
due to observational equivalence, where BT ( ) := [T I - 3 G]              , and BT ( ) := [T I - 3 G]    . Since
1 , 1 = 0 by the Regularity assumption, and BT ( ) and BT ( ) are invertible, we obtain

                                        1                       1
                                          [T I - 3 G]      =      [T I - 3 G]                              (D.3)
                                        1                       1

Since gii = 0, the diagonal entries on left and right hand sides of the equation give T /1 = T /1 .
Moreover, the row sums on both sides off the diagonal yield 3 /1 = 3 /1 . Under the normalization
T =       i   i = 1, we obtain

                                               1                     1
                                                 = 1       = 1 =
                                               T                     T

which would in turn imply, by substituting back into (D.3), that 3 = 3 . Therefore, 2 = 1 - 1 - 2 .
    Consistent estimate of the reduced form equation (7) yields further observable equivalence restrictions,
namely, for k = 1, . . . , K

                                 (k )                   (k)
                 (k I + k G) xT         = (k I + k G) xT        =    (k I + k G) = (k I + k G)


which is equivalent to


                                           (k - k ) I + (k - k ) G =         0                             (D.4)


Since I and G are linearly independent (remember that gii = 0), this yields k = k and k = k .
    Similarly, for t = T - 1, we obtain consistent coefficient estimates in equation (8) and can recover
BT -1 since we already recovered the true 1 using (7) above. We can then recover T -1 by reversing the
operations in Step 8 of the recursive algorithm we used to obtain BT -1 from T -1 , that we presented in
Section C, namely by


                                 T -1      =   diag(B- 1       -1           -1
                                                     T -1 ) - BT -1 - diag(BT -1 )


and using the expression in (B.17), we can also recover


                      := ~ T -1 - 2 diag ~ T -1        =      T -1 - 3 G - (1 + 2 + 3 ) IN                 (D.5)


since we already recovered everything to the right of the second equality sign. Hence, we can also obtain
~ T -1 by reverse operations, namely by 
                                          ~ T -1 =  - 2 diag (). Moreover, we know by substituting




                                                           61
period-T equilibrium into (B.16 )that, ~ T -1 takes the form


                     ~ T -1
                              := - 1 diag (IN - 1 BT ) (IN - 1 BT ) + 2 diag (1 BT ) 1 BT

                                         N
                               +    3         diag (G·l N ) diag (N Bl·,T - BT ) (N Bl·,T - BT )
                                        l=1
                               =    - M


where M represents everyhting inside the brackets, which we recovered using period-T equilibrium restric-
tions. Hence,  is recovered as well. This concludes the proof.




E         Optimal GMM Estimator - G exogenous

Let zt = [yt-1 , Xt , GXt ] and qt = [Xt-1 , GXt-1 , G2 Xt , G2 Xt-1 , Xt , GXt ] be vectors of explanatory
                                                    48
variables and instruments, respectively.                 Let  = [1 , 2 , 3 ,  ,  ,  ] .

        Let the stacked vectors be Y = [yT , . . . , yT -4 ] , Z = [zT , . . . , zT -4 ] , Q = [qT , . . . , qT -4 ] and F (Z,  ) =
    1 B5 y4 + 2 B5 ( X5 +  GX5 + D5 + u5 )
                      .
                                                                 

                      .
                      .                                          . Finally, let h(Z, Q,  ) = Q [Y - F (Z,  )]. The mo-
                                                                 
                                                                 
  1 B1 y0 + 2 B1 ( X1 +  GX1 + D1 + u1 )
ment conditions are then,
                                         E (h(Z, Q,  )) = E (Q [Y - F (Z,  )]) = 0;                                         (E.1)

The optimal GMM estimator of  satisfies


                                            arg min h(Z, Q,  ) W-1 h(Z, Q,  ),                                              (E.2)


where the weight matrix W is the variance of the moment condition, W = S = E [h(Z, Q,  )h(Z, Q,  ) ].
        In practice, we

Step 1 Obtain a GMM estimator using (the suboptimal choice of the weight matrix) W = IP ; obtain
                                                   1      N
          also the consistent estimate S =         N      i=1   u2
                                                                 i qi qi ; where ui = yi - F (zi ,  ), qi is the i-th row of Q

          and 1 is the (inefficient) GMM estimator of 0 in the first step.

Step 2 Obtain a GMM estimator, again, but using (the optimal weight matrix) W = S-1 .

        The optimal GMM estimator OGM M is consistent and asymptotically normally distributed with mean
   48
    Observe that in principle we would not need to add G2 Xt as excluded instrument. Given that empirically G
and G2 are linear independent we exploit Bramoull´ e et al. (2009) conditions including this additional instrument
in order to improve efficiency.


                                                                   62
                                                                         -1
0 and with estimated asymptotic variance V = N D QS-1 Q D                     , where S denotes S evaluated at
GM M and a consistent estimate D of D0 can be obtained from D =          u
                                                                         evaluated at  = GM M . For the
model in Section 6, where we use G     ~ instead of G (see (15)), the matrix of the instrument is defined as
              ~ t-1 , G
~ t = [Xt-1 , GX
q                     ~ 2 Xt , G
                               ~ 2 Xt-1 , Xt , GX
                                               ~ t ].



F     Recursive Computation of the Dynamic Multiplier

Remember that t, , for any  = t + 1, . . . , T , as

                                                  -t
                                           t, := 1   B × . . . × Bt+1                                    (F.1)


with the convention that t,t := IN , the identity matrix. Moreover, using equation (B.12) from the
Appendix for the definition of t, , for any  = t + 1, . . . , T , we obtain

                                            
                             t, :=                 -s
                                                  1   (B × · · · × Bs ) ¯s + Ds                          (F.2)
                                          s=t+1


with the convention that t,t := 0N , the N × 1 matrix of zeros, and where ¯s is the expected value of s ,
conditional on period-t information. Similarly, equation (B.17) yields

                             T
              Dt     :=              -t    - 1 diag (t, -1 - t, ) (t, -1 - t, )
                            =t+1

                          + diag (t, ) ¯ - t,
                                   N
                          - 3          diag (G·k N ) diag (N k·,t, - t, ) (k,t, 1 - t, )                 (F.3)
                                 k=1


where 1 is an N × 1 column vector of ones. These are the two variables we need for the computation.
    For t = T , DT = 0 by construction. For t = T - 1, (F.2) simplifies to


                                          T -1,T = BT ¯T =  BT 1                                         (F.4)


Hence, DT -1 , for example, can be obtained as


          DT -1      =   1 diag (T -1,T -1 - T -1,T ) BT 1

                          + diag (T -1,T ) (1 - BT 1)
                                 N
                          - 3          diag (G·k N ) diag (N k·,t, - T -1,T ) ((BT 1)k· 1 - BT 1)
                                 k=1




                                                         63
Here is the recursive algorithm to compute these variables for the remaining periods t = 1, . . . , T - 1:

1. Compute t, ,  = t + 1, . . . , T using equation (F.2).

2. Compute Dt using equation (F.3).

3. Repeat until t = 0.




                                                 64
G     Data and Additional Tables Checks


                                         Table G1: Sample Selection
                                                    Panel (a)                Panle (b)                Panel (c)
                                                  Initial sample         Sample without         Students connected
                                                                           missing values       in a social network
                                                  (N. obs.: 1793)         (N. obs.: 1759)          (N. obs.: 1207)
    Variable                                     Mean         SD         Mean         SD         Mean          SD
    Risky behavior index (wave II)               0.1535     0.2023       0.1545     0.2026       0.1579       0.204
    Risky behavior index (wave I)                0.1396     0.1947       0.1399     0.1947       0.1345      0.1877
    Female                                       0.4992     0.5001       0.4997     0.5001       0.4979      0.5002
    Black or African American                    0.1439     0.3511        0.145     0.3522       0.1052       0.307
    White                                       0.5438      0.4982      0.5469      0.3522      0.6081       0.4884
    Hispanic or Latino                           0.2166     0.4121       0.2166      0.412       0.1806      0.3849
    Parents College degree                       0.2627     0.4402       0.2609     0.4393       0.2759      0.4471
    Two-parent family                           0.7317      0.4432      0.7351      0.4414      0.7664       0.4233
    Age (wave II)                               16.9844 0.9389          16.9835 0.9397          16.9246      0.9437
    Pocket money (wave II)                      8.7582 12.2948          8.7822 12.3681          7.9039      11.6601
    Alcohol/tobacco at home (wave II)            0.2651     0.3497       0.2649     0.3493       0.2668      0.3475
    Height (wave II)                            67.1150 3.9558          67.133      3.9549      67.1814       3.941

     This table reports means and standard deviations of students' characteristics for the initial sample (Panel (a)),
     for the sample without missing values in observations (Panel (b)) and the sample with no isolates (Panel (b)).




                                  Table G2: Sample Representativness
                                                            Add Health                CPS
                                                          (N. obs.: 1207)       (N. obs.: 14257)
                       Variable                           Mean       SD         Mean       SD
                       Female                             0.4979 0.5002         0.5021 0.5000
                       Black or African American          0.1052 0.307          0.1268 0.3327
                       White                              0.6081 0.4884         0.6587 0.4742
                       Hispanic or Latino                 0.1806 0.3849         0.1639 0.3702
                       Parents College degree             0.2759 0.4471         0.2328 0.4227

                       This table reports summary statistics for the Add Health data sample used
                       in the paper and the 1994 CPS. Person weights are used in the 1994 Current
                       Population Surveys (CPS). The CPS sample is restricted to those aged 14-
                       20 and re-weighted to match the age distribution of the Add Health sample.




                                                            65
Table G3: Dynamic recursive model- Controls and contextual effects

    Dep. Var. Risky Behavior Index                       Endogenous networks
                                                  (1)                   (2)
    Addiction effect (1 )                     0.5084**             0.4299***
                                              (0.2129)              (0.1552)
    Own effect (2 )                          0.1017***             0.1538***
                                              (0.0227)              (0.0210)
    Peer effect (3 )                          0.3899*               0.4163**
                                              (0.2243)              (0.1665)
    Discount factor ( )                       0.4829*               0.4925**
                                              (0.2614)              (0.2017)
    Selectivity ( )                             0.1488               -0.0620
                                              (0.7404)              (0.5942)
    Female                                     -0.3266               -0.2897
                                              (0.9793)              (0.2546)
    Black or African American                  -0.1789               -0.1920
                                              (1.0958)              (0.3811)
    Age (wave II)                              -0.0021               0.0041
                                              (0.1931)              (0.0447)
    Parents College degree                     -0.9833               -0.5259
                                              (1.7672)              (0.7302)
    Two-parent family                           0.7263                0.3738
                                              (1.5658)              (0.6258)
    Pocket money                                0.0065                0.0029
                                              (0.0137)              (0.0060)
    Alcohol/tobacco at home (wave II)           0.4332                0.1698
                                              (1.0185)              (0.5274)
    Height (wave II)                            0.0008               -0.0026
                                              (0.0556)              (0.0122)
    Peers' characteristics                        No                   Yes
    Networks fixed effects                        Yes                  Yes
    N. Obs.                                      1,207                1,207

    This table reports GMM estimates of the structural model 10. The network formation is
    assumed to satisfy the linear dyadic structure in equation 9. The peers' characteristics
    are calculated as friends' averages of the included variables. Heteroskedasticity-robust
    numerical standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                              66
Table G4: Constrained "myopic" and "static" models- Controls

  Dep. Var. Risky Behavior Index                        Endogenous network
                                             Myopic           Static     Benchmark
                                              =0          1 = 0,  = 0
                                                (1)             (2)            (3)
  Addiction effect (1 )                     0.4233***                     0.4299***
                                             (0.1225)                      (0.1552)
  Own effect (2 )                           0.1468***      0.3547***      0.1538***
                                             (0.0134)       (0.0999)       (0.0210)
  Peer effect (3 )                          0.4299***      0.6453***       0.4163**
                                             (0.1347)       (0.0999)       (0.1665)
  Discount factor ( )                                                      0.4925**
                                                                           (0.2017)
  Selectivity ( )                              0.2615         0.0888        -0.0620
                                             (1.1107)       (0.1680)       (0.5942)
  Female                                      -0.2602        -0.0953        -0.2897
                                             (0.5906)       (0.0712)       (0.2546)
  Black or African American                   -0.0133        -0.0931        -0.1920
                                             (0.7322)       (0.1761)       (0.3811)
  Age (wave II)                                0.0016        -0.0019         0.0041
                                             (0.2155)       (0.0238)       (0.0447)
  Parents College degree                      -1.0193        -0.3309        -0.5259
                                             (0.9485)       (0.2497)       (0.7302)
  Two-parent family                            0.4994         0.1888         0.3738
                                             (0.8497)       (0.1347)       (0.6258)
  Pocket money                                 0.0056         0.0010         0.0029
                                             (0.0092)       (0.0019)       (0.0060)
  Alcohol/tobacco at home (wave II)            0.1601        0.0517          0.1698
                                             (0.8999)       (0.1634)       (0.5274)
  Height (wave II)                             0.0015         0.0002        -0.0026
                                             (0.0489)       (0.0026)       (0.0122)
  Student characteristics                        Yes            Yes            Yes
  Peers' characteristics                         Yes            Yes            Yes
  Networks fixed effects                         Yes            Yes            Yes
  N. Obs.                                       1,207          1,207          1,207

  his table reports GMM estimates of the structural model 10. The network formation is
  assumed to satisfy the linear dyadic structure in equation 9. In Column 1 we restrict
  the model by setting  = 0, while in Column 2 we restrict the model by setting 1 =
  0 and  = 0. Column 3 reports baseline estimates presented in Table 2 Column 2.
  The peers' characteristics are calculated as friends' averages of the included variables.
  Heteroskedasticity-robust numerical standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
  p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                            67
                                                            Table G5: Balancing tests
                                                Parents         Two-parent           Black or         Pocket money       Alcohol/tobacco        Height
                                             College degree       family        African American      (wave II)         at home (wave II)      (wave II)

     Same gender average risky behavior           -0.324           -0.1404            -0.3234            -21.1289             0.2696            5.4013
                                                 (0.8734)         (0.8512)           (0.3681)           (21.2361)            (0.7274)          (5.4155)

     School fixed effects                          yes               yes               yes                  yes                 yes               yes

     N. Obs.                                      1,207            1,207              1,207                1,207               1,207             1,207

     The figures in each row are coefficients from separate regressions of students' characteristics (parent college degree, two parent family, black or
     African American, pocket money, alcohol/tobacco at home and height) on peers' average risky behavior, a gender indicator and the students' age.
     Heteroskedasticity-robust numerical standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
68
       Table G6: Dynamic recursive model - Robustness

Dep. Var. Risky Behavior Index           WI links               Isolated nodes
                                             (1)                      (2)
Addiction effect (1 )                   0.4040***                 0.3897***
                                         (0.1177)                  (0.1106)
Own effect (2 )                         0.1529***                 0.2061***
                                         (0.0207)                  (0.0275)
Peer effect (3 )                        0.4431***                 0.4042***
                                         (0.1290)                  (0.1164)
Discount factor ( )                     0.5088***                  0.4989**
                                         (0.1595)                  (0.2292)
Selectivity ( )                            0.1059                   -0.1545
                                          -0.2519                  (0.3356)
Student characteristics                     Yes                       Yes
Peers' characteristics                      Yes                       Yes
Networks fixed effects                      Yes                       Yes
Dummy for isolated individuals               No                       Yes
N. Obs.                                     1286                     1759

This table reports GMM estimates of the structural model 10. The network formation is
assumed to satisfy the linear dyadic structure in equation 9. Students' characteristics are
listed in Table G1. The peers' characteristics are calculated as friends' averages of the
included variables. Heteroskedasticity-robust numerical standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                           69
