                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     OPTIMAL RATINGS AND MARKET OUTCOMES

                                      Hugo Hopenhayn
                                       Maryam Saeedi

                                     Working Paper 26221
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26221


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




We acknowledge support of NSF grant #1757134. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Hugo Hopenhayn and Maryam Saeedi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Ratings and Market Outcomes
Hugo Hopenhayn and Maryam Saeedi
NBER Working Paper No. 26221
September 2019
JEL No. D21,D47,D60,D82,L11

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper considers the design of an optimal rating system, in a market with adverse selection.
We address two critical questions about rating design: First, given a number of categories, what
are the criteria for setting the boundaries between them? Second, what are the gains from
increasing the number of categories? A rating system helps reallocate sales from lower- to higher-
quality producers, thus mitigating the problem of adverse selection. We focus on two main
sources of market heterogeneity that determine the extent and effect of this reallocation: the
distribution of firm qualities and the responsiveness of sellers' supply to prices. We provide a
simple characterization for the optimal rating system as the solution to a standard k-means
clustering problem, and discuss its connection to supply elasticity and the skewness of firm
qualities. Our results show that a simple two-tier rating can achieve a large share of full
information surplus. Additionally, we characterize the conflicting interests of consumers and
producers in the design of a rating system.


Hugo Hopenhayn
UCLA
Department of Economics
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
hopen@econ.ucla.edu

Maryam Saeedi
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
msaeedi@andrew.cmu.edu
1     Introduction
Certification ratings are widely used in markets with adverse selection. While relevant for
any market with asymmetric information (e.g., hygiene ratings for restaurants or doctors'
performance ratings), rating design is a key consideration for the overall performance of the
ever more popular online trading platforms, where transactions are decentralized and rarely
repeated. Despite the importance of rating mechanisms, little is known about their optimal
design and how it might depend on the characteristics of the market, such as supply, demand,
and the distribution of sellers' qualities. This paper sheds light on this question by considering
the design of an optimal rating system and how it relates to the characteristics of the market.
    Rating systems usually provide coarse signals of quality to buyers. For example, in Cal-
ifornia, restaurants are given grades A, B, C, or none based on the score obtained after a
hygiene inspection is conducted. Airbnb awards its top-quality hosts the Superhost badge,
and eBay's high-quality sellers are classified as Top Rated Sellers. These examples raise two
critical questions about rating design: First, given a number of categories, what are the criteria
for setting the boundaries between them? In particular, when there are only two categories,
how stringent should the standards be to certify a seller is high quality? Second, what are the
gains from increasing the number of categories? These choices aect the total market size,
the market shares of dierent types of sellers, and, as a result, the quality distribution of the
goods consumed, as supported by recent empirical evidence.1 Consequently, a key to rating
design is evaluating how these choices impact market performance as measured by consumer
and producer surplus. This paper develops a tractable framework to address these questions
and provides specific guidelines for the optimal design for dierent market structures.
    A rating system helps reallocate sales from lower- to higher-quality producers, thus miti-
gating the problem of adverse selection. Our analysis focuses on two main sources of market
heterogeneity that are critical to determine the extent and eect of this reallocation: the
distribution of firm qualities and the responsiveness of sellers' supply to prices. Intuitively,
the heterogeneity and skeweness of seller quality aect the spread of prices across ratings,
while the responsiveness of supply determines the resulting reallocation of output across these
categories. To our best knowledge, this is the first paper that considers systematically the
interaction of these two factors and their impact on optimal rating design.
    The following is a preview of our results. We first show that while better information always
increases total surplus, its eect on consumers depends on the elasticity of supply. Second,
    1
      Hui et al. (2018) examine the eect of an increase in the requirements to become a badged seller on eBay.
They find that this increase leads to a higher market share of high-quality sellers while decreasing the sales of
sellers in the medium range of quality.



                                                       2
we show that the optimal information structure with finite ratings can be found in the set
of threshold partitions, which are related to the solution of a standard k-means clustering
problem. Right skewness in the distribution of qualities or more elastic supply implies higher
thresholds and a lower share of certified sellers. Third, we identify theoretical bounds for the
performance of a simple two-tier rating system and provide numerical computations showing
it can achieve 46-77% of full information surplus for some standard classes of distributions.
    Our baseline model considers a competitive market with a large set of buyers and sellers.2
Firms are endowed with dierent levels of quality, which is the only source of product dieren-
tiation.3 Production technology is the same for all firms. All buyers have the same preference
for quality but are heterogeneous in their value of the outside option. As explained below, the
information structure partitions sellers into dierent levels of expected quality. An equilibrium
is a set of prices as a function of expected quality and quantities supplied by firms such that
markets clear. Our model exhibits two features that are common to adverse selection settings
that are aected by the degree of asymmetric information. First, low-quality sellers benefit
from being pooled with high-quality ones, while adversely aecting them. Second, high-quality
sales are crowded out by low-quality ones.
    The information structure shared by all buyers follows the setting described in Ganuza and
Penalva (2010) and Gentzkow and Kamenica (2016). A common prior over firm qualities and a
signal structure determine the distribution of expected posterior firm qualities. As an example,
if we consider the case of finite rating systems as those described above, the posterior is given
by a discrete distribution with point masses at the conditional mean qualities associated to
each rating. This setting provides a natural ordering of the quality of information, where
better information is associated to a mean-preserving spread of the distribution of expected
values.
    As a preliminary step we analyze the eect of improving information on equilibrium out-
comes. As a result of improved information, prices become more strongly associated with true
seller quality and thus more disperse. Demand is reallocated from lower- to higher-quality
firms, which has a positive eect on the average quality of goods consumed and total surplus.
However, its eect on total market size and consumer surplus is ambiguous and depends on the
properties of the supply function. When supply is convex, the higher spread in prices results in
an increase in total output and higher consumer surplus. The opposite occurs when the supply
   2
     We also consider the case of Cournot competition with constant marginal costs and show the results are
the same as those for perfect competition with linear supply.
   3
     While moral hazard might be a critical consideration in some markets, in others adverse selection might
play a more critical role, as suggested by an empirical study on eBay (see Hui et al. (2017)). Optimal rating
design with moral hazard and adverse selection is considered in Saeedi and Shourideh (2019) in a simplified
market environment.


                                                     3
is concave. In this case, any information provided by the market designer lowers consumer
surplus. We also show that profits increase with information quality when the supply function
is concave, while the eect is ambiguous otherwise.
    We then turn to the question of optimal rating design. While we focus primarily on total
surplus as a criterion, we also consider the eect on consumer and producer surplus. Since total
surplus increases with better information, an unconstrained designer would prefer to release
all information. However, in practice, many platforms use a limited number of categories,
as in the examples discussed above, as well as certifiers such as bond rating agencies.4 To
provide guidance in the design of such rating systems, we consider the problem of optimal
rating design when the designer is constrained to choose a fixed number of categories N .
    We show that the optimal information structure with finite ratings can be found in the set
of threshold partitions, i.e., those that partition sellers into ordered, disjoint, and connected
intervals of quality in a monotone fashion. This reduces the problem of optimal ratings to
the determination of the corresponding set of optimal thresholds, which are defined by an
intuitive criterion. Consider a marginal firm with quality at the threshold between two adjacent
intervals. For this threshold to be optimal, the planner should be indierent between placing
this marginal firm in the lower or upper interval. This decision ultimately aects the demand
faced by this firm, and thus its total output. The benefit of the increased output is the extra
value generated by the additional sales, which at the optimum should be equated to the extra
cost of production. This suggests that one of the key determinants of this trade-o is the
supply behavior of firms, in particular, the curvature of the supply function.
    The role of curvature can be conveniently illustrated comparing the two polar cases of per-
fectly inelastic and perfectly elastic supply. When supply is perfectly inelastic (i.e., producers
can produce either zero or one unit or equally face a constant marginal cost up to a fixed
capacity), quality ratings cannot reallocate output to higher-quality producers, except in the
extreme case where there is no production in the absence of information. However, ratings can
potentially serve to filter out the very low-quality producers that no consumer would buy from
at a positive price, so the optimal threshold will be at this low end. At the other extreme,
when all firms face a constant marginal cost, only the highest-quality firm should serve the
market, so the optimal threshold would be at the other end. More generally, we find that
the optimal thresholds in the case of a convex (resp. concave) supply function are pointwise
higher (resp. lower) than those in the linear case. As an example, in the case of a simple
certification rating with two groups, more elastic supply leads to a higher threshold and lower
share of certified sellers.
   4
    This can be justified by practical reasons, to reduce the cost of acquiring information or to keep the rating
system simple and transparent.


                                                       4
    We find a simple characterization for the optimal thresholds in the case of linear supply,
which provides a useful benchmark. These optimal thresholds are the solution to a standard
clustering problem that involves only information regarding the distribution of qualities. This
clustering problem can be solved by the k means algorithm as introduced by MacQueen
et al. (1967) and used extensively in machine learning and statistics. Our results thus provide
a straightforward and easy-to-compute method for the design of rating systems.
    We then consider the thresholds that maximize consumer and producer surplus. To high-
light the conflict of interest between consumers and producers, we have already noted that in
the case of concave supply functions, consumer surplus decreases while profits increase with
better information. More generally, the thresholds that maximize total surplus are in between
those that maximize producer and consumer surplus. When supply is linear, consumer surplus
does not change with the choice of ratings and the optimal thresholds for total surplus also
maximize total profits, so the ranking of optimal threshold is indeterminate. On the sides of
this knife-edge case, we provide su cient conditions for the ordering of optimal thresholds.
In particular, we find a clear ranking for the class of homogeneous supply functions that are
widely used in applications. When the degree is greater than one (convex supply) producers
prefer higher thresholds, i.e., more stringent standards, while consumers prefer lower ones.
The reverse occurs when the degree is less than one.
    Next, we relate the optimal thresholds to the distribution of firm qualities in the linear
supply case. In the case of a single threshold, the optimal share of certified sellers relates
to the skewness of the distribution: when it is right (resp. left) skewed, the share is above
(resp. below) one half. We also show that if the distribution of qualities is more skewed to
the right then the optimal percentiles of thresholds defined for the first will be higher. In
particular, for a two-tier certification rating, the share of certified firms should decrease with
the degree of right-skewness. Optimal thresholds are considerably high for some distributions;
as an example, when the distribution of qualities is exponential with any hazard rate, only
20% of sellers should be certified.
    Regarding the performance of ratings, we show that a one-threshold partition closes at least
half of the surplus gap between no information and full information for quality distributions
with log-concave density. In our numerical computations we find that it closes from 46%
to nearly 77% of the gap, depending on the underlying distribution of qualities. The gains
diminish rapidly as the number of thresholds increases. Even though our results show that the
higher the number of certification tiers, the higher the total surplus, the market designer should
weigh in the cost of having a more complex information structure against the diminishing
return of having more tiers. As an illustration of our methodology, we solve for the optimal
threshold in a two-tier partition using data from eBay.

                                                5
    The last part of the paper examines a series of extensions. Our first extension considers
a demand system where agents have heterogeneous preference for quality, and firms have
inelastic supply. While by construction, improvements in information do not increase total
quantity, they contribute to welfare by increasing the correlation between average firm quality
and consumer preference for quality. The optimal threshold is defined by a slightly modified
formula that weighs dierences in the firm's quality gap in each interval by the respective
gap in consumers' preferences. As a result, skewness in consumers' preferences for quality has
similar implications to the ones observed for skewness in producers' quality.
    Second, we consider Cournot competition and show that all the results obtained under
perfect competition for the linear supply case apply to this setting. In our final extension, we
add entry to the baseline model. Improvements in information induce entry, as a result of the
increase in profits. Entry reduces prices, increases market size, and, thus, consumer surplus.
In the extreme case where all potential entrants are ex-ante identical, drawing their qualities
after entry, all gains from improved information accrue to consumers.


Related Literature
Our paper is related to two strands of the literature: first, the papers considering the impact
of information disclosure on consumer and producer surplus; second, those concerning the
determinants of ratings systems as well as their performance.5
    In regards to the impact of information disclosure, most papers consider the case where
there is a single seller/auctioneer and multiple buyers, as opposed to multiple agents on both
sides. Similar to our results, Schlee (1996) shows that information can hurt consumers when the
cost function is su ciently convex. Bergemann et al. (2015) consider the impact of information
in third degree price discrimination. They show that any distribution of surplus that is between
the ones achieved by optimal pricing with none and full information can be attained with some
information structure. Bergemann and Pesendorfer (2007) show that in a private value setting,
bidders can be worse o with better information even though total surplus increases. Board
(2009) shows that this result depends on the number of bidders. Hoppe et al. (2011) consider a
matching problem where for some distribution of types, consumers can be worse o with better
information. In our paper we show that better information always increases total surplus, but
might decrease consumer or producer surplus depending on properties of the supply function.
    There is a large literature on certification and quality disclosure. Dranove and Jin (2010)
provide an excellent survey of the earlier papers. One of the first theoretical papers is Lizzeri
   5
    Our paper focuses on a setting where uncertainty is about seller quality and information is provided to
consumers. There is a growing literature that focuses on the reverse channel where an intermediary transmits
information about buyers to sellers. For a survey see Bergemann and Bonatti (2019).


                                                     6
(1999), that considers the eect of competition among certifiers. The author finds that while a
monopoly certifier chooses to provide coarse information with a single and low threshold, com-
petition among certifiers can lead to full information. Ostrovsky and Schwarz (2010) consider
equilibrium information structures and show that colleges maximize student job prospects by
pooling weaker and stronger students. De Marzo, Kremer, and Skrzypacz (2018) consider a
Bayesian game where agents choose the informativeness of testing, but can withhold bad re-
sults. The equilibrium test minimizes the expected price upon nondisclosure over all possible
tests and disclosure strategies and results in a threshold that is below the optimal one. In
contrast, to these papers, in our setting, the preferred thresholds of sellers can be below or
above the optimal ones depending on properties of the supply function.
    A growing literature considers the impact of moral hazard and experimentation incentives
on ratings design. The general finding is that coarse ratings can contribute to provide better
incentives. Harbaugh and Rasmusen (2018) consider a case where the certifier discloses limited
information in order to incentivize participation. Examples of papers related to moral hazard
and limited information/memory are H¨     orner and Lambert (2016), Liu and Skrzypacz (2014),
Ekmekci (2011), and Bhaskar et al. (2017). Examples of papers where limited information
encourages experimentation are Kovbasyuk and Spagnolo (2017), Che and H¨            orner (2018),
Kremer et al. (2014) and Vellodi (2019). The latter also considers information design and its
eect on entry and selection of firms.
    Coarse ratings have also been justified in the literature by their simplicity and overall
performance. Wilson (1989) shows that losses relative to full information are of order 1/n2
for a partition with n classes. This is consistent with our computed bounds in Section 5. Our
theoretical bound on the gains from a two-tier certification builds on similar bounds found by
McAfee (2002) and also relate to those in Hoppe et al. (2011).
    Information disclosure is the focus of the literature on Bayesian persuasion, where an
informed sender chooses an information structure to influence the behavior of a receiver. This
literature generally finds coarse information provision as a result. Dworczak and Martini,
(2018) provide conditions on payos so that interval partitions are the optimal information
structure. In contrast to most of this literature, where a single receiver takes an action, in our
setting the outcome is the result of the equilibrium choices of multiple agents.6 This distinction
   6
     While other papers have studied settings with multiple receivers (see surveys in Kamenica (2018); Berge-
mann and Morris (2017)), the analysis has often been suitable for games where a low-dimensional source of
aggregate information is observed by a sender. For example, Bergemann and Morris (2013, 2016) characterize
the outcome of all Bayesian persuasion games with multiple receivers. In principle, our problem could be
potentially mapped into this framework, with an omniscient sender that observes the quality of a continuum
of firms, but it would be impractical to solve it this way. Even for a simple two-player game, Bhaskar et al.
(2016) show that computing the optimal public signal is NP-hard.



                                                     7
applies to most of the literature reviewed above, which often ignores market interactions, in
contrast to the approach followed in this paper where it is a key consideration. While individual
incentives for quality disclosure are important, they seem less relevant for platforms wherein
a central authority observes some information and must choose what to reveal to the market
participants; this is what we focus on in our analysis.
    The most relevant empirical papers related to our theory are Saeedi (2014), Elfenbein
et al. (2015), Fan et al. (2013), and Jin and Leslie (2003). Saeedi (2014) studies the value of
reputation mechanisms and establishes a positive signaling value for the certification done by
eBay. Elfenbein et al. (2015) study the value of certification badges across dierent markets.
They find that certification provides more value when the number of certified sellers is low
and when markets are more competitive. Fan et al. (2013) analyze the eect of badges on
Taobao.com. They find sellers oer price discounts to move up to the next reputation level. Jin
and Leslie (2003) examine the eect of an increase in product quality information to consumers
on firms' choices of product quality using data on restaurant hygiene ratings. Our paper
also relates to the literature that analyzes the eects of changes in a marketplace feedback
mechanisms on price and quality (Hui et al. (2016), Filippas et al. (2018), and Nosko and
Tadelis (2015)).7
    Section 2 describes the model. Section 3 considers the eect of improved information
on market outcomes. Section 4 derives the conditions that characterize optimal thresholds,
the comparative statics on supply functions and discusses the implications for consumer and
producer surplus. Section 5 provides comparative statics on distribution functions, numer-
ically solves for the optimal thresholds for various distribution functions and considers the
application to eBay ratings. Finally, Section 6 studies the extensions to the baseline model.


2       The Model
There is a unit mass of firms with qualities z distributed according to a continuous cumulative
distribution function (cdf) F (z ). Production technology is the same for all firms and is given
by a continuous, strictly increasing, and strictly convex cost function c (q ), and, correspond-
ingly, a strictly increasing supply function s (p). On the demand side, there is mass M of
consumers who face a discrete choice problem, with preferences

                                         U (z, , p) = z +        p,
    7
    More generally, this research also fits broadly into the theme of understanding the eect of certification
and reputation in e-commerce; representative papers include Cabral and Hortacsu (2010), Wu et al. (2015),
Tadelis (2016), Dellarocas et al. (2006), Bajari and Hortacsu (2004), and Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006).


                                                     8
where z is the quality of the good purchased, and  is a taste parameter measuring the
preference for goods oered in this market vis a vis an outside option and p is the price
of the good. The taste parameter  is distributed according to a continuous and strictly
increasing cdf (), while the outside good's utility (no purchase) is normalized to zero.8
Goods are dierentiated only by quality that is equally valued by all consumers.9 Given
the linearity of the utility function in z, the same ordering is obtained for consumption of
a good of expected quality z. We assume all market participants have the same information
about the expected qualities of firms, represented by the distribution function G (z ).10 In
particular, when considering a finite rating system as in Section 4, we assume that G is a
discrete distribution with point masses at the conditional mean qualities associated to each
rating. We will say that a firm has expected quality z if conditional on all signals received,
that is the quality expected by consumers.
    Given expected quality z , equilibrium prices take the form p (z ) = p (0)+ z, where p (0) cor-
responds to the demand price of a hypothetical good of quality zero. This expression for prices
guarantees that all consumers are indierent between goods with dierent signal realizations,
which is a necessary condition for an equilibrium. Given a baseline price p (0) , the marginal
consumer's  is found by setting U (0, , p (0)) = 0, or simply  (p (0)) = p (0) . All consumers
with       p (0) will consume some good, so aggregate demand is Q = M (1             (p (0))). In-
verting this function we can define an inverse baseline demand function

                                                        1
                                          P ( Q) =          (1   Q/M )                                        (1)

    On the supply side, each firm with expected quality z chooses its output, q = s (p (z )), ,
                         R
so aggregate supply Q = s (p (z )) dG (z ).

Definition. An (interior) equilibrium, given the distribution of expected qualities G (z ), is
                                                            R
given by prices p (z ) = P (Q) + z, where total quantity Q = s (p (z )) dG (z ).

    Figure 1 shows graphically the derivation of an interior equilibrium for the case of a two-
tier partition, where L represents the group of firms with quality below a threshold z  , and
H those above.11 Denote zL (resp. zH ) to be the average quality of sellers in the L group
(resp. H group). The two curves depict the demand curve for the goods in the L and
H segment, respectively. Since all consumers value quality identically, the price dierence
   8
      Alternatively, one can consider  to be the value of the outside good to consumers.
   9
      In Section 6.1, we consider a case where consumers are heterogenous with respect to their taste for quality.
   10
      This representation of the information structure is consistent with the approach followed in Ganuza and
Penalva (2010) and Gentzkow and Kamenica (2016). Given a common prior F (z0 ) over firm qualities and a
signal structure  , we can let G (z ) be the distribution of expected posterior firm quality.
   11
      Alternatively, this can be interpreted as a case of having two type of sellers with two levels of qualities.


                                                        9
                                           Figure 1: Equilibrium


pH pL = zH zL , i.e., the dierence between the two respective average qualities. The first
upward sloping curve is the H group's supply function: SH = (1 F (z  )) s (pH ) . The second
one is the supply function of the L firms' segment SL = F (z  ) s (pL ) displaced to the right by
the equilibrium quantity QH . The marginal consumer Q is the one that is indierent between
consuming either of these goods or none. At the equilibrium prices, Q is also the total market
supply of both goods.
   To prove the existence of an interior equilibrium, we make the following assumption.

Assumption 1. There exists  in the support of such that
                                    Z
                               M > s ( + z ) dG (z )

for all distributions G such that F is a mean preserving spread of G.

    This assumption rules out the possibility that all consumers make purchases in this mar-
ket.12 While a corner equilibrium, if it exists, is also unique, we rule this out as a matter of
convenience.
 12
      As explained below, the assumption spans the set of all possible information structures.



                                                       10
Lemma 1. Under Assumption 1, there exists a unique interior equilibrium for all expected
quality distributions G such that F is a mean preserving spread of G.

Proof. Given that the cdf is strictly increasing and continuous, the function P (Q) is strictly
                                                      R
decreasing and continuous. Define function f (Q) = s (P (Q) + z ) dG (z ). This is strictly
decreasing and continuous. It follows immediately that f (0) > 0. By assumption 1, f (M ) <
M since P (M )  . Hence, there exists a unique fixed point Q for this mapping.


3      Improved Information
This section considers the eect of improved information for general signal structures. As
in Ganuza and Penalva (2010), the quality of information can be ordered by the dispersion
of beliefs as follows. The distribution of expected qualities G~ is more informative than dis-
tribution G if it is a mean preserving spread of G. We will refer to this ordering as better
information. As the maximal signal structure corresponds to perfect information, the class
of all information structures can be represented by all garblings of F , i.e., all distributions G
such that F is a mean preserving spread of G. 13

Market Size and Consumer Surplus

We consider first the eect of information precision on market size measured by the equilib-
rium quantity Q. For fixed quantity Q, better information implies a mean-preserving spread
of prices. In the case of linear supply functions, this does not aect aggregate supply, so
equilibrium quantity remains unchanged. In the case of convex supply functions, aggregate
supply will exceed the original quantity Q, so aggregate output must increase. For similar
reasons, in the case of concave supply functions, aggregate output decreases with the quality
of information.
    We show that consumer surplus can be measured by the area under the baseline demand
function and over P (Q), up to quantity Q. Consider a consumer of type  who buys a good
of quality z . Equilibrium price for this good p (z ) = P (Q) + z, so this consumer's net utility
  13
    This corresponds to the ordering of integral precision of signal structures defined in Ganuza and Penalva
(2010). Starting from a prior F0 , signal structure t   ~ is more integral precise than signal t if the induced
                                                        ~
distribution of expected qualities G (z ) generated by t is a mean-preserving spread of the one generated by t.
In general, integral precision ordering is weaker than the likelihood ratio and other related orderings considered
in the literature (see Ganuza and Penalva (2010) for references.)




                                                       11
is    P (Q) . It follows that total consumer surplus is
                       Z                                Z       Q
                                    (   P (Q)) d () =               ( P ( x)   P (Q)) dx
                           P (Q )                           0


where the last equality follows from the change of variables x = M (1           ()) and our def-
inition of P (Q) given by equation (1). As a result, total consumer surplus will move in the
same direction as total quantity, so it will increase (resp. decrease) with information precision
if the supply function is convex (resp. concave). The following proposition summarizes these
results.

Proposition 1. Suppose signal t1 is more precise than t2 . If in addition the supply function
is convex (resp. concave), then total output Q1 Q2 (resp. Q2  Q1 ) and consumer surplus
increase (resp. decrease). This further implies that when the supply function is linear, total
output is independent of information.

Proof. Suppose the supply function S (p) is convex and, by way of contradiction, Q1 < Q2 .
Let p1 (z ) = P (Q1 )+ z denote the equilibrium price for a good of expected quality z and define
similarly p2 (z ) . It follows immediately that p1 (z ) > p2 (z ) since P is strictly decreasing. Let-
ting G1 and G2 denote the distribution of expected qualities under signal structures t1 and t2 ,
respectively. By definition of integral precision, it follows that G1 second order stochastically
dominates G2 , so
                                  Z
                           Q1 =      S (p1 (z )) dG1 (z ) S (p2 (z )) dG1 (z )
                                  Z
                                     S (p2 (z )) dG2 (z ) = Q2

where the second inequality follows from convexity of S (p) . The above contradicts the original
hypothesis, proving that Q1 Q2 . The proof is similar for concave S (p).

    In particular, note that for the case of concave supply functions, consumers are better o
with no signal provision. There are some related results in the literature, though in dierent
settings. Schlee (1996) considers a single product monopoly seller in a vertically dierentiated
market. The quality of the good oered is exogenous and privately observed by the monopolist,
who must choose the informativeness of a signal to be provided to consumers before observing
the quality realization. It is shown that if the cost function is su ciently convex, consumers
are worse o ex-ante with a more informative signal. Hoppe et al. (2011) consider a matching
problem and show that under some conditions on the distribution of types, one of the sides


                                                  12
(e.g., consumers) can be worse o by having a more precise information structure regarding
the type of the other side.

Total Surplus and Profits

In this part, we show that improved information always increases total surplus. The intuition is
as follows. First, we show that a social planner, subject to the the same information structure,
cannot improve on the competitive equilibrium allocation, which is thus optimal. Secondly,
equipped with better information a social planner can always increase total surplus.

Proposition 2. A better information system results in higher total surplus.

Proof. First, we show that there exists a correspondence between competitive equilibria and
allocations that maximize total surplus. Given a distribution of mean qualities G (z ), the
problem of maximizing total surplus solves:
                                 Z       Q                Z
                      S = max                P (x) dx +       [zq (z )     C (q (z ))] dG (z )
                            qk       0

subject to                                          Z
                                               Q=       q (z ) dG (z ) .

The first order conditions for the choice of q (z ) is:

                                              z   C 0 (q (z )) +     =0                          (2)

and this holds for all points in the support of G, where the Lagrange multiplier of the con-
straint, = P (Q) . Substituting in (2) and letting p (z ) = P (Q) + z, implies p (z ) = C 0 (q (z ))
which is the condition defining the profit maximizing output q (z ) in the competitive equilib-
rium. Hence the allocation q (z ) together with the prices p (z ) are the ones that correspond to
the unique competitive equilibrium.
                                                   ~ corresponds to a better information system
    Suppose the distribution of expected qualities G
than G, so it is a mean preserving spread of G. Following the characterization in Rothschild
and Stiglitz (1970), there exists a garbling of signals that generates G from G.   ~ This means
that a social planner could ignore the additional information contained in G     ~ and reproduce
the quantity-weighted distribution of average qualities corresponding to the optimal allocation
under G and thus the same value. Since this is not optimal, because the competitive equilib-
rium given G~ (which is optimal) diers from that under G, it follows that total value increases
with signal precision.


                                                          13
    In particular, the above proposition implies that average profits must rise when consumer
surplus does not increase. Following Proposition 1, this will be the case when supply functions
are concave or linear. On the other hand, it is easy to construct examples with convex supply
functions where the opposite occurs.


4      Optimal Ratings
This section considers the question of optimal information design. While we focus on total
surplus as a criterion, we also consider the eect on consumer and producer surplus. As stated
by Proposition 2, better information is preferred to worse, so an unconstrained designer would
prefer to release all information. However, in practice, many platforms use a limited number
of categories. For example, in the case of Yelp, the partition involves five stars, including the
possibility of half-stars. In the case of eBay, the partition includes two groups: the badged
and unbadged. In the case of California restaurants, the partition involves three elements: A,
B, and C. To provide guidance in the design of such rating systems, we consider the optimal
information structure design subject to a fixed set of categories N .
    To simplify our analysis, we assume that consumers have no information other than that
provided by the certifier. The timing is as follows: 1) Certifier observes some signals for each
firm that are correlated with their quality; 2) Certifier assigns a rating to each firm and makes
it common knowledge to all participants in the market. Based on these ratings all market
participants can infer the average quality of sellers, thus sharing a common posterior with
support at the corresponding N conditional quality means.14 3) Market equilibrium outcomes
are determined for this distribution of expected qualities. Following our earlier discussion
on information structures, the certifier's information can be summarized by a distribution of
posterior mean qualities that, in order to avoid further notation, we denote by F (z ). This is
the basis on which the certifier classifies firms into rating bins. To simplify the exposition, we
refer to the expected value z as the quality of the firm.15 We assume F is dierentiable on its
support with density f (z ).
    A threshold partition totally orders firms into N quality intervals. As a corollary to
Proposition 2, we establish the superiority of threshold partitions.16
  14
     Certifiers usually provide users with guidelines to interpret their ratings or users learn their meaning over
time.
  15
     The true distribution of qualities plays no role, as any information provision that respects the information
of the certifier is a garbling of the certifier's posterior F.
  16
     Dworczak and Martini (2019) provide conditions under which the optimal signal structure implies a mono-
tone partition in a Bayesian persuasion setting. Our setting is quite dierent and our result quite straightfor-
ward. We can only find a connection in the case of linear supply, where our problem can be mapped into their


                                                       14
Corollary 1. The optimal rating is given by a threshold partition.
Proof. Consider a partition of the set of sellers into sets S1 , ..., SN . Suppose there are two sets
Sk , Sk+1 that are not totally ordered in quality. One can substitute Sk and Sk+1 by two new
               0      0
disjoint sets Sk and Sk +1 of equal measures to the original ones that are totally ordered so that
  0     0
Sk < Sk+1 , element-wise. This generates a mean-preserving spread of the original distribution
of means and thus higher surplus.

   Section 4.1 considers the ratings that maximize total surplus and the next section considers
consumer and producer surplus.


4.1     Total Surplus
We now characterize the threshold partition that maximizes total surplus. Consider a vector
of thresholds z = (z1 ....zN 1 ) defining the N partitions {[z0 , z1 ] , [z1 , z2 ], ..., [zN 1 , zN ]}, where
z0 and zN are the lower and upper supports of the distribution of qualities ( 1 or +1 if un-
bounded), respectively. Let m (zk 1 , zk ) , k = 1, ..., N denote the conditional means of quality
z in the intervals [zk 1 , zk ]. For simplicity, we will use the notation Mk = m (zk 1 , zk ) unless
otherwise needed for clarity. The following lemma gives necessary and su cient conditions for
these thresholds to be optimal. Let Q (z ) denote the unique equilibrium total quantity at the
optimal threshold vector, with prices pk = P (Q (z )) + Mk and quantities qk = s (pk ) . Total
surplus is given by
                             Z       Q (z )                N
                                                           X
               W (z ) =                       P (x) dx +         [ F (zk )   F (zk 1 )] [Mk qk   c (qk )]          (3)
                                 0                         k=1


The following lemma gives the necessary conditions for an optimal zk .
Lemma 2. A necessary condition for an optimal threshold zk is that

                             (P (Q) + zk ) (qk+1                 qk ) = c (qk+1 )   c ( qk ) .                     (4)

Proof. To totally dierentiate equation (3) with respect to zk , first note that by the envelope
condition, we can ignore the eect on the output choices q1 , ..., qN . In particular, this implies
                                                Rz
that @ Q/@ zk = f (zk ) (qk qk+1 ) . Since Mk = zkk 1 zdF (z ) / (F (zk ) F (zk 1 )) , it follows
that
         @ (F (zk )    F (zk 1 )) Mk                @ (F (zk+1 ) F (zk )) Mk+1
                                     = f (zk ) zk ,                            =                    f (zk ) zk .
                      @ zk                                      @ zk
formulation with the additional constraint of a fixed number of ratings.


                                                             15
The result now follows by totally dierentiating (3) and setting it equal to zero.

    Condition (4) has an intuitive interpretation. The left hand side shows the marginal value
obtained by increasing the quantity of the marginal firm with qualityzk , from qk to qk+1 ; this
would result from a marginal change in this threshold. The right hand side shows the dierence
in cost. At an optimum, these two should be equal. While intuitive, all the variables in this
equation, quantities and prices, are endogenous to the choice of thresholds, thus limiting the
usefulness in characterizing the optimal thresholds. The following Lemma provides a more
useful characterization.
Lemma 3. The optimal thresholds satisfy the following condition:
                                                                     R pk+1
                     z k Mk            Mk+1         zk                pk
                                                                              s (p) dp
                            s ( pk ) +                 s (pk+1 ) =                       ,           (5)
                    Mk+1 Mk            Mk+1         Mk                 pk+1      pk

where Mk and Mk+1 are the conditional mean qualities for the two groups and pk and pk+1 the
equilibrium prices.
Proof. See Appendix.

    Equation (5) equates the expected value of s (p) under two lotteries. The left hand side
lottery has weights  = (zk Mk ) / (Mk+1 Mk ) on price pk and (1 ) on price pk+1 . The
second lottery is uniform between these two extreme prices. When s is linear, it must be the
case that  = 1/2 and this implies that

                                       zk    Mk = Mk+1       zk .                                    (6)

When s is convex,  > 1/2 so zk Mk > Mk+1 zk ,so the optimal threshold is above the
one defined by equation (6), while the reverse occurs when s is concave. The following lemma
summarizes these results.
Lemma 4. If the supply function is linear, the optimal threshold zk = (Mk + Mk+1 ) /2. If the
supply function is concave (resp. convex), then zk is lower (resp. higher) than (Mk + Mk+1 ) /2.
   While the second part of this lemma gives criteria for local deviations for a single threshold,
convex to the right and concave to the left, starting at those obtained for the linear case, it
does not imply an ordering of the whole vector of thresholds. The following proposition gives
conditions for the total ordering.
                                                                                           L         L
Proposition 3. Suppose the quality distribution F (z ) has log-concave density. Let z1       , ..., zN  1
be the optimal thresholds for the linear case. The optimal vector of thresholds (z1 , ..., zN 1 ) for
                                                                                    L          L
convex (resp. concave) supply function is pointwise higher (resp. lower) than z1      , ..., zN     1 .


                                                  16
Proof. See Appendix.

    The formula given by equation (6) gives a simple characterization for the optimal thresholds
for the linear supply case that only depends on the distribution of qualities and by the previous
proposition provides a lower (resp. upper) bound when the supply function is convex (resp.
concave). We now show that these thresholds are also the solution to a standard clustering
problem.

Proposition 4. Assume the supply function is linear. The optimal thresholds z1 , ..., zN    1   for
an N rating are the ones that minimize

                               N Z
                               X      zk
                                               (z   m (zk 1 , zk ))2 dF (z )                    (7)
                               k=1   zk    1



Proof. Taking derivatives with respect to zk gives first order condition (6).

    The objective defined in the above proposition coincides with the popular k means
criteria for clustering as introduced by MacQueen et al. (1967) which is commonly used in
machine learning and statistics literature. Uniqueness of the thresholds is guaranteed when
the distribution has log-concave density (Mease and Nair (2006).) This makes estimating the
optimal thresholds a trivial task, as many software programs incorporate algorithms to solve
this problem. Additionally, when combining this result with the one in Lemma 4, the simple
algorithm can give a market designer a good place to start, given that the above thresholds
will be the lower bound or upper bound, depending on the properties of the supply functions.


4.2    Consumer and Producer Surplus
The above thresholds maximize total surplus, however it might be the case that the certifier
has a dierent objective, such as maximizing consumer surplus or profits. How would the
corresponding thresholds compare the ones obtained above? The answer depends again on
properties of the supply function. We have shown that consumer surplus moves together
with total output. In the case of concave supply, total output decreases with information,
so optimal thresholds are at the extremes of the distribution. When supply is linear, total
quantity is independent of the amount of information (see Proposition 1), so consumer surplus
is the same for any threshold. This implies that the optimal threshold is also the one that
maximizes profits. More generally, total output will vary as the thresholds change. The
following Lemma provides a characterization.



                                                     17
Lemma 5. dQ (z ) /dzk has the same sign as
                                                                  R pk+1
                   z k Mk 0          Mk+1          zk 0            pk
                                                                           s0 (p) dp
                          s ( pk ) +                  s (pk+1 )                        ,       (8)
                  Mk+1 Mk            Mk+1          Mk               pk+1       pk

Proof. See Appendix.

    It is useful to compare this expression to equation (5) that corresponds to the optimal
thresholds. Both represent expected values with the same lotteries, but with dierent func-
tions. In parallel to Lemma 4, it is immediate to prove:

Lemma 6. The certification thresholds z1 , ..., zN 1 that maximize total output and consumer
surplus satisfy zk =(Mk + Mk+1 ) /2 when s0 (p) is linear, and is lower than (resp. higher than)
this value when s0 (p) is concave (resp. convex).

   A comparison of equations (5) and (8) allows us provide some global comparison between
the corresponding thresholds for the convex case, in parallel to Proposition 3.

Proposition 5. Let z o = z1    o         o
                                 , ..., zN 1 be the thresholds that maximize total surplus and
 c      c      c
z = z1 , ..., zN 1 the ones that maximize consumer surplus. Suppose that the distribution of
qualities F (z ) has log-concave density and the supply function is convex and s0 (p) concave.
Then z c is pointwise smaller than z o .

    To illustrate the above results, consider a simple example. Suppose the supply function
s (p) = p (cost function c (q ) = q 1+ / (1 + )). For 0 <  < 1, s (·) is concave, so consumers
prefer no thresholds. For  = 1, consumers are indierent and the optimal thresholds also
maximize profits. For 1 <   2, supply is convex but s0 (·) concave, so by the previous propo-
sition consumers prefer lower thresholds. For  > 2, s0 (·) is also convex, so this proposition
does not apply. The following proposition and its corollary provide more general local results
that also cover this case.

Proposition 6. Let z = (z1 , ..., zN   1)   be the thresholds that maximize total surplus.

  1. If s is convex and s00 (p) /s0 (p) is decreasing (resp. increasing) in p. Then dQ (z ) /dzk is
     negative (resp. positive) at z .

  2. If s is concave and s00 (p) /s0 (p) is decreasing (resp. increasing) in p. Then dQ (z ) /dzk
     is positive (resp. negative) at z .

Proof. See Appendix.


                                                  18
    The previous proposition can be used to sign the local behavior of consumer and producer
surplus at any optimal threshold. Given that the derivative of total surplus is zero at any
of the optimal thresholds zk , derivatives of consumer surplus and producer surplus have the
opposite signs. Moreover, derivative of consumer surplus has the same sign as dQ/dz . Hence
the following corollary follows.
Corollary 2. Let z = (z1 , ..., zN   1)   be the thresholds that maximize total surplus.
    1. If s is convex and s00 (p) /s0 (p) is decreasing (resp. increasing) in p. Then the derivative
       of consumer surplus, dCS (z ) /dzk , is negative (resp. positive) and the derivative of
       producer surplus, dP S (z ) /dzk , is positive (resp. negative) at z .

    2. If s is concave and s00 (p) /s0 (p) is decreasing (resp. increasing) in p. Then dCS (z ) /dzk
       is positive (resp. negative) and dP S (z ) /dzk is negative (resp. positive) at z .
    Going back to the previous example of homogeneous supply, s00 (p) /s0 (p) = ( 1) /p
which is decreasing for convex supply functions ( > 1) . Applying the first case in the corol-
lary, this implies that starting at the surplus maximizing thresholds, consumers prefer lower
thresholds while producers prefer higher ones. This highlights a tension in the choice of ratings
systems between consumers and producers.


5      Distribution Functions and Optimal Thresholds
The thresholds defined by equation (6) are determined solely by the distribution of seller
quality for the case of linear supply functions. In this section, we examine the impact of
skewness on optimal thresholds. Our analysis is restricted to the case of linear supply function,
though we conjecture it can be extended to more general supply. Our first result considers
a weak notion of skewness (mean vs. median) but restricted to certification ratings (N = 2).
Our second result relates to a stronger skewness order, the convex/concave order, applied
to arbitrary N. Finally, we calculate optimal thresholds for a series of distribution functions
and provide measures of surplus attainment as we increase the number of partitions. As an
application, we solve for the optimal threshold for a distribution of seller quality from eBay.
    To simplify notation in the case where N = 2, we let z  denote the optimal threshold and
zL and zH the conditional means below and above this threshold, respectively. The condition
given in equation (6) implies
                                         1
                                  z  = (zL (z  ) + zH (z  )) ,                                 (9)
                                         2
which can be used to relate this threshold to properties of the distribution. Consider first the
case of a symmetric distribution, i.e., where the median, zmedian , equals the mean, z¯. Since for

                                                  19
any z  , F (z  ) zL + (1 F (z  )) zH = z
                                       ¯, setting the threshold z  = z¯ = zmedian would satisfy
the above condition. For skewed distributions F (z ) , the following result can be proved:

Proposition 7. Suppose there is a unique point z  satisfying (9) and z
                                                                     ¯ is greater (resp.
                              
smaller) than zmedian . Then z is greater (resp. smaller) than z.

Proof. See Appendix.

    The above proposition shows that if a distribution is skewed, the optimal threshold when
N = 2 will be even more skewed in the same direction. Table 1, shows the optimal threshold
for a series of distributions, as well as the corresponding fraction of certified sellers. Except
for the last case, all distributions are skewed to the right so according to Proposition 7,
z > z  ¯ > zmedian and it is optimal to have a small share of sellers certified. This is shown in
the fifth column of our table. As an example, for the Pareto distributions only a small fraction
should get certified, 5% when the power parameter is 3 and 9% when the power parameter is
4.17 For the exponential distribution, only 20% of sellers should be certified regardless of the
hazard rate.
    We now turn to the case of general N under a stronger skewness order, the convex (concave)
order, proposed originally by Van Zwet (1964).

Definition. Distribution F  ~ is more skewed to the right than F if F    ~ 1 (F (x)) is convex,
equivalently, there exists an increasing convex function g (x) such that F~ (g (x)) = F (x).18

    We can think of this ordering as stretching to the right the quality scale with the trans-
formation g (x) . As an example, if F is a uniform distribution in [0, 1] and g (x) = x2 , then
F~ (x2 ) = x or equivalently, F
                              ~ ( x ) = x 1/ 2 .

Proposition 8. Suppose the supply function is linear. Let F be a distribution with log-concave
            ~ a distribution such that F
density and F                           ~ (g (z )) = F (z ) , where g is a strictly convex increasing
function. Let {lk } be the optimal thresholds for F and {g (zk )} the optimal thresholds for F     ~.
Then zk > lk for all k.

Proof. See appendix.

    This proposition implies that for all k, F  ~ (g (zk )) = F (zk ) > F (lk ) so the percentiles
defined by the two optimal thresholds are ordered. In particular, for a 2-tier certification
rating, the share of certified firms should be lower for distribution F  ~ . An example is given in
Table 1 for the case of power distributions F (z ) = z  . It is easily shown that the distribution
  17
       When   2, the value of z  is undefined, as total surplus is strictly increasing in z  in all the support.
  18
       Note that this definition implies that F 1 (F (x)) = g 1 (x) is concave.


                                                         20
with  = 0.5 is more skewed to the right than the one with  = 2.19 Consistently with the
previous proposition, the share of certified sellers is lower when  = 0.5.
    We now examine how the surplus gap between the full-information and no-information
settings changes as the number of groups in a partition increases for the case of linear supply. In
this case, we have shown that total output Q remains unchanged and so does consumer surplus.
Therefore, the gap in total surplus equals the gap in total profits. For a firm with perceived
quality z , profits are equal to p (z )2 /2 = (P (Q) + z )2 /2. Therefore, for any distribution G of
expected quality, total profits are
                                       Z
                                    1
                            =              (P (Q) + z )2 dG (z )
                                    2
                                                               Z
                                    1        2               1
                                =      P ( Q) + P ( Q) z ¯+      z 2 dG (z ) .
                                    2                        2

The first two terms do not depend on G and thus on the partition. For full information, the
                                                                R 2
distribution of means G = F, so,  = 1  2
                                         P ( Q) 2 + P ( Q) z
                                                           ¯+ 1
                                                              2
                                                                 z dF (z ). Therefore, the surplus
                                                  1
                                                    R 2           R 2
gap with respect to full information is  = 2          z dF (z )     z dG (z ) for any distribution
of expected quality G. In particular, the total gap with respect to the no-information case
             R 2
is  = 1    2
               z dF (z ) z ¯2 . For a threshold partition (z1 , ..., zN 1 ) , where G has N mass
points at the conditional means M1 , ..., MN

                                          N   Z
                                  1X               zk
                                =                            z2     2
                                                                   Mk dF (z )                  (10)
                                  2 k=1           zk    1

                                          N   Z
                                     1X            zk
                                   =                        (z    Mk )2 dF (z ) .
                                     2 k=1        zk    1



This corresponds again to the loss function used in k means clustering, given that at the
optimal thresholds, as defined earlier, the expected values Mk are precisely the centroids of the
corresponding intervals [zk 1 , zk ] . Table 1 reports the share of the total surplus gaps that is
closed with partitions of dierent sizes n. As can be seen from the calculations a one-threshold
(two-group) partition closes from near 50% to almost 80% of the surplus gap, depending on
the underlying distribution of qualities. The gains are diminishing as the number of thresholds
increases. Even though total surplus increases with the number of tiers, our numerical results
suggest that most gains are attained with a small number of ratings. As a result, the market
designer should weigh in the cost of having a more complicated information structure against
the diminishing return of having more tiers. While we do not model the cost of providing more
 19
      Take g (x) = x4 .


                                                   21
                                       Table 1: Optimal Thresholds

                                                                                  Share of Surplus Gap Closed
  Distribution           Case       Mean/Median          z      1    F (z  )
                                                                                 n = 2 n = 3 n = 5 n = 10
       Pareto        =3            1.19        2.73                  0.05         0.46    0.68   0.84    0.94
                     =4            1.12        1.84                  0.09         0.54    0.74   0.89    0.97
  Exponential         all          1.45                              0.20         0.65    0.82   0.93    0.98
             
  F (z ) = z         = 0. 5        1.32        0.41                  0.36         0.77    0.90   0.97    0.99
   z 2 [0, 1]        =2            0.94        0.62                  0.62         0.72    0.87   0.95    0.99
  Log-normal         = 0.25        1.03        1.09                  0.36         0.63    0.81   0.92    0.98
    (µ = 0)           =1           1.64        4.25                  0.07         0.55    0.75   0.89    0.97
 eBay (Kernel) band=0.2            0.97        0.63                  0.63         0.66    0.83   0.93    0.98
              Note : The above calculations correspond              to the   linear supply case.

detailed information for the market designer or consumer's cost of analyzing and understanding
detailed information, our results suggest that small costs could justify simple optimal rating
systems that include only limited number of tiers, as usually seen in practice.
    Following McAfee (2002); Hoppe et al. (2011); Shao (2016), it is possible to find lower
bounds for the share of the surplus gap that is closed by a one-threshold partition. While
these papers consider the case of one-to-one matching, our setup with linear supply can be
conveniently mapped into this setting. Let z represent the type of a seller,  that of a buyer,
and m (z, ) = z  the surplus of this match. Furthermore, assume that both seller and
consumer types have the same distribution F. This is a special case of the class of matching
problems considered in the above papers. With complete information, the optimal matching
                                        R
is assortative, with total value W = z 2 dF (z ). In contrast, in a two-group partition with
threshold z  and conditional means zL and zH , there is random matching within each partition,
resulting in total value W  ~ = F (z  ) z 2 + (1 F (z  )) z 2 . At the other extreme, with no
                                          L                  H
information and pure random matching, the value is simply z      ¯2 . The gap between these values
is proportional to the corresponding ones in our setting, as given by equation (10), so the
relative gain from a one-threshold partition is identical in both cases.20
    McAfee (2002) finds that for the class of distribution functions with log concave densities,
the relative gain is at least 1/2. For this class of distributions, Hoppe et al. (2011) show that
W~     3
         W. They also find that the same bound as McAfee (2002) applies to distributions with
       4
decreasing hazard rate.
    These results show that a very simple rating system consisting of a single certification
threshold can achieve a considerable share of the gains from full information. This suggests
that the added cost or complexity of a more elaborate design might not be compensated by
 20
      More generally, the relative gain from any information structure is the same.


                                                       22
the gains. This could explain the popularity of such simple schemes among market designers.


Optimal Threshold for eBay
Nosko and Tadelis (2015) provides a quality measure given by the percentage time a seller got
positive feedback (as opposed to negative or none). The distribution of this statistic across
sellers is given in Figure 2 together with a density kernel estimator.21 If we interpret this
statistic as an ex-ante probability of a good (vs. a bad) experience and the expected utility
from this purchase as (1 P (good)) u (bad) + P (good)u(good), then expected utility is an
a ne transformation of the probability of a good experience. Based on this interpretation,
we can use this distribution to calculate the optimal certification threshold, as done for other
distributions above. Table 1 reports the results for the kernel estimate of this distribution.
According to our calculations, more than 65% of sellers should be certified, closing about 63%
of the surplus gap. The exercise highlights the importance of skewness in the distribution of
qualities. While our mapping of this data to a quality distribution is admittedly quite special,
it suggests that filtering out the lower end of the distribution so to avoid bad experiences could
provide considerable value.22


6      Extensions
In this section we consider a series of extensions. First, we consider heterogeneous preference
for quality. Second, we show results for Cournot competition. Third, we analyze the eect of
entry.


6.1    Heterogeneous Preference for Quality
We examine briefly the determination of optimal thresholds when consumers dier in their
preferences for quality for the case where N = 2. Suppose consumers' preferences are given
by the utility function u = z + 0 p for a good of quality z , a la Mussa and Rosen (1978).
Consumers dier in their preference for quality  and for the value they assign the inside vs.
outside good 0 , which is distributed in the population according to some joint distribution
  (, 0 ). As earlier, firm qualities z are distributed according to cdf F (z ) . For simplicity,
we restrict our analysis to a partition of sellers into two groups defined by threshold z  with
  21
    The data for the histogram come directly from Table 4 in Nosko and Tadelis (2015).
  22
    Also note that here we make very special assumptions in terms of supply and demand functions; for
example, we assume a linear the supply function, while if the supply function is convex, the optimal z 
estimated is just a lower bound for the actual z  .


                                                  23
               Figure 2: Distribution of % Positive Responses for eBay sellers

qualities zL and zH , respectively. Given prices pL and pH , consumers will be split into three
groups: those that do not consume and those that consume either the H or L product, with
demands DH (pL , pH ) and DL (pL , pH ), respectively. These will be equilibrium prices provided
that DH (pL , pH ) = (1 F (z  )) q (pH ) and DL (pL , pH ) = F (z  ) q (pL ) . As in our previous
case, there is a unique equilibrium under fairly general conditions.
Lemma 7. The optimal choice of threshold z  satisfies the following first-order necessary
condition:

                     (pH )     ( p L ) = (z     z L )  L qL + ( z H   z  )  H qH ,          (11)

where L is the average preference for quality of consumers who purchase the L product, and
H of those who purchase the H product.
Proof. See Appendix.

    This formula has an intuitive explanation. The first term is the loss of profits by those
firms that transition from the H to the L group, when z  is marginally increasing. The second
term measures the eect of the increase in the averages zL and zH as z  is increased, valued at
the quality preference of the average consumer in each group and weighted by their respective
market sizes.

                                               24
Vertical Dierentiation with Inelastic Supply

To establish further results, we consider the canonical model of vertical dierentiation where
consumers dier only in their preference for quality  and where firms supply inelastically one
unit of output.23 Given equilibrium prices pL and pH , all consumers above a threshold 
buy an H product, while all those between  and  buy an L product, where zL = pL and
 (zH zL ) = pH pL . Substituting in equation (11) gives the condition



                              (z       z L ) (    L ) = (z H       z  ) ( H     ) .

Notice that this is a modified version of equation (6), where the gaps between z  and the re-
spective means are weighted by the corresponding preference gaps. This highlights the role of
the complementarities between average quality and preference for quality in the determination
of the optimal threshold. In particular, when both distributions are symmetric, this also im-
plies that the optimal threshold z  (and also  ) will equal the corresponding mean. Moreover,
when z and  have the same distribution, the optimal threshold is also given by our baseline
condition, as given in equation (6).24 As an example, if both have uniform distributions, then
when  = z  = 1/2, this condition will hold.


6.2     Cournot Competition
Here we restrict the analysis to a fixed set of firms, without considering explicitly the eect
of changes in z * on entry. There is a total of N firms (per consumer), and given signal z  ,
a fraction F (z  ) in the first group and (1 F (z  )) in the second. The demand structure is
the same as in the competitive case considered above. Assume firms face a constant marginal
cost c regardless of their type. The equilibrium conditions are

                                    M R H = P 0 ( Q ) qh + P ( Q ) + z H = c                                 (12)
                                    M RL = P 0 (Q) ql + P (Q) + zL = c.                                      (13)

Multiplying each equation by the number of firms in the respective group and adding up, we
get
                             P 0 ( Q) Q + N P ( Q) + N z
                                                       ¯ = N c,
  23
    This can be reinterpreted as a one-to-one matching environment with surplus function z.
  24
    It is interesting to note that when all consumers have the same preference for quality and supply is inelastic,
welfare is independent of z  , as the average product quality is not aected by its choice.



                                                        25
where z¯ is the mean quality for the N firms. Interestingly, this equation determines Q inde-
pendently of the signal threshold z  , as in the case of perfect competition.
   Another implication of the invariance of total output is that consumer surplus does not
change, as in the case of linear supply with z  . This occurs because price increases capture
exactly the change in average quality in each group. It follows that optimal thresholds solve
the maximization problem (3), so they are identical to those obtained above for the linear
case. 25


6.3     Entry
In our previous analysis we did not consider explicitly the eect of changes in z  on entry.
Many of our results extend to settings where the distribution of qualities of firms is not aected
by entry. We discuss here two scenarios: one where entrants are ex-ante dierentiated and
one when they are ex-ante homogeneous.
    Consider first the case of dierentiated entrants. Our analysis extends without modification
in the following scenario. Suppose there is a mass N of entrants that are dierentiated in
qualities z and fixed (or entry) costs f . Assume qualities are independent from fixed costs
and are given by distribution F and , respectively. For a given threshold partition z  , we
can define the aggregate supply functions SL and SH as follows. Let SH (p) = s (p) NH (p),
where NH (p) = N (1 F (z  )) ( (p)). This supply function combines the eect of prices
on the intensive and extensive margin. We can define similarly SL (p) .Our analysis remains
unchanged if we substitute s (p) by s  ^ (p) = s (p) N (f (p)), so total supplies are SL (p) =
     
F (z ) s
       ^ (p) and SH (p) = s ^ (p) (1 F (z  )) .26
    For the homogeneous case, assume there is a set N of potential entrants that draw their
qualities independently from distribution F upon entry, after paying an entry cost f, which
is distributed according to cdf (f ) . For fixed output, improved information results in a
mean-preserving spread of expected qualities and thus prices. Given that profit functions
are convex in prices, this results in an increase in expected profits and a consequent increase
in entry. In the case of linear supply, where in the absence of entry, total output does not
change, additional entry results in an increase in total output and thus consumer surplus. In
the case of concave supply, we have seen that total output decreases. This increases profits
over and beyond what is produced by the mean-preserving spread of average qualities, thus
  25
     We have considered here quantity competition. For a model of price competition with partially informed
consumers see Moscarini and Ottaviani (2001).
  26
     The properties of these modified supply functions will now depend both on the individual supply functions
and the distribution of fixed costs. There exist assumptions on the latter that will guarantee that the modified
supply functions are linear, convex, or concave when these properties hold for the original supply functions.


                                                      26
inducing entry, mitigating, if not totally undoing, the drop in total output that would result
in the absence of entry. Finally, note that if all potential entrants were to have the same entry
cost, all surplus gains from improved information would accrue to consumers, as expected and
average profits would remain unchanged. The above results apply in particular to the eect
of introducing a certification mechanism in a market where there is none.


7    Final Remarks
This paper considered the optimal design of quality ratings in markets with adverse selection.
Ratings reallocate demand across producers, impacting the average quality of goods consumed
but also average cost. The optimal thresholds in a discrete rating system optimize this trade-
o. Optimal ratings thus depend on characteristics of the market, given by the distribution of
producers quality, the elasticity of supply and consumer preferences. We find that the optimal
thresholds in the case of a convex (resp. concave) supply function are pointwise higher (resp.
lower) than those in the linear case. Intuitively, in case of a simple certification rating with
two groups, more elastic supply leads to a higher threshold and lower share of certified sellers.
We also find that skewness in the distribution of firm qualities matters for optimal ratings,
which move in the direction of the skew.
    We have given a simple characterization for the optimal thresholds in the case of linear
supply, or Cournot competition with constant marginal cost, as the solution to a standard
k -means clustering problem. Our results thus provide a straightforward and easy-to-compute
method for the design of rating systems. This method is used to derive bounds on the per-
formance of the rating system as a function of the number of categories. As an example,
we find that for the exponential family of distributions, 65% of the surplus gains from full
information can be achieved with only two categories. In addition we provide general bounds
for the case of distribution functions with log-concave density. The large gains in surplus with
a very simple threshold mechanism suggest that the added cost of a more complex one might
not be compensated by the gains. This could explain the popularity of these simple schemes
among market designers.
    As for the distribution of surplus, we find that there is a tension between the interest of
consumers and producers in the design of a rating mechanism. When supply is concave, better
information hurts consumers and benefits producers. More generally, our results suggest the
thresholds that maximize producer surplus and those that maximize consumer surplus are on
opposite sides of those maximizing total surplus.
    Our preliminary analysis of the vertical dierentiation model suggests that preferences for
quality can be an important factor in determining optimal thresholds. One might conjecture

                                               27
that, in parallel to our results on the supply side, more convexity (resp. concavity) in the
distribution of consumer types increases (resp. decreases) the gains from more assortative
matching, thus leading to higher thresholds. This question and further extensions on the
demand side, such as including scope for horizontal dierentiation, are subject for future
research. Other extensions worth considering are a more detailed modeling of entry, following
results obtained in the empirical literature Hui et al. (2018). Finally, we have abstracted from
moral hazard considerations which can be important in some settings. Exploring the impact
these may have on the design of optimal ratings is subject for future research.




                                              28
References
Bajari, P. and A. Hortacsu (2004): "Economic insights from internet auctions," Journal
 of Economic Literature, 42, 457­486. 8

Bergemann, D. and A. Bonatti (2019): "Markets for information: An introduction,"
 Annual Review of Economics, 11. 6

Bergemann, D., B. Brooks, and S. Morris (2015): "The Limits of Price Discrimination,"
 American Economic Review, 105, 921­57. 6

Bergemann, D. and S. Morris (2013): "Robust predictions in games with incomplete
 information," Econometrica, 81, 1251­1308. 7

------ (2016): "Bayes correlated equilibrium and the comparison of information structures in
  games," Theoretical Economics, 11, 487­522. 7

------ (2017): "Information design: A unified perspective," . 7

Bergemann, D. and M. Pesendorfer (2007): "Information structures in optimal auc-
 tions," Journal of economic theory, 137, 580­609. 6

Bhaskar, U., Y. Cheng, Y. K. Ko, and C. Swamy (2016): "Hardness results for sig-
 naling in bayesian zero-sum and network routing games," in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
 Conference on Economics and Computation, ACM, 479­496. 7

Bhaskar, V., C. D. Thomas, et al. (2017): The design of credit information systems,
 Centre for Economic Policy Research. 7

Board, S. (2009): "Revealing information in auctions: the allocation eect," Economic The-
 ory, 38, 125­135. 6

Cabral, L. and A. Hortacsu (2010): "The dynamics of seller reputation: Evidence from
 ebay*," The Journal of Industrial Economics, 58, 54­78. 8

Che, Y.-K. and J. H¨  orner (2018): "Recommender Systems as Mechanisms for Social
 Learning," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 871­925. 7

Chevalier, J. A. and D. Mayzlin (2006): "The eect of word of mouth on sales: Online
 book reviews," Journal of marketing research, 43, 345­354. 8



                                             29
De Marzo, P., I. Kremer, and A. Skrzypacz (2018): "Testing Design and Minimum
 Standards," American Economic Review, forthcoming. 7

Dellarocas, C., F. Dini, and G. Spagnolo (2006): "Designing reputation (feedback)
 mechanisms," . 8

Dranove, D. and G. Z. Jin (2010): "Quality disclosure and certification: Theory and
 practice," Journal of Economic Literature, 48, 935­963. 6

Dworczak, P. and G. Martini (2019): "The Simple Economics of Optimal Persuasion,"
 Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming. 7, 14

Ekmekci, M. (2011): "Sustainable reputations with rating systems," Journal of Economic
 Theory, 146, 479­503. 7

Elfenbein, D. W., R. Fisman, and B. McManus (2015): "Market structure, reputation,
 and the value of quality certification," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7,
 83­108. 8

Fan, Y., J. Ju, and M. Xiao (2013): "Losing to Win: Reputation Management of Online
  Sellers," . 8

Filippas, A., J. J. Horton, and J. Golden (2018): "Reputation inflation," in Proceedings
  of the 2018 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, ACM, 483­484. 8

Ganuza, J.-J. and J. S. Penalva (2010): "Signal Orderings Based on Dispersion and the
 Supply of Private Information in Auctions," Econometrica, 78, 1007­1030. 3, 9, 11

Gentzkow, M. and E. Kamenica (2016): "A Rothschild-Stiglitz Approach to Bayesian
 Persuasion," American Economic Review, 106. 3, 9

Harbaugh, R. and E. Rasmusen (2018): "Coarse grades: Informing the public by with-
 holding information," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 10, 210­35. 7

Hoppe, H. C., B. Moldovanu, and E. Ozdenoren (2011): "Coarse matching with
 incomplete information," Economic Theory, 47, 75­104. 6, 7, 12, 22

H¨
 orner, J. and N. S. Lambert (2016): "Motivational ratings," . 7

Hui, X., M. Saeedi, Z. Shen, and N. Sundaresan (2016): "Reputation and regulations:
 evidence from eBay," Management Science, 62, 3604­3616. 8


                                          30
Hui, X., M. Saeedi, G. Spagnolo, and S. Tadelis (2018): "Certification, Reputation
 and Entry: An Empirical Analysis," Working Paper 24916, National Bureau of Economic
 Research. 2, 28

Hui, X., M. Saeedi, and N. Sundaresan (2017): "Adverse Selection or Moral Hazard:
 An Empirical Study," Working paper. 3

Jin, G. Z. and P. Leslie (2003): "The eect of information on product quality: Evidence
  from restaurant hygiene grade cards," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 409­451.
  8

Kamenica, E. (2018): "Bayesian persuasion and information design," Annual Review of
 Economics. 7

Kovbasyuk, S. and G. Spagnolo (2017): "Memory and markets," . 7

Kremer, I., Y. Mansour, and M. Perry (2014): "Implementing the "wisdom of the
 crowd"," Journal of Political Economy, 122, 988­1012. 7

Liu, Q. and A. Skrzypacz (2014): "Limited records and reputation bubbles," Journal of
  Economic Theory, 151, 2­29. 7

Lizzeri, A. (1999): "Information revelation and certification intermediaries," The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 214­231. 6

MacQueen, J. et al. (1967): "Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate
 observations," in Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and
 probability, Oakland, CA, USA, vol. 1, 281­297. 5, 17

McAfee, R. P. (2002): "Coarse matching," Econometrica, 70, 2025­2034. 7, 22

Mease, D. and V. N. Nair (2006): "Unique optimal partitions of distributions and con-
 nections to hazard rates and stochastic ordering," Statistica Sinica, 1299­1312. 17, 33

Moscarini, G. and M. Ottaviani (2001): "Price competition for an informed buyer,"
 Journal of Economic Theory, 101, 457­493. 26

Mussa, M. and S. Rosen (1978): "Monopoly and product quality," Journal of Economic
 theory, 18, 301­317. 23




                                             31
Nosko, C. and S. Tadelis (2015): "The limits of reputation in platform markets: An
 empirical analysis and field experiment," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
 8, 23

Ostrovsky, M. and M. Schwarz (2010): "Information disclosure and unraveling in match-
 ing markets," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2, 34­63. 7

Rothschild, M. and J. E. Stiglitz (1970): "Increasing risk: I. A definition," Journal of
 Economic theory, 2, 225­243. 13

Saeedi, M. (2014): "Reputation and Adverse Selection, Theory and Evidence from eBay,"
  Working Paper. 8

Saeedi, M. and A. Shourideh (2019): "Optimal Rating Design," . 3

Schlee, E. E. (1996): "The Value of Information about Product Quality," The RAND Jour-
  nal of Economics, 27, 803­815. 6, 12

Shao, R. (2016): "Generalized coarse matching," Games and Economic Behavior, 100, 142­
  148. 22

Tadelis, S. (2016): "Reputation and feedback systems in online platform markets," Annual
 Review of Economics, 8, 321­340. 8

Van Zwet, W. (1964): "Convex transformations of random variables, Math," Centrum,
 Amsterdam, 1964. 20

Vellodi, N. (2019): "Ratings Design and Barriers to Entry," . 7

Wilson, R. (1989): "E cient and competitive rationing," Econometrica: Journal of the
 Econometric Society, 1­40. 7

Wu, C., H. Che, T. Y. Chan, and X. Lu (2015): "The economic value of online reviews,"
 Marketing Science, 34, 739­754. 8




                                            32
8      Appendix. Proofs
Proof of Lemma 3
First note that



        (P (Q) + zk ) (qk+1        qk ) = (P (Q) + Mk+1                 Mk+1 + zk ) qk+1
                                              ( P ( Q ) + Mk          M k + z k ) qk
                                           = pk+1 qk+1       p k qk      (Mk+1         zk ) qk+1   (zk   M k ) qk .

Substituting in (4) and rearranging gives:

                                 (Mk+1     zk ) qk+1 + (zk      Mk ) qk = k+1             k .
                                                    Rp
Equation (5) follows by substituting k+1 k = pkk+1 s (p) dp , using qk+1 = s (pk+1 ) and
qk = s (pk ) and dividing through the left hand side by (Mk+1 Mk ) and the right hand side
by the equivalent value pk+1 pk .


Proof of Proposition 3 and Proposition 8
We use the following properties of distributions with log-concave densities (see Lemma 1 in
Mease and Nair (2006)):

                             E (z |s  z  s + d)        s is decreasing in s for d > 0                                 (14)


                             s   E (z |s    d  z  s) is increasing in s for d > 0                                     (15)

and these properties are preserved when conditioning on intervals.

Lemma 8. Suppose F is a distribution with log-concave density and let m (a, b) = EF (z |a  z  b) .
Suppose the vector of thresholds {lk }N  1
                                      k=1 satisfy


                                      lk    m (lk 1 , lk ) = m (lk , lk+1 )       lk                                  (16)

and let z1 , ..., zN   1   be a vector such that

                                     zk     m (zk 1 , zk ) > m (zk , zk+1 )        zk                                 (17)


                                                          33
Then zk > lk for all k.

   To prove Lemma 8 we use first the following:
Claim. Under the assumptions of Lemma 8, suppose that for some k, zk < lk and zk+1                   zk
lk+1 lk . Then zk 1 < lk 1 and zk zk 1 lk lk 1 .

Proof. Note that



                          zk    m (zk 1 , zk ) > m (zk , zk+1 )                zk                    (18)
                                                   m (zk , zk + lk+1                 lk )    zk
                                                   m (lk , lk+1 )          lk
                                               = lk          m ( l k 1 , lk ) .

The first inequality follows from (17), the second one from monotonicity of m,the third from
(14), and the last by (16). Now consider k 1. We will show that zk zk 1 lk lk 1 .
   Suppose, by way of contradiction, that zk zk 1 < lk lk 1 . Then

                      zk       m ( z k 1 , zk )  l k        m (lk      (zk          z k 1 ) , lk )
                                               lk           m ( l k 1 , lk )

where the first inequality follows from condition (15) and the second one from the monotonicity
of m. This inequality contradicts (18), proving that zk zk 1 lk lk 1 . Given that zk < lk ,
this also guarantees that zk 1 < lk 1 .

    We now prove Lemma 8. Let h denote the highest k for which zk < lk . By the definition
of h, zh+1 zh > lh+1 lh . Using inductively the previous claim, it follows that the same is
true for all k = 1, ..., h. For k = 1, the claim would imply that z0 < l0 which cannot be true if
the distribution had a lower bound since in that case both z0 and l0 should equal this lower
bound. For unbounded support, an argument similar to the one used in the claim can be used
to generate a contradiction. This completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 3.

Let {lk } denote the optimal thresholds for the linear supply function and {zk } those for the
convex supply function. Lemma 4 (16) and (??) hold, so Lemma 8 proves the proposition.




                                                       34
Proof or Proposition 8.

We first prove the following:

                                                                    ~ . Let Mk = m (zk 1 , zk ) =
Lemma 9. Let g (z1 ) , ..., g (zN 1 ) be the optimal thresholds for F
EF (zk 1  z  zk ). Then zk Mk > Mk+1 zk .

Proof. Let M ~ k = E ~ (g (~
                           zk 1 )  z  g (~                                          ~ k > g ( Mk ) .
                                         zk )). Note that by strict convexity of g, M
                    F
It follows that

                                                                     
                             z      Mk > z k         g   1      ~k
                                                                M
                                                           
                                        = g      1
                                             (g (zk )) g 1 M ~k
                                                      
                                        = g 1 M ~ k+1   g 1 (g (zk ))
                                        > Mk+1              zk



   To prove the proposition, let the vector {lk } be the optimal thresholds for F and {zk }
                           ~ . Equation (16) follows from the necessary condition for optimal
the optimal thresholds for F
thresholds and (??) follows by the previous lemma.




Proof of Lemma 5
Total output
                                      N
                                      X
                                 Q=         (F (zk )        F (zk 1 )) s (pk ) .
                                      k=1

where pk = P (Q) + Mk . Dierentiating with respect to zk and using

                                                @ Mk
                         (F (zk )    F (zk 1 ))       = f ( z k ) ( z k Mk ) .
                                                 @ zk
                                              @ Mk+1
                       (F (zk+1 )    F (zk ))         = f (zk ) (Mk+1 zk )
                                                @ zk




                                                       35
                     @Q
                          = f (zk ) (s (pk ) s (pk+1 ))
                     @ zk
                          + f (zk ) [s0 (pk ) (Mk zk ) + s0 (pk+1 ) (Mk+1                                   zk )]
                            XN
                                                                      @Q
                          +     (F (zk ) F (zk 1 )) s0 (pk ) P 0 (Q)
                            k=1
                                                                      @ zk

so
           @Q     f (zk ) [s (pk ) s (pk+1 ) + s0 (pk ) (Mk zk ) + s0 (pk+1 ) (Mk+1                                      zk )]
                =                   PN
           @ zk                   1    k=1 (F (zk )     F (zk 1 )) s0 (pk ) P 0 (Q)
The denominator is positive since s0 (pk ) > 0 and P 0 (Q) < 0 so @ Q/@ zk has the same sign as

                    s ( pk )       s (pk+1 ) + s0 (pk ) (Mk             zk ) + s0 (pk+1 ) (Mk+1                   zk )
                                        R pk+1
and since s (pk )   s (pk+1 ) =          pk
                                                 s0 (p) dp and pk+1                  pk = M k+1           Mk , equation (8) follows.


Proof of Proposition 6
                    Mk+1 zk
Letting  (zk ) =    Mk+1 Mk
                                   we can rewrite Equation (5) as
                                                                                       R pk+1
                                                                                        pk
                                                                                                 s ( p)     s (pk ) dp
               s (pk ) +  (zk ) (s (pk+1 )            s (pk )) = s (pk ) +
                                                                                                 pk+1       pk
so                                                      R pk+1        s ( p ) s (p k )
                                                           pk       s(pk+1 ) s(pk )
                                                                                       dp
                                           (zk ) =                                           .                                   (19)
                                                                  pk+1         pk
To evaluate dQ/dzk at the optimal thresholds z1 , ..., zk we rewrite , equation (8) in similar
fashion using the expression for  (zk ) given by equation (19).
                                                     R pk+1        s 0 (p ) s 0 (p k )
                         dQ                           pk        s0 (pk+1 ) s0 (pk )
                                                                                       dp
                                    s  (zk )
                         dzk       =                            pk+1         pk
                                      R pk+1       s (p ) s (p k )            R pk+1      s 0 (p ) s0 (p k )
                                         pk      s(pk+1 ) s(pk )
                                                                   dp           pk     s0 (pk+1 ) s0 (pk )
                                                                                                             dp
                                   =
                                                                   pk+1         pk

so dQ/dzk has the same sign as
                       Z    pk+1                                    Z    pk+1
                                     s ( p) s ( pk )                              s0 ( p ) s0 ( p k )
                                                     dp                                               dp
                           pk      s (pk+1 ) s (pk )                    pk      s0 (pk+1 ) s0 (pk )




                                                                 36
so a su cient condition for dQ/dzk to be positive (negative) is that

                            s ( p) s ( pk )               s0 ( p ) s0 ( p k )
                                                                              > 0 (< 0)
                          s (pk+1 ) s (pk )             s0 (pk+1 ) s0 (pk )

   For convex s, s0 (pk+1 )    s0 (pk ) > 0 so we can rewrite this condition as

                           s0 (pk+1 )      s0 ( p k )         s0 ( p )    s0 ( p k )
                                                                                     > 0 (< 0)    (20)
                            s (pk+1 )      s ( pk )            s ( p)     s ( pk )

This can be restated as
                                                   s0 ( p )       s0 ( p k )
                                                                                                  (21)
                                                    s ( p)        s ( pk )
increasing or decreasing in p (for all p > pk ). The derivative of (21) with respect to p has the
sign of:

                           s00 (p) (s (p) s (pk )) s0 (p) (s0 (p) s0 (pk ))
                                   Z p                 Z p
                            00          0         0
                          =s ( p)      s (x) dx s (p)      (s00 (x)) dx
                                    pk                                    pk


which in turn has the sign of
                                                        Rp (s00 (x)) 0
                                        s00 (p)         p k s 0 ( x)
                                                                     s (x) dx
                                                           Rp                 .
                                        s0 ( p )            pk
                                                                 s0 (x) dx

The second term is a weighted average of the coe cient of absolute risk aversion of s for values
between pk and p. So if s00 (x) /s0 (x) is increasing (resp. decreasing) in x, then this dierence
will be positive (resp. negative).
    For concave s the signs in inequality (20) flip, as s0 (ph+1 ) s0 (pk ) < 0,so the results will
be reversed.


Proof of Proposition 7
Let g (z ) = 1
             2
               (zL (z ) + zH (z )) . The optimal threshold is a fixed point of this function. When
z ! zmax (or as z ! 1 in the case of unbounded support), g (z ) ! 1          2
                                                                               ¯+ 1
                                                                               z   2
                                                                                     z < z , and when
                                                                           1         1
z ! zmin (or as z ! 1 in the case of unbounded support), g (z ) ! 2 zmin + 2 z         ¯ > z . Consider
the case where z ¯ > zmedian , which is illustrated in Figure 3. For z = zmedian , g (z ) = z    ¯ > z.
                                                                                      
Since the function g (z ) is increasing and continuous, the unique fixed point z must be to the
right of zmedian and, as a consequence, z  > z    ¯, as illustrated in the figure. The proof for the


                                                               37
                                 Figure 3: z  When Mean>Median


case where z
           ¯ < zmedian follows from a similar argument.


Proof of Lemma 7
Let
                                         Z                             Z
                                                         
         U ( Q H , QL , z ) =    max      u (, zL (z )) d () +    u (, zH (z  )) d ()                      (22)
                                AL ,AH AL                      AH
                                            Z                  Z
                                subject to:     d () = QL and      d ( ) = QH
                                               AL                          AH


Given this we can write the general problem as

      V (z  ) = max U (qL F (z  ) , qH (1    F (z  )) , z  )   F ( z  ) c ( qL )   (1   F (z  )) c (qH )
                qL ,qH


By the envelope theorem,

                         @ V (z  )    @U                   @U                 @U
                               
                                   =       qL f ( z  )           qH f ( z  ) +                             (23)
                            @z       @ QL                 @ QH                @z
                                                             
                                     f ( z ) c ( qL ) + f ( z ) c ( qH )




                                                    38
The first two derivatives are the respective multipliers pL and pH of the constraints in (22).
To evaluate the last term, first we note that:
                                                  
                                  @ zL          z    zL (z  )
                                       = f ( z )                                          (24)
                                  @z               F (z  )

and                                                  
                                  @ zH          zH (z ) z
                                       = f ( z )                                          (25)
                                  @z             1 F (z  )
Note also that:
                                       Z                        
                             @U                            @ zL
                                =                     1 dG                                (26)
                             @z       (  1 , 0 )  A L       @z
                                    Z                            
                                                            @ zH
                                  +                   1 dG
                                      (  1 , 0 )  A H       @z

Finally note that the measure of the set AL is QL = qL F (z  ) and the measure of the set
AH is QH = qH (1 F (z  )) . Dividing and multiplying (26) by this respective measures and
substituting (24) and (25) we get:

                       @U
                          = f ( z  ) (z        zL ) E (1 | (0 , 1 ) AL ) qL               (27)
                       @z
                          + f ( z  ) (z H      z  ) E (1 | (0 , 1 ) AH ) qH

Substituting (27) in (23) we obtain:

                          1 @V
                                    = pL qL c (qL ) [pH qH c (qH )]
                       f (z  ) @ z 
                                    + (z  zL ) E (1 | (0 , 1 ) AL ) qL
                                   + (zH       z  ) E (1 | (0 , 1 ) AH ) qH .

Noting that the multipliers pL and pH are also the equilibrium prices, we can rewrite the first
order condition for the optimal z  as:

                     (pH )     ( p L ) = (z       zL ) E (1 | (0 , 1 ) AL ) qL            (28)
                                       + (zH        z  ) E (1 | (0 , 1 ) AH ) qH




                                               39
