                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  COMBINING FAMILY HISTORY AND MACHINE LEARNING TO LINK HISTORICAL
                             RECORDS

                                          Joseph Price
                                         Kasey Buckles
                                      Jacob Van Leeuwen
                                           Isaac Riley

                                      Working Paper 26227
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26227


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




This work has been supported in part by grant #G-1063 from the Russell Sage Foundation. Any
opinions expressed are those of the principal investigators alone and should not be construed as
representing the opinions of the Foundation or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We
are grateful for helpful comments and assistance from Ran Abramitzky, Martha Bailey, Katherine
Eriksson, James Feigenbaum, Joe Ferrie, Ian Fillmore, Cathy Fitch, Brigham Frandsen, Katie
Genadek, Jonas Helgertz, Bob Pollack, Steve Ruggles, and Anne Winkler. This project would
not have been possible without the careful and thoughtful work of many research assistants at the
Brigham Young University Record Linking Lab, including Ben Branchflower, Alison Doxey,
Neil Duzzett, Nicholas Grasley, Amanda Marsden, and Joseph Young.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joseph Price, Kasey Buckles, Jacob Van Leeuwen, and Isaac Riley. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Combining Family History and Machine Learning to Link Historical Records
Joseph Price, Kasey Buckles, Jacob Van Leeuwen, and Isaac Riley
NBER Working Paper No. 26227
September 2019
JEL No. C81,J1,N01

                                           ABSTRACT

A key challenge for research on many questions in the social sciences is that it is difficult to link
historical records in a way that allows investigators to observe people at different points in their
life or across generations. In this paper, we develop a new approach that relies on millions of
record links created by individual contributors to a large, public, wiki-style family tree. First, we
use these "true" links to inform the decisions one needs to make when using traditional linking
methods. Second, we use the links to construct a training data set for use in supervised machine
learning methods. We describe the procedure we use and illustrate the potential of our approach
by linking individuals across the 100% samples of the US decennial censuses from 1900,
1910, and 1920. We obtain an overall match rate of about 70 percent, with a false positive rate of
about 12 percent. This combination of high match rate and accuracy represents a point
beyond the current frontier for record linking methods.

Joseph Price                                      Jacob Van Leeuwen
Department of Economics                           Brigham Young University
Brigham Young University                          jacobrvl@gmail.com
162 FOB
Provo, UT 84602                                   Isaac Riley
and NBER                                          Record Linking Lab
joseph_price@byu.edu                              Brigham Young University
                                                  435 Crabtree Technology Building
Kasey Buckles                                     Provo, UT 84602
University of Notre Dame                          isaac.r.riley@gmail.com
Department of Economics
3052 Jenkins-Nanovic Halls
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
kbuckles@nd.edu
I. Introduction

        For many of the most pressing questions in the social sciences, empirical analysis relies on

access to data that allow the researcher to observe people at different points in their life or across

generations. For example, to measure the intergenerational transmission of socio-economic status,

we need to be able to link a parent to his or her adult child; to estimate the long-term impacts of

childhood circumstances, we typically need to observe a person as both a child and as an adult.

Unfortunately, this kind of data has been hard to come by in the United States, due to a lack of a

consistent individual registration number that is recorded in census data and in many administrative

data sets (as exists, for example, in Sweden and Norway).

        Recently, researchers studying the U.S. have solved this problem by acquiring restricted-use

data with information that permits this linking. This includes work that uses Social Security

numbers to link tax records across generations (Chetty and Hendren, 2018), to education histories

(Chetty et al., 2017), or to survey data (Mazumder and Davis, 2013). This innovative approach is

limited by the fact that the data are only available for recent decades, and Social Security numbers

are not recorded in many data sets where we would like to have them, such as censuses or vital

statistics data. Another strategy has been to link individuals across censuses and other records by

matching on characteristics like the person's name, birth year, and birth place (Ferrie, 1996;

Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson, 2014; Evans et al., 2016; Abramitzky, Mill, and Pérez, 2018). A

drawback of this method is that it is known to produce non-representative samples and has typically

omitted women, whose names often change between childhood and adulthood (Beach et al. 2016;

Pérez 2019). A relatively new approach to record linking is to use supervised machine learning

algorithms. Unlike the unsupervised matching methods described above, supervised methods

require a training data set that includes examples of both correct and incorrect matches that the

algorithms can "learn" from to make new matches. While machine learning methods show


                                                                                                         2
promise, quality training data can be difficult and costly to obtain. Both Feigenbaum (2016) and

Bailey (2018) use a process that relies on skilled human trainers to create their training data.

        In this paper, we propose a new approach for linking individuals across historical records.

At the center of our method is a data set created from decisions that are made by millions of

people who are researching their own family histories. These researchers often gather source

documents--including census records--to establish various life events and relationships for a

family member, and then post their conclusions on genealogical websites like Ancestry,

FamilySearch, FindMyPast, MyHeritage, Geni, and Wikitree. The key feature we exploit is that

when the profile for a deceased individual on one of these websites has multiple sources attached,

each pair of these sources establishes a "correct" match that can potentially be used to inform the

decisions made when employing various linking strategies, and as training data for supervised

machine learning methods. 1 The data are highly reliable, as the family members doing the linking

have a personal interest in making a correct match. Furthermore, the family members typically

have private information that can be used to identify the person of interest across multiple data

sets, such as maiden names or the names of other household members.

       The genealogy platform we use for our study is FamilySearch. FamilySearch has created a

large, public, wiki-style family tree that includes a profile for over 1.2 billion deceased individuals

with over 12.6 million registered users who can contribute information to those profiles. Individuals

can upload information and sources to the profiles of their own ancestors and relatives and can

make edits to the conclusions and sources attached by other contributors working on the same

people. In addition, FamilySearch provides regular record hints as suggestions to these contributors,



1
  Of course, in most cases there is no way to determine conclusively whether a match is true.
However, both Abramitzky et al. (2019) and Bailey et al. (2019) refer to genealogy data as the "gold
standard" of hand linking, and use links from our FamilySearch database as a benchmark for
evaluating the accuracy of their methods.
                                                                                                          3
who then decide whether the source should be attached to that person. We use a sample of

individuals from this family tree that are attached to at least two census records between 1900 and

1920. This provides a data set with 4.6 million 1900-1910 links, 4.9 million 1910-1920 links, and 2.9

million 1900-1920 links.

       We describe a process that builds on these data to create millions more links among these

three censuses. First, the FamilySearch data allow us to examine several important decisions that

need to be made when using automated methods to link historical records. These decisions include

how to pre-process the data, which features to use to identify potential matches (blocking), and

which machine learning algorithm to use. We then use the FamilySearch links as training data for a

supervised machine learning algorithm and combine the links we get from this machine learning

approach with other methods to link records. Our final data set, which we call the "Census Tree"

data, contains 67.8% of the potential matches between the 1900 and 1910 full-count US censuses,

and 71.4% of the potential matches between the 1910 and 1920 full-count US censuses (or 42.7 and

54.8 million matches, respectively). We hand-check a random sample of our predicted matches and

also use a transitivity test to show that the false positive rate among our predicted matches is about

12%. Abramitzky et al. (2019) document a "production possibilities frontier" showing the tradeoff

between accuracy and the number of possible matches made for several widely-used record linking

approaches and our method reaches a point well beyond this frontier.

       Ultimately, our goal for this project is to create every possible link among the full-count US

decennial censuses from 1850 to 1940. 2 But the method we describe in this paper could be applied

to any pair of datasets for which there is a sufficient number of individuals with records in both




2
 The effort will extend past 1940 as later censuses become available under the Census Bureau's 72-
year release policy.


                                                                                                         4
collections linked by users of a genealogy platform. As a result, the potential of the method will

grow even beyond this ambitious goal, as the use of genealogy websites like FamilySearch spreads

around the globe and as more historical records are digitized. 3



II. Background

       The 100 percent samples of the US decennial censuses are made available to the public after

72 years, which opens up unique opportunities to link individuals over long periods of time. Several

approaches have been used by social scientists to create large linked samples. These include creating

pre-determined rules to identify unique matches (Ferrie 1996; Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson

2014; Collins and Wanamaker 2015; Beach et al. 2016; Alexander and Ward 2018), employing a

statistical algorithm such as expectation-maximization (Abramitsky, Mill, and Pérez 2018; Pérez

2019), using hand-linked data (Bailey 2018; Costa et al. 2018), or combining human-created training

data with machine learning algorithms (Feigenbaum 2016; Goeken et al. 2011; Bailey et al. 2019).

Each of these approaches have their advantages and disadvantages, and they are likely to

complement each other in a combined effort to link as many individuals across historical records as

possible (see Bailey et al. (2019) and Abramitzky et al. (2019) for summaries of these approaches).

In this section, we describe in more detail two papers that have used supervised machine learning to

link historical records, as their approaches are most closely related to the main approach that we use

in this paper.

       Supervised machine learning requires training data with examples of both correct and

incorrect matches. An algorithm then uses training data to determine which characteristics (or

features) are best able to predict whether two records are a match. Feigenbaum (2016) proposes a



3
 In the case of FamilySearch, outside researchers can use the FamilySearch API to obtain links
directly from the Family Tree. A similar strategy can be used for other websites.
                                                                                                      5
machine learning procedure for linking a sample of men in the 1915 Iowa Census with their record

in the 1940 census. He limits the set of potential matches to those with the same birth state, born

within 2 years of each other, and with similar first and last names (based on Jaro-Winkler distance).

He creates 17 features, all of which are based on name, birth year, and the number of possible

matches, and uses a probit regression to estimate which of these features predict the likelihood that

a particular pair of records is a correct match. Finally, a correct match is defined as one that has a

high match score and has a significantly higher match score than any other possible matches. For

his sample of 7,580 boys in the 1915 Iowa Census, he is able to find a match in the 1940 census for

57% of them, with an estimated false positive rate of around 13%.

       Goeken et al. (2011) use a machine learning approach to create the IPUMS Linked

Representative Samples of the 1850-1930 US censuses. Their blocking features are race, gender, and

birthplace, and they require that matches have birth years within seven years of one another. They

use a Support Vector Machine as their machine learning algorithm and combine this with two

sources of training data. The first set of training data was created by data entry operators who coded

a set of potential matches as true or false based on a visual examination of the names and ages of the

possible links. For the second, they assessed links created by a company that produces record

linkage software for genealogical research. Along with features based on name, birthplace, gender,

and birth year, they also include features on parental birthplace, name commonality, and birth

density (which is the fraction of the census born in particular states by race and gender). This

approach yielded a data set with nearly 179,000 matches between the 1880 complete-count census

and the 1% samples of the 1850-1930 censuses.




                                                                                                         6
III. Data

        We use two sources of data for this project. The first dataset is the 100% sample of the US

decennial census for 1900, 1910, and 1920. These data provide the raw records that we aim to link

together. These data include each person's name, birth year, birthplace, gender, race, and place of

residence, and the birthplace of their father and mother. All of these variables were transcribed (or

indexed) from the original digitized images by volunteers recruited by FamilySearch. The data also

include other family members who are living in the same household which allows us to observe the

same characteristics for the individual's parents, siblings, spouse, or children, depending on who

they are living with in each census.

        The second dataset is comprised of linked census records that were provided to us by

FamilySearch. These matched pairs come from their online, wiki-style genealogy platform called the

Family Tree. The Family Tree was created in 2012 and allows anyone to contribute once they have

set up a free account. The website is structured to allow individuals to collaborate when they have a

family member in common, and various relatives of the same individual on the tree can contribute

information about vital events, family members and historical sources. This is an active

crowdsourcing platform with over 450,000 site visits per day, 12.6 million registered users, and over

1.2 billion individual profiles of deceased people.

        The link between census records and FamilySearch profiles is made by FamilySearch users

themselves, who find records on the FamilySearch platform and attach them to an individual's

profile. An individual profile could also be attached to vital records, military records, school

records, and city directories. We include an example profile in Figure 1 to illustrate the potential of

the data. For this person, we can observe the dates of birth, death, and marriage, and links to several

public records. The record links include the 1900, 1910, and 1920 censuses, which allow us to create

a panel with observations for this person at ages 9, 19, and 29. The first two observations are from


                                                                                                          7
a time when he lived in his parents' household, while in the latter he was the head of his own

household.

       This process produces a large data set of highly reliable links among records, as the family

members doing the linking identify the person of interest across multiple data sets more accurately

than can be done by name matching methods. For example, family members are more likely to

know maiden names, or to know which census record for a "John Williams" belongs to their family

member. 4 This type of data collection strategy has been validated in recent work by Kaplanis et al.

(2018), who used data from 86 million profiles from Geni.com, a similar website that allows users

to create individual profiles and upload family trees. The authors attempted to confirm the links in

the family trees using DNA data, and found very low rates of non-maternity and non-paternity that

were consistent with rates of adoption, and that the lifespan and death information had a 98%

concordance with historical distributions from the Human Mortality Database. The authors also

compared the data to a population sample from Vermont, and found that the Geni.com sample

was highly representative of the population. Kaplanis et al. (2018) conclude "that millions of

genealogists can collaborate in order to produce high quality population-scale family trees" (p. 172).

       We call this data set, which consists of matches made by FamilySearch users themselves, the

"Family Tree" data set. Table 1 provides information about the size of the Family Tree data. We

split the individuals in our training set into mutually exclusive groups based on their gender and

which census records they are attached to. Some of the people in the Family Tree data are attached

to all three census records from 1900 to 1920, while others are only linked to two of the censuses.

Individuals linked to all three censuses provide three sets of matched pairs. Altogether, the Family



4
 One way family members do this is by using the names of the other people in the household. For
example, if I know that the John Williams I am looking for had an older sister named Sarah and a
younger brother named Joseph, that can drastically reduce the number of potential matches. The
"Household Matching" strategy we describe below mimics this approach.
                                                                                                         8
Tree data provide 12.3 million true matched pairs across the three censuses. There are more men

than women, as men are easier for contributors to link across multiple records because their

surnames rarely change. Nevertheless, the fact that women make up nearly half of our sample is a

substantial advance in this literature; the poor performance of conventional name-matching methods

for linking women's records has meant that women have been completely omitted from some

important research. 5

        We validate the quality of the Family Tree data in two ways. First, we compare links from

the Family Tree with the links created by the human trainers working on the LIFE-M project (Bailey

2018). LIFE-M provided us a set of 54,000 individuals that they had linked from an Ohio birth

certificate to the 1940 census. We were able to find 12,000 people from their sample that were

attached to both an Ohio birth certificate and the 1940 census on the Family Tree. Of this

overlapping sample, we found that that the links on the Family Tree and those identified by LIFE-M

agreed 93.4% of the time.

        We then took the 991 cases where there was disagreement and asked hand research

assistants to use traditional family tools to determine which match was correct. They found that

75.4% of the time the link based on the Family Tree was correct, 26.1% of the time the LIFE-M link

was correct, 4.3% of the time they were both right (because the individual showed up twice in the

1940 census), and 4.3% of the time neither of the links were correct. Treating all of the links where

LIFE-M and the Family Tree data agree as correct indicates that, for this overlap group, the LIFE-M

links were correct 95.2% of the time and the links based on the Family Tree were correct 98.4% of




5
 While this paper describes a process for using the Family Tree data to create additional matches,
the Family Tree links alone constitute an incredible data set, with millions of links among census
records that include many matches between women before and after marriage.
                                                                                                        9
the time. This suggests that the Family Tree links achieve a level of accuracy similar to or better

than that created by skilled human trainers, at a much lower cost.

        We also validate the quality of the Family Tree data by having humans hand-match a random

sample of the records. Among the 500,000 matches for our Ohio sample between 1910 and 1920,

we randomly sampled 100 records from the 1920 census and provided them to trained research

assistants and asked them to use the search tools on Ancestry to identify the number of potential

matches for that person in the 1910 census and which of those possible matches they determined

was the correct one based on their inspection of the information from the two records. On average,

they identified 12 individuals in the 1910 census that were a possible match for each person in the

sample from the 1920 census. The 1910 census record that they labeled as a match for each 1920

census record agreed with the match in the Family Tree data 98% of the time. We replicated this

with a random sample of 350 record links from our full data set. Of those 350 records, they were

able to find a link 94% of the time and of these links that were found, they agreed with the link in

the Family Tree data 99% of the time.



IV. Method

        The process we use to link census records is depicted in Figure 2. We begin with the Family

Tree data as described above. These user-made links not only serve as an input into our supervised

machine learning algorithms, but also as a resource for making informed decisions about how to

pre-process the data, which blocking and matching features to choose, and which machine learning

algorithm to use. We now describe these different uses of the data in more detail.

A. Pre-processing the data

        There are three features in the census that are especially important for our linking methods:

birth year, birthplace, and name. We employ some pre-processing to each of these features to


                                                                                                       10
improve the accuracy of our machine learning models. First, the birth year variable is imputed in

our data in 1910 and 1920 based on the age that the person reported. In 1910, age was based on the

age of the person on April 15th of that year, and in 1920 was based on the person's age on January 1st

of that year. In 1900, the individual reported both their birth month and birth year, so no

imputation is necessary.

        Second, in the census records, the most specific birthplace listed for those born in the U.S. is

the state in which they were born. For those born outside of the U.S., there are varying levels of

specificity used; for example, birthplaces in the Netherlands were sometimes listed with their city of

birth (e.g. "Amsterdam Netherlands") or province of birth ("Friesland Netherlands"). We pre-

process the birthplace in two ways. For those born in the U.S., we clean the spelling of each birth

state to have a single standardized name (the state of Connecticut is spelled 97 different ways in the

data). For those born outside of the U.S., we standardize the birth place to be the name of the

country of birth, though certain abbreviations such as "ata" and "o" are difficult to classify.

        Third, we do some cleaning to convert nicknames and abbreviations to a standardized set of

formal names. Each matched pair in the Family Tree data allows us to see two potential ways to

spell an individual's first name. We use this information to create a network between every

combination of uniquely spelled names and use the strength of the edges between nodes in this

network to identify common nicknames and abbreviations. This provides us with a list of 1,704 nick

names and abbreviations that we can convert into a formal name equivalent. We also create features

that help address common misspellings by employing Soundex and Jaro-Winkler distances to handle

transcription errors. 6




6
 See Massey (2017) for an analysis of the tradeoff between linkage rates and accuracy when using
Jaro-Winkler distances in matching.
                                                                                                      11
B. Blocking and matching features

       Blocking features are the characteristics of an individual for which you require an exact match

in your matching algorithm. Blocking is required for nearly all matching to make it computationally

possible to do the linking. Past studies have often required exact matching on birth state

(Feigenbaum, 2018); birth year within a given number of years (Goeken et al., 2011; Feigenbaum,

2018); and the letters of the first and last names (Mill & Stein, 2016). These blocking strategies can

be problematic when fields are indexed incorrectly, when information is not reported or recorded

correctly on the census, or when people change aspects of their identity over time (such as race or

last name). One notable case occurred after World War I when the number of people who reported

being born in Germany or Austria dropped by roughly 40% between the 1910 and 1920 census

(Charles et al. 2018). Many of these people likely changed their last name and birth place in

response to the discrimination occurring in the U.S. during the war (Fouka 2018).

       In Table 2, we use the 1900-1910 and 1910-1920 links from the Family Tree data to provide

some information about the level of stability across adjacent census years in some of the potential

blocking features. The first column in this table provides the fraction of the Family Tree data for

which each of the characteristics is the same for the individual between the 1900 and 1910 census

and the second column does the same for 1910 and 1920. For example, between the 1900 and 1910

censuses only 75% of people have the exact same first name, but 94% have the same first initial of

their first name. Three of the most stable characteristics of individuals are their race (99.8%), gender

(99.8%), and birthplace (96.6%). Values for the 1910 and 1920 links are similar. The stability of

these features is a reason why they have frequently been used for blocking in previous studies. We

also include columns that provide the number of unique values for each of the characteristics; this

highlights the natural tradeoff for blocking strategies as the characteristics that are the most stable




                                                                                                          12
are also the least unique. The uniqueness of the characteristics directly affects the size of the blocks,

with less unique features producing larger blocks that make it more difficult to make a match.

       The Family Tree data allow us to evaluate the performance of blocking strategies used in

prior work. We focus on the blocking strategies used by Ferrie (1996), Abramitzky et al. (2014),

Feigenbaum (2016), and Abramitzky et al. (2018), which are based on different combinations of

state of birth, gender, first initial of first name, first initial of last name, and birth year. The results

are in Table 3. The column labeled "consistency" indicates the fraction of the linked pairs in the

Family Tree data for which all of the characteristics used in the blocking strategy are the same across

the two records. This measure provides a proxy for the upper bound of the match rate that is

possible using each of the blocking strategies.

       Beginning with the first column in Panel A of Table 3, we see that the blocking strategy used

by Ferrie (1996) would have included 73% of the true matches from the Family Tree data and ABE

would include 49%. This means that there would have been no way to link the other 27% or 51%

of the sample because they would not have been included in the set of possible matches. The other

two approaches perform better on this dimension, with 83% for Feigenbaum (2016) and 86% for

Abramitzky et al. (2018). However, the next two columns show the advantages of Ferrie's strategy.

Each observation in the Ferrie approach would, on average, require 7.4 comparisons to be

computed when linking the 1900 and 1910 census (and ABE would only have 2.1), while the

Abramitzky et al. (2018) approach would require almost 200 times as many comparisons. The

number of potential matches has a direct effect on the computing time required to create predicted

scores for all of the possible matches. The third column indicates the number of unique matches

that are identified with that set of potential matches; the ABE blocking strategy produces the most

unique matches. The results are similar in Panel B, which uses matches between the 1910 and 1920

censuses. This exercise shows that the choice of blocking strategy can have a dramatic effect on


                                                                                                               13
computing time, and that there is a natural trade-off between consistency and the number of unique

matches a strategy is able to produce.

       Informed by this exercise, we block on race, gender, birth year within 3 years, and the

Soundex values for the first and last name. However, we can construct multiple features based on

each of these variables to use in the matching process for the machine learning algorithm. For

example, we create features for whether the first name matches exactly, whether the first initial of

the first name matches, whether the Soundex value of the first name matches, and the Jaro-Winkler

similarity score of the first name. We construct similar measures for the middle name and last name.

We also create indicators for the similarity of birth year, birth place, race, and gender. Finally, the

machine learning algorithm can include information on the similarity of the mother and father's

birthplace, the names of family members, and place of residence.

C. Choosing the machine learning algorithm

        There are many different algorithms that one can use to link records using a supervised

machine learning method. Ideally, an algorithm performs well on three dimensions. First, it should

be accurate--that is, most of the identified matches are true matches (often referred to as precision

in the machine learning literature). Second, it should be efficient--many true matches are identified

among those that are possible (often referred to as recall). Third, it should be computationally fast.

Because we observe true matches in the Family Tree data, it can help inform this choice as well. In

Table 4, we show how five different machine learning algorithms perform along these three

dimensions when we ask them to make matches among the Family Tree links, using a subset of the

links. We see that XGBoost performs best in terms of both accuracy and efficiency. We therefore




                                                                                                          14
choose it as our classifier, though it is a bit slower than neural nets, random forests, and logit

regression. 7

D. Other steps in the process

        After pre-processing the data and selecting the blocking strategy and machine learning

algorithm, we implement the supervised machine learning method. In the early stages of this

process, we asked trained research assistants to evaluate a random sample of the predicted matches

and code them as either "true" or "false"; these links were then added to the training data set to

further refine the matching algorithm. 8

        We also employ other linking strategies. First, we use the automated matching strategy

developed by Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2014) (ABE). Second, we use a dyad matching

method that is described in more detail in Helgertz and Price (2019) and involves linking multiple

people across households at the same time. This approach is helpful when the individual level




7
  XGBoost is a library that builds high-performing gradient boosting tree models. XGBoost has the
benefits of a decision tree model with the added advantage of boosting through an ensemble
learning method. XGBoost works by creating gradient boosted decision trees which split our data
based on included features in order to predict an outcome. Gradient boosted decision trees are
many-decision trees that are produced one after another where each sequential tree is specifically
built using the residual errors of the previous model as target areas to improve upon and minimize
loss and misclassification. XGBoost does this using a leaf-wise growth strategy meaning that the
next tree splits at the leaf that reduces the greatest amount of loss. The benefits of using a tree-
based model include scalability to large data sets, outlier robustness, and natural handling of missing
data. This is important in our data as missing values are common and features have a variety of
distributions, many of which are non-normal.
8
  While there are over 12.3 million links in the Family Tree data, we actually use only a subset of
these when implementing the XGBoost algorithm. Using the full data set slows the processing
speed considerably without increasing predictive power. This is consistent with the findings of
Feigenbaum (2016) who shows that gains to accuracy and efficiency plateau at around 500
observations in the training data. The training data we use has 43,800 true matches and 794,607
false matches, where the false matches are other potential matches for the true matches. The
advantage of the Family Tree data as training data is not its size, but rather the fact that it is high
quality and can be obtained at a relatively low cost. The size is more important when using the data
to inform the data cleaning and matching processes as described above.


                                                                                                     15
information is sufficiently different that the other approaches are not sure if it is a match but when

multiple close matches cluster in the same household, confidence in all of the matches increases. 9

Third, we use a household matching method which takes advantage of links created through the

other methods. Once a person in a household in one census has been linked to a person in a

household in another census, we employ a rules-based algorithm to identify other individuals in the

two households that should be linked together. This works well for married couples, parent-child

relationships, and siblings who are often in the same household together in adjacent censuses. 10

Fourth, we also include additional record hints that FamilySearch shared with us using their own

machine learning algorithm. The files they shared with us provided us with 54 million links; of

these, 5.7 million were links that we did not identify using one of the other methods. 11 Finally, we

implemented the full process to link 1920 to 1900 and used a transitivity rule to create additional

implied links for 1910 to 1900 and 1920 to 1910. That is, we take advantage of the fact that if we

link a record between 1900 and 1920 and 1910 and 1920, we also have a link between 1900 and

1910. This last method will become even more valuable as we add other censuses to our data.



V. Results

        We now apply this process to produce a linked dataset of individuals across the 1900, 1910

and 1920 US censuses. Table 5 reports the number of links we are able to make between adjacent

censuses, using each of the strategies described in the previous section. We provide the total



9
  For example, if Andrew Buckles and Mary Buckles are siblings in two adjacent censuses, but both
are excluded from our blocking strategy due to a mismatched feature (such as a difference in birth
years of more than three years), the fact that the family relationship was the same across the two
censuses gives us more confidence in linking the records for both Andrew and Mary.
10
   That is, if we have successfully linked Andrew using one of the other methods, and Andrew has a
sister Mary in both censuses, we can then link the two records for Mary.
11
   We note that this is the only one of our linking strategies that is not readily available to other
researchers.
                                                                                                        16
number of matches that are obtained from each strategy as well as the number of new matches

obtained when we apply the methods in sequence. Focusing on links between the 1910 and 1920

censuses, we see that the Family Tree data itself provides about 4.9 million links. The ABE

automated linking method and the XGBoost machine learning method contribute an additional 19

million links each. Household matching and dyad matching add 2.6 and 4.2 million links,

respectively.

          Once we have employed the first four methods, we remove the linked records from our

sample and then implement the ABE method a second time. This generates an additional 1.1

million links and highlights the potential for this approach to create additional matches as the

number of unlinked individuals shrinks, in an interative process. FamilySearch hints and the implied

links provide 3.9 million more links, so that the final Census Tree linked sample consists of 54.8

million links from 1910 to 1920. Given our estimate of the number of possible matches, we

conclude that we have identified 71.4% of the possible links between these two censuses. 12 For

1900 to 1910, we identify 42.7 million links for a match rate of 67.8%.

          In Table 6, we show the number of matches and match rates by the individual's relationship

to the household head. We construct our base sample and use the household relationship code for

the second of the two years for each pair of years, such that the 1910-1920 links are based on the

1920 data. The groups with the highest match rates are sons (74.0%) and daughters (72.7%). This is

expected, as children living with their birth family in the 1920 census would likely have been living

with their birth families in the 1910 census as well (here again, children who were born after 1910

are not included when calculating match rates). The group with the next highest match rates are




12
     See the Appendix for a description of how we estimate the number of potential matches.


                                                                                                        17
male heads of household (64.0%), followed by the spouses of the head of household (55.1%). 13 The

lowest match rates occur for other household members who are not part of the immediate nuclear

family where the match rates fall to 44.6% for women and 39.5% for men.

        We employ two methods to evaluate the false positive rate among the predicted matches that

we obtain. First, we can examine the transitivity property between the predicted matches that we

create. For example, our machine learning algorithm allows us to create predicted matches between

the 1900 and 1910 census, the 1910 and 1920 census, and the 1900 and 1920 census. This triangle

of links provides a number of transitivity tests that we can use to provide a measure of the quality of

our matches--that is, if the model had a prediction for all three possible links, they should agree.

Our final Census Tree linked sample includes 15.1 million of these transitivity tests and for this set,

we find an agreement rate of 87.3% which implies a false positive rate of 12.7%.

        Second, we drew a random sample of 1,000 records from the 1920 census and asked

research assistants to use traditional genealogy tools to hand link these individuals to the 1910

census. They were able to find a link for all of those in the random sample and the link they

identified agreed with our predicted link 88% of the time, again implying a false positive rate of




13
  The lower match rate for spouses of the household head reflects the difficulty in matching women
before and after marriage, when their surnames usually changed. The subset of the Family Tree data
that we use as training data include many of these links, as family members often know maiden
names. However, the training data are unable to "teach" the algorithm to make these matches since
the algorithm does not have this private information. We therefore still miss many of these links
before and after marriage. Nevertheless, the across-marriage links from the Family Tree data set
alone constitute a valuable resource for researchers.


                                                                                                       18
about 12%. 14 In addition, we find that this false positive rate was about the same for men and

women with a false positive rate of 12.8% for men and 11.1% for women. 15

        How do these measures compare to those achieved with other methods? Abramitzky et al.

(2019) report the levels of accuracy and efficiency for various linking methods using a linked sample

between the 1900 census and Union Army records. 16 They define accuracy as the number of correct

matches divided by the total number of matches, and efficiency is calculated as the number of

correct matches divided by the total possible number of matches. 17 Figure 1 of their paper shows

the tradeoff between accuracy and efficiency, and can be thought of as a "production possibilities

frontier" in the record linking literature. We have reproduced this figure as Figure 3, and added the

two points achieved by the 1900-1910 and 1910-1920 Census Tree samples. 18 While we are using a

different sample, the fact that we are trying to create accurate matches between two data sets with

tens of millions of observations each makes linking more difficult--the sample Abramitzky et al. is

attempting to match contains 1,647 possible links. As described above, about 12% of our matches



14
   While this may seem high, as we discuss below this false positive rate combined with our high
match rate puts us well beyond the frontier for linking methods. Furthermore, it is possible that for
many questions in the social sciences, the false positives that linking methods generate do not bias
the results because the falsely linked people would often have had similar outcomes on average,
given that they share so many other characteristics (name, birthplace, and birth year). This
hypothesis is supported by the work of Olivetti and Paserman (2015), who show that first names
contain important information about socioeconomic status; future work could formally test this
hypothesis using the Census Tree data.
15
   We can also use the FamilySearch record-hinting system to continue to monitor the quality of our
matches and use error analysis to improve the matching methods. FamilySearch has a system for
emailing individuals using their platform about possible record hints for individuals that they are
related to. These record hints also show up on the right side of the screen on the profile for each
person on the Family Tree. We are sharing all of the predicted links that we identified through our
pipeline with FamilySeach and will be able to observe in the future the decisions that individuals
make with our predicted matches.
16
    They compare their links to those in the Union Army-Oldest Old sample, treating the latter as
the "truth."
17
   Note that the efficiency rate is different from the match rate; the former has only correct matches
in the numerator, while the latter has both correct and incorrect matches.
18
   We are grateful to the authors for providing the data and code to allow us to replicate this figure.
                                                                                                      19
are false, for an accuracy rate of 88%, and our efficiency rate is 59.6% for the 1900-1910 Census

Tree sample and 62.9% for 1910-1920. Figure 3 shows that this combination of accuracy and

efficiency is well beyond the current frontier.

         Finally, we aim to produce a sample that is representative of the entire US population for

each census year. Table 7 compares those individuals that we are able to match to the previous

census to those that we are not, for the 1910 and 1920 censuses. The samples are limited to those

age eleven and over, to omit those who would not have been born in the previous census and

therefore cannot possibly be matched. In the third and sixth columns, we also remove those who

immigrated since the previous census. First, we see that while the unmatched samples are closer to

50% female, it is still the case that 47.1% (47.5%) of our matched sample is female in 1910 (1920).

This level of representation of women constitutes a tremendous advance in the census linking

literature. We do see that the matched sample is more likely to be white and less likely to be black, is

slightly older, and is more likely to be a household head. The matched sample is also more likely to

have been born in the U.S., which is unsurprising given that state of birth is one of the matching

features. 19

         Despite these differences between the matched and unmatched samples, the fact that the

final Census Tree data set is so large means that we still observe millions of links for groups that are

under-represented in our data. For example, we have about 5.7 million links between the 1910 and

1920 censuses for people who were not born in the U.S. Thus, our data should be useful to

researchers who are studying small or minority populations and to those who are interested in




19
  We also implement the balance test recommended by Bailey et al (2019) that employs a
heteroscedasticity-corrected F-test for joint significance and find that we reject the null that our
sample is balanced.
                                                                                                       20
comparative analyses. The large sample sizes should also permit researchers to re-weight the data to

construct a sample that is representative of the US population.



VI. Conclusion

        Recent developments in data access and record linking methodology have created exciting

opportunities for social science research using large populations (Gutmann, Merchant, and Roberts,

2018). We contribute to this work by developing novel ways to use data created from the

contributions of millions of individuals who are investigating their own family histories on

FamilySearch, a genealogy web platform. These researchers often gather records from censuses and

other sources and link them together on a family member's profile. Effectively, the FamilySearch

users do the work that trained research assistants would do to try to link records but at a much

lower cost, and with a personal interest in identifying correct matches and private information that

allows them to make accurate matches that other methods cannot. The result is a high-quality data

set with links among censuses and other records for millions of people.

        In this paper, we document the value of this new source of data. Taking the links created by

the FamilySearch users alone, we observe 12.3 million links among the 1900, 1910, and 1920

censuses. These include links for women before and after marriage, which have typically been very

difficult to make using other methods due to the change in surname. But we also show that these

data provide several insights that will be helpful for advancing the state of art in machine-based

records linking. For example, the data can be used to identify common nicknames and

abbreviations for common names, to explore the stability and uniqueness of common blocking and

matching features, and to test the performance of different machine learning algorithms. Finally, we

show that the data can be used as a very large and reliable training data set for use in supervised

machine learning approaches.


                                                                                                      21
        To demonstrate the potential of the data, we combine a supervised machine learning

algorithm that uses data from the FamilySearch Family Tree as training data with other record

linking methods to generate links among the 1900, 1910, and 1920 full count US censuses. We are

able to create 68% of the potential matches between the 1900 and 1910 censuses, and 71% of the

matches between 1910 and 1920. With a false positive rate of about 12%, our approach reaches a

level of accuracy and efficiency that is beyond the frontier for record linking methods (Abramitzky

et al. 2019).

        The integration of family history research with automated record linking methods has the

potential to dramatically improve the quality and quantity of data available to researchers in the

social sciences, and to economic historians in particular. We are working to expand the current

census-linking project to include all full-count censuses between 1850 and 1940. Beyond this effort,

we note that training could be created with the same approach for any two types of records that are

available on various genealogical platforms, including vital records, military records, and school

records. Furthermore, as the use of genealogy web platforms expands around the world, researchers

will be able to use our method to link records across and within other countries.




                                                                                                     22
References

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Boustan, and Katerine Eriksson. "A Nation of Immigrants: Assimilation and
      Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration." Journal of Political Economy 122, no. 3
      (2014): 467-506.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Boustan, Katherine Eriksson, Boustan, Leah, Eriksson, Katherine, James
      Feigenbaum, and Santiago Pérez. "Automated Linking of Historical Data." NBER Working
      Paper No. 25825, Cambridge, MA, 2019.

Abramitzky, Ran, Roy Mill, and Santiago Pérez. "Linking Individuals Across Historical Sources: A
      Fully Automated Approach." NBER Working Paper No. 24324, Cambridge, MA, 2018.

Alexander, Rohan, and Zachary Ward. "Age at Arrival and Assimilation During the Age of Mass
       Migration." The Journal of Economic History 78, no. 3 (2018): 904-937.

Bailey, Martha J. "Creating LIFE-M: The Longitudinal, Intergenerational Family Electronic Micro-
        Database." Working Paper, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 2018.

Bailey, Martha, Connor Cole, Morgan Henderson, and Catherine Massey. "How Well Do
        Automated Methods Perform in Historical Samples? Evidence from New Ground Truth."
        Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming, 2019.

Beach, Brian, Joseph Ferrie, Martin Saavedra, and Werner Troesken. "Typhoid Fever, Water
       Quality, and Human Capital Formation." The Journal of Economic History 76, no. 1 (2016):
       41-75.

Charles, Kerwin, Tanner Eastmond, Joseph Price, and Daniel Rees. "Long-Run Consequences of
       Prejudice." Working paper. 2018.

Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan. "Mobility Report
        Cards: The Role of Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility." NBER Working Paper No.
        23618, Cambridge, MA, 2017.

Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility
        I: Childhood Exposure Effects." Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, no. 3 (2018): 1107-1162.

Collins, William, and Marianne Wanamaker. "The Great Migration in Black and White: New
        Evidence on the Selection and Sorting of Southern Migrants." The Journal of Economic
        History 75, no. 4 (2015): 947-992.

Costa, Dora, Matthew Kahn, Christopher Roudiez, and Sven Wilson. "Data set from the Union
       Army samples to study locational choice and social networks." Data in Brief, 17, (2018): 226-
       233.

Evans, Mary, Eric Helland, Jonathan Klick, and Ashwin Patel. "The Developmental Effect of State
       Alcohol Prohibitions at the Turn of the Twentieth Century." Economic Inquiry 54, no. 2
       (2016): 762-777.


                                                                                                   23
Feigenbaum, James J. "Automated Census Record Linking: A Machine Learning Approach."
       Working Paper, 2016.

---- "Multiple Measures of Historical Intergenerational Mobility: Iowa 1915 to 1940." Economic
       Journal 128, no. 612 (2018): F446-F481.

Ferrie, Joseph. "A New Sample of Americans Linked from the 1850 Public Use Micro Sample of the
         Federal Census of Population to the 1860 Federal Census Manuscript." Historical Methods 29,
         (1996): 141-156.

Fouka, Vasiliki. "How Do Immigrants Respond to Discrimination? The Case of Germans in the US
       During World War I." American Political Science Review 113, no. 2 (2019): 405-422.

Goeken, Ron, Lap Huynh, Thomas Lenius, and Rebecca Vick. "New Methods of Census Record
      Linking." Historical Methods 44, (2011): 7-14.

Gutmann, Myron, Emily Merchant, and Evan Roberts. "`Big Data' in Economic History." The
      Journal of Economic History 78, no. 1 (2018): 268-299.

Hacker, J. David. "New Estimates of Census Coverage in the United States, 1850-1930." Social
       Science History 37, no. 1 (2013): 71-101.

Helgertz, Jonas, and Joseph Price. "Improving Precision in Linking Historical Census Data:
       Applying a Two-Stage Linking Procedure on the 1900-1910 US Census Data." Working
       paper, 2019.

Kaplanis, Joanna, Assaf Gordon, Tal Shor et al. "Quantitative Analysis of Population-Scale Family
       Trees with Millions of Relatives." Science 360, no. 6385 (2018): 171-175.

Massey, Catherine G. "Playing with Matches: An Assessment of Accuracy in Linked Historical
       Data." Historical Methods 50, no. 3 (2017): 129-43.

Mazumder, Bhashkar, and Jonathan M.V. Davis. "Parental Earnings and Children's WellBeing: An
     Analysis of the Survey of Income and Program Participation Matched to Social Security
     Administration Earnings Data." Economic Inquiry 51 no. 3 (2013): 1795-1808.

Mill, Roy, and Luke C. D. Stein. "Race, Skin Color, and Economic Outcomes in Early Twentieth-
        Century America." SSRN, Working Paper no. 2741797, 2016.

Olivetti, Claudia, and M. Daniele Paserman. "In the Name of the Son (and the Daughter):
        Intergenerational Mobility in the United States, 1850-1940." American Economic Review 105,
        no. 8 (2015): 2695-2724.

Pérez, Santiago. "Intergenerational Occupational Mobility across Three Continents." The Journal of
        Economic History 79, no. 2 (2019): 383-416.




                                                                                                     24
Figure 1. Example of Person Profile with Sources on the Family Tree




Notes: This is an example of an individual profile page on FamilySearch. There is a section that
includes vital information about the person (name, birth, and death) and then a section with each of
the sources attached to the person. Not shown is a separate section that provides names and links
to each of the familial relations of the individual (parents, siblings, spouse, and children).




                                                                                                  25
Figure 2. Process for Linking Census Records




Notes: Figure shows the process for going from the Family Tree data consisting of user-made links
to the final Census Tree data set, which includes the Family Tree data as well as additional links
made by supervised and unsupervised machine learning methods and additional linking strategies.




                                                                                                 26
Figure 3. Accuracy vs. Efficiency for Various Linking Algorithms (Based on Abramitzky et al. 2019)




Notes: Figure is a reproduction, with permission, of Figure 1 in Abramtizky et al. (2019). For all but
the Census Tree points (CT-1910 and CT-1920), data are from their exercise linking Union Army
records to the 1900 census using different versions of the ABE automated matching strategy, an
expectation maximization algorithm (EM), a machine learning method (ML), or a hand-linking
strategy (Hand). CT-1910 documents the levels of accuracy and efficiency achieved in our Census
Tree sample for 1900-1910; CT-1920 does the same for 1910-1920.




                                                                                                    27
Table 1. Size of the Family Tree Data Set

                                 Women                      Men
 Only 1900 & 1910               1,275,583                1,356,810
 Only 1910 & 1920               1,433,637                1,557,970
 Only 1900 & 1920                442,814                  536,256
 1900 & 1910 & 1920              905,095                 1,003,087

Notes: The table shows the number of links in the Family Tree data set, based on record matches
made by FamilySearch users. Each of the cells in this table are mutually exclusive. The rows in the
table indicate the censuses that are attached to each individual in the data. For example, the first
row provides the number of women and men that are matched to just the 1910 and 1920 census in
the Family Tree.




                                                                                                   28
Table 2. Stability of Potential Blocking Features between the 1900, 1910, and 1920 Censuses
 Feature                  Stable 1900-   Stable 1910-       1900           1910           1920
                              1910           1920          Unique         Unique         Unique
                                                           Values         Values         Values

 Race/Ethnicity               0.998          0.998           14             17             15
 Sex                          0.998          0.999            2              2              2
 Birth year within 3          0.978          0.984            -              -              -
 Birthplace                   0.966          0.984          2,927           648           1,937
 Birth year within 2          0.964          0.973            -              -              -
 Last initial                 0.944          0.946           26             26             26
 Last JW > 0.8                0.939          0.942            -              -              -
 First initial                0.935          0.942           26             26             26
 Last Soundex                 0.908          0.915          5,209          5,209          5,235
 Last JW > 0.9                0.908          0.915            -              -              -
 Birth year within 1          0.885          0.923            -              -              -
 First JW > 0.8               0.881          0.894            -              -              -
 First Soundex                0.850          0.868          4,187          4,149          4,168
 Mother's birthplace          0.840          0.852          3,862          1,052          3,230
 Father's birthplace          0.837          0.848          4,158          1,125          3,522
 First JW > 0.9               0.822          0.842            -              -              -
 Last name                    0.806          0.823         179,008        185,581        191,484
 First name                   0.743          0.769         79,837         85,326         85,170
 County                       0.741          0.746          1,628          1,724          1,818
 Middle initial               0.656          0.654           26             26             26
 Middle JW > 0.8              0.643          0.638            -              -              -
 Middle JW > 0.9              0.635          0.638            -              -              -
 Township                     0.601          0.555         29,870         17,313         19,986

Notes: Data are from the full Family Tree data set (12.3 million observations). Features where the
number of unique values are not reported are features where the values are binary (0 or 1). Data are
from the 1900, 1910, and 1920 census records in the Family Tree data.




                                                                                                   29
Table 3. Performance of Common Blocking Strategies Using the Family Tree Data

Panel A. 1900 and 1910 Censuses
       Blocking Strategy        Consistency Potential Matches Unique Match
          Ferrie (1996)           0.728            7.2          902,135
 Abramitzky et al. (2014) (ABE)   0.485            2.1         1,005,944
      Feigenbaum (2016)           0.829           10.4          652,387
    Abramitzky et al. (2018)      0.842          1,367.6          7,159

Panel B. 1910 and 1920 Censuses
        Blocking Strategy       Consistency Potential Matches Unique Match
          Ferrie (1996)           0.756            5.9         1,069,929
 Abramitzky et al. (2014) (ABE)   0.518            1.8         1,148,645
       Feigenbaum (2016)          0.861            8.5          766,206
    Abramitzky et al. (2018)      0.868          1,241.0          4,183

Notes: The analysis is performed on the full Family Tree data set. The first column indicates the
fraction of true matches for which all of the characteristics used in each blocking strategy are the
same across the two records (consistency). The second indicates the average number of potential
matches across censuses for each individual. The third provides the number of pairs of records that
are a unique match in one of the blocks. The sample size for Panel A is 4.52 million and the sample
size for Panel B is 4.90 million.




Table 4. Performance Measures of Classifiers
     Model              Accuracy (%)                 Efficiency (%)        Processing Time (min)
   XGBoost                  91.95                         89.95                    16.72
Gradient boosting           91.74                         89.54                    28.45
   Neural nets              90.01                         86.86                     4.06
 Random forest              89.18                         81.85                     8.97
 Logit regression           87.59                         80.35                     0.31

Notes: The analysis is performed on a subset of the Family Tree data. Accuracy is the fraction of
identified matches that are true matches. Efficiency is the fraction of possible true matches that
were identified. Processing time provides a relative measure of speed based on a representative run
of the training data. In this case, the processing time represents the time it takes to train the
classifier and run predictions on a dataset of 838,407 comparisons, with 43,800 true matches and
794,607 false matches. We use 80% of the data to train the model and 20% as a test set to get the
measures of accuracy and efficiency.




                                                                                                  30
Table 5. Contributions of the Different Methods Used to Link Records

                                          1900-1910                            1910-1920
 Method                           Matches        New Matches           Matches        New Matches
 Family Tree data                4,567,392         4,567,392          4,912,838         4,912,838
 ABE                            17,093,182        14,665,647         21,811,611        19,064,068
 XGBoost                        26,855,325        14,845,508         29,063,701        19,028,103
 Household matching             13,656,233         2,364,018          6,710,830         2,593,163
 Dyad matching                  12,846,431          548,382          25,085,386         4,214,342
 ABE (second time)                961,544           656,070           3,424,294         1,111,118
 FamilySearch hints             23,527,806         3,712,348         30,578,568         2,036,346
 Implied from 1900-1920          3,087,749         1,335,657          2,579,389         1,847,714
 Total                                            42,695,022                           54,807,692
 Match rate                                          67.8%                                71.4%

Notes: Table summarizes the full Census Tree data set. "Matches" indicates the total number of
matches created at each step of the iterative matching process. "New Matches" indicates the
number of additional matches added to the cumulative total. The match rate is the total number of
unique matches divided by the number of individuals in the later census that could have a match in
the earlier census (see the Appendix for details).




Table 6. Match Rates by Relationship Type

                                 1900-1910                                 1910-1920
                        Matches         Match Rate (%)            Matches         Match Rate (%)
 Male head            10,089,985             59.8               12,838,744             64.0
 Female head           1,191,723             50.6                1,523,930             55.1
 Spouse                7,862,816             51.8               10,670,849             57.7
 Sons                  7,524,531             67.2                9,594,710             74.0
 Daughters             6,769,585             64.4                8,733,776             72.7
 Other males           2,167,038             38.4                2,596,060             39.5
 Other females         1,894,616             40.9                2,380,334             44.6

Notes: Table summarizes the full Census Tree data set. Each of the rows is mutually exclusive and
based on the relationship to the household head that was reported in the later census record. The
match rate is the total number of unique matches divided by the number of individuals in the later
census that could have a match in the earlier census (see the Appendix for details).




                                                                                                     31
Table 7. Summary Statistics for Matched and Unmatched Records in the 1910 and 1920 Censuses

                                         1910 Census                                              1920 Census
                         Matched        Unmatched        Unmatched                 Matched        Unmatched         Unmatched
                         to 1900                       (No Immigrants)             to 1910                        (No Immigrants)
 Female                   0.471             0.498           0.520                   0.475             0.509            0.515
                         [0.499]           [0.500]         [0.500]                 [0.499]           [0.500]          [0.500]
 White                    0.916             0.855           0.839                   0.917             0.853            0.845
                         [0.278]           [0.352]         [0.368]                 [0.276]           [0.354]          [0.361]
 Black                    0.081             0.129           0.148                   0.079             0.134            0.141
                         [0.273]           [0.335]         [0.355]                 [0.270]           [0.340]          [0.348]
 Married                  0.511             0.511           0.515                   0.524             0.547            0.546
                         [0.500]           [0.500]         [0.500]                 [0.499]           [0.498]          [0.498]
 Household head           0.312             0.264           0.272                   0.318             0.282            0.285
                         [0.463]           [0.441]         [0.445]                 [0.466]           [0.450]          [0.451]
 Age                      34.55             32.32           32.98                   35.43             33.19            33.40
                         [17.38]           [15.44]         [16.01]                 [17.70]           [15.49]          [15.72]
 Born in US               0.874             0.718           0.828                   0.879             0.722            0.769
                         [0.331]           [0.450]         [0.377]                 [0.326]           [0.448]          [0.421]
 At least one parent      0.712             0.587           0.677                   0.721             0.580            0.618
   born in US            [0.453]           [0.492]         [0.468]                 [0.449]           [0.494]          [0.486]
 Lives in birth state     0.665             0.467           0.539                   0.651             0.496            0.529
                         [0.471]           [0.499]         [0.498]                 [0.477]           [0.500]          [0.499]

 N                        39,805,878        30,000,265       26,010,807             46,778,504     30,944,708         29,024,181
Notes: Data are from the full Census Tree data set and from the 100% samples of the 1910 and 1920 decennial census. The terms
"matched" and "unmatched" refers to whether we are able to link the individuals to a record in the previous census. The columns marked
"No Immigrants" exclude individuals who immigrated after the previous census had taken place. Columns 1, 2, and 3 report summary
statistics for the 1910 census. Columns 4, 5, and 6 report summary statistics for the 1920 census. All samples are restricted to individuals
who are at least 11 years old in the latter census. Standard deviations reported in brackets.




                                                                                                                                          32
Appendix: Calculating the Match Rate

        Here we describe the procedure for calculating the number of matches we could possibly

make between two censuses, for use in calculating match rates. For a pair of censuses, we begin

with the number of people in the latter survey. We then subtract the number of people in the

census whose information indicates that they either were born or immigrated since the previous

census. We also account for the undercount in the previous census, as we will not be able to create

a match between people in the latter census who were not enumerated in the former. Our numbers

for the undercount are based on the estimates found in Hacker (2013). The numbers used to

calculate the potential number of matches are shown in Appendix Table 8. We estimate that we

could potentially find 63.0 million links between the 1900 and 1910 censuses (92.2 ­ 20.4 ­ 4.7 ­

4.1), and 76.7 million links between 1910 and 1920 (106.5 ­ 22.3 ­ 2.2 ­ 5.3).



Appendix Table 8. Number of Possible Matches

                                                                     Number
            Number of                           Number Born         Immigrated        Number of
            Records in      Number Under-        Since Prior        Since Prior        Possible
             Census          Enumerated            Census             Census           Matches
 1900          76.2             4.1                 32.5                5.5
 1910          92.2             5.3                 20.4                4.7               63.0
 1920         106.5             6.9                 22.3                2.2               76.7

Notes: All numbers are in millions. The number under-enumerated is calculated using the estimates
in Hacker (2013).




                                                                                                    33
