                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE EFFICIENT DEPLOYMENT OF POLICE RESOURCES:
                       THEORY AND NEW EVIDENCE FROM
              A RANDOMIZED DRUNK DRIVING CRACKDOWN IN INDIA

                                       Abhijit Banerjee
                                        Esther Duflo
                                       Daniel Keniston
                                         Nina Singh

                                      Working Paper 26224
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26224


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




We thank John Firth and Pankaj Verma for their outstanding contributions as research assistants
on this project, and the Rajasthan Research Institute for coordinating data collection. We are
grateful to the JPAL Governance Initiative for financial support. Thanks to Steven Berry, Mira
Frick, Debray Ray, Nicholas Ryan and Christopher Udry for helpful suggestions, and seminar
participants at Auburn Univ., Boston Univ., the Univ. of Chicago, Oxford Univ., Stanford Univ.,
Harvard Univ., Univ. of Pennsylvania, Northwestern Univ., LSE, LSU, and Yale Univ. for
comments. The findings and opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
in any way engage the responsibility of the Rajasthan Police, nor do they necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Daniel Keniston, and Nina Singh. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Efficient Deployment of Police Resources: Theory and New Evidence from a Randomized
Drunk Driving Crackdown in India
Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Daniel Keniston, and Nina Singh
NBER Working Paper No. 26224
September 2019
JEL No. D83,K42,O18

                                           ABSTRACT

Should police activity be narrowly focused and high force, or widely-dispersed but of
moderate intensity? Critics of intense "hot spot" policing argue it primarily displaces, not
reduces, crime. But if learning about enforcement takes time, the police may take advantage of
this period to intervene intensively in the most productive location. We propose a multi-armed
bandit model of criminal learning and structurally estimate its parameters using data from a
randomized controlled experiment on an anti-drunken driving campaign in Rajasthan, India. In
each police station, sobriety checkpoints were either rotated among 3 locations or fixed in the
best location, and the intensity of the crackdown was cross-randomized. Rotating checkpoints
reduced night accidents by 17%, and night deaths by 25%, while fixed checkpoints had no
significant effects. In structural estimation, we show clear evidence of driver learning and
strategic responses. We use these parameters to simulate environment-specific optimal
enforcement policies.

Abhijit Banerjee                                  Daniel Keniston
Department of Economics, E52-540                  Louisiana State University
MIT                                               Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive                                 2325 Business Education Complex South
Cambridge, MA 02142                               501 South Quad Drive
and NBER                                          Baton Rouge, LA 70803
banerjee@mit.edu                                  and NBER
                                                  dkeniston@lsu.edu
Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E52-544                  Nina Singh
MIT                                               IPS
50 Memorial Drive                                 Additional Director General of Police (ADGP)
Cambridge, MA 02142                               State Police Headquarters
and NBER                                          Jaipur, Rajasthan
eduflo@mit.edu                                    Pin 302015
                                                  India
                                                  ninasingh89@gmail.com




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2343
1    Introduction
How to deploy limited law enforcement resources to maximal e ect is one of the central
questions of law and economics. One perspective advocates intense, pre-announced
crackdowns, to take advantage of potential increasing returns from higher arrest
probabilities on criminal activity (Eeckhout et al., 2010; Ross, 1993). Others argue
that unless it is possible to police all locations all the time, the deployment should be
randomized over time and across the potential locations where the wrongdoing could
take place, because otherwise the wrongdoers would simply switch to the unpoliced
locations and continue their activities with impunity (Clarke and Weisburd, 1994;
Mookherjee and Png, 1994).
    However this is only true in the full Nash Equilibrium. Potential criminals need to
know the strategy the police are following in order to undo it. At the onset of short,
intensive crackdowns, lawbreakers may not be aware that they are being policed and
therefore continue to frequent their most favored locations, in which case the police
will stop the most criminals by concentrating their e orts on the most crime-prone
locations. Moreover, even after criminals actually find out that those locations are
being policed, they may assume that the intervention was temporary if, in their past
experience, policing strategies involved temporary crackdowns. In that case they will
continue to frequent their favored location for a while, until they are persuaded that
the checking will continue long enough that it is worth changing behavior. Until such
a time as this switch happens, it is optimal to continue to police the location that
the law breakers have traditionally favored.
    Therefore if the police are planning a new initiative involving monitoring hitherto
unpoliced locations for a fixed period of time, it is not clear whether they should
simply focus on the most popular location or randomize across many potential locations.
The answer will depend on, among other things, the speed of learning and potential
criminals' beliefs about the duration of enforcement. If people learn about the new
initiative fast enough, then randomizing enforcement across locations is optimal. On
the other hand, if people learn slowly the police are better o focusing on the areas
that most lawbreakers prefer.
    In this paper we use a randomized field experiment combined with a structural
model of learning to examine this issue. We study the e ects of an anti-drunk
driving crackdown in the Indian state of Rajasthan which was implemented in a


                                           2
randomized fashion. Road safety is emerging as one of the top public health problems
in developing countries, and although the precise share of accidents due to alcohol is
unknown, it is likely to be important. Until recently, (Habyarimana and Jack, 2011)
road safety did not receive as much attention as other policing and health issues, and
there is thus considerable uncertainty about the best way to organize police action
against drunk driving.
    This project was undertaken in collaboration with the Rajasthan police, who
invested in equipment and resources to fight drunk driving but were uncertain about
the right way to organize the campaign. In some areas, chosen at random, only
the route judged most conducive for catching drunken drivers was chosen for the
crackdown­we refer to these as "fixed" checkpoints. In others, checkpoints were
randomly assigned across the three most promising routes­we refer to these as the
"rotating" checkpoints. In yet other areas no crackdown was implemented, allowing
us to evaluate the e ectiveness of the crackdown itself. The intensity of the crackdown
was also varied in two di erent ways. First, police stations involved in the intervention
were randomly assigned to have 1, 2 or 3 checkpoints per week in their jurisdictions.
Second, the duration of the crackdown was varied, with some stations randomly
ending enforcement up to one month earlier than others. Finally, incentives for the
policemen for doing those checks e ectively were also varied at random.
    The experimental results clearly show that checking works. Over the two to three
months duration of the crackdown and the subsequent three months, the number of
deaths from accidents at night (when the checking took place) decreased by about
25% in all treatment stations relative to the control stations. There was essentially
no change in the number of deaths during the day time. The number of accidents at
night also went down by about 17%, though there was some marginally significant
increase in non-fatal accidents in day time. This salutary e ect comes mainly from the
rotating check locations. Those e ects are much larger, only those are significant, and
in the case of accidents the di erence with fixed checkpoints is statistically significant.
    We can start to understand the reason for the greater e ectiveness of the rotating
checks when we look at the number of drunk drivers caught each night of checking.
Since fixed checks are conducted at the location best suited to catch drunken drivers,
absent avoidance e ects, there should be more drunk drivers caught for fixed checks.
In fact we see the opposite: after the first 2 weeks there are marginally fewer (rather
than more) vehicles with a drunk driver apprehended at the fixed checkpoints. Furthermore,


                                          3
with fixed checks the number of drunken drivers apprehended per night goes down
with the number and intensity of past check, while these e ects are absent with
rotating checks. This is consistent with the view that drunk drivers are still savvy
enough to switch to other routes, which is what gives random checks their advantage
over fixed checks.
    This pattern of choices suggests that prospective drunken drivers are learning
about police behavior, but allow for the possibility that the behavior changes over
time, much as in a Restless Bandit model of learning. Some corroborating evidence
that learning matters comes from looking at the post-intervention period. First, the
e ect on accidents of the rotating intervention continues over ninety days after the
intervention was concluded. The e ect on deaths is also of the same magnitude as that
in the intervention period, though not significant. Second, the di erence between fixed
and rotating checks is even larger after the intervention period, consistent with the
idea that the end of checking is easier to detect with a fixed intervention. Overall, the
reduced form evidence is consistent that learning is su ciently fast that a campaign
that rotates across locations dominates one that focuses on the most crime-prone
areas.
    The data from the experiment are suggestive of a more general model of drunken
driver behavior that could be applied towards calculating the optimal crackdown
strategy. To inform this counterfactual policy choice, we develop a multi-armed
Bandit model of driver behavior in which drivers choose actions both to maximize
static payo s as well as to learn about police strategies. We fit this model to
the experimental data and structurally estimate the parameters of driver's initial
beliefs and payo s. These parameters, in turn, allow us to evaluate counterfactual
enforcement strategies and select the one which would be most e ective in preventing
drunken driving. This contribution is, to our knowledge, the first time a Bandit
model of learning has been applied in the policing literature, despite many informal
discussions implying the same underlying logic.
    The structural model specifies agents' preferences for drunken driving as a function
of their static utility of drunken driving in various locations, and their beliefs about
the intensity and duration of police activity. Agents' strategies involve maximizing
their static utility, and gaining information about police activity that will decrease
the future danger of getting caught; we solve for these optimal policies using value
function iteration. Using these policies, we can simulate the behavior of a large


                                           4
number of agents (in each police station) as they encounter the set of checkpoints
implemented during the anti-drunken driving campaign and adjust their beliefs and
behaviors accordingly. We then match these simulated behaviors with data on road
accidents and drunken drivers apprehended. Since the actual implementation of the
checkpoints was imperfect and potentially endogenous, we construct moments using
the randomly assigned checkpoint schedule as an instrument and find parameters of
drivers' preferences and beliefs that minimize the resulting GMM criterion function.
    Overall, our structural results confirm the qualitative findings implied by the
reduced form results: drivers' estimated priors about the intensity of checking in the
most preferred location are nearly uninformative, implying that they rapidly update
their beliefs about the intensity of police enforcement in that location after just a
single encounter. While drivers initially believe that, on average, the crackdown will
last about 3 days, their high disutility of getting stopped by police ensures that a
strong deterrence e ect persists long after the checkpoints have ended and agents'
beliefs about the probability of apprehension have decreased substantially. The
parameters suggest that displacement of drunken driving is heterogeneous: increased
checking in the preferred location decreases drunken driving in the 2nd location, but
displaces criminal activity towards the less popular 3rd location.
    With these structural parameters in hand, we can evaluate the e ectiveness of
potential counterfactual enforcement policies. We find that, given the beliefs held by
drivers in Rajasthan at the time of the beginning of our intervention, the optimal
crackdown would have been longer than the sobriety campaign actually implemented
(82 days) and would have put 35% of the checkpoints on the most preferred road,
similar to the actual rotating intervention. This long duration is necessary to convince
drivers that the police are in fact checking on all roads­even those in which the
population initially has very low expectations of finding a checkpoint. However, this
is because we start from the premise that we have a one-o intervention. If such
interventions happened regularly, in the long run equilibrium the population would
probably have close to correct beliefs about the intensity and duration of the police
checkpoint strategy. In this case, the optimal campaign duration is much shorter­21
days, and highly focused with 75% of checkpoints on the preferred road. In this
scenario, the police's main goal is simply to demonstrate that the crackdown has
begun through a "show of force" on the most commonly traveled road. Finally,
we consider how pre-announcing the beginning of the campaign would a ect the


                                           5
design and impact of the campaign. An initial announcement has a moderate e ect
when drivers' beliefs are as measured in the actual intervention, but if drivers have
equilibrium beliefs the announcement of the campaign is fully e ective in ending
drunken driving for the duration of the campaign and afterwards.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides some
background on drunk driving and law enforcement against drunk driving in India.
Section 3 describes our experiment. Section A1 presents a tractable model illustrating
the factors a ecting driver behavior and police e ectiveness. Sections 4 and 5 present
the data and reduced form results of the experiment. The structural estimation
technique and results are presented in Section 6, along with the implications for the
optimal policy. Finally, Section 7 concludes.


2    Background: Enforcing Drunk Driving
Each year 1.35 million people die in tra c accidents worldwide, with as many as 50
million injured. A staggering 90% of these deaths happen in developing countries
(World Health Organization, 2018). Moreover, death and accident rates are rapidly
increasing in developing countries even though these rates are falling in the developed
world (Davis et al., 2003; Peden et al., 2004). By 2030, tra c accidents will be
the third or fourth most important contributor to the global disease burden, and
will account for 3.7% of deaths worldwide, twice the projected share for malaria
(Habyarimana and Jack, 2011). The role of alcohol in road accidents is di cult to
measure, especially in developing countries where police often lack the manpower
and technology to measure drivers' alcohol levels. The available evidence suggests,
however, that alcohol does play a major role in tra c accidents. According to a
review of studies conducted in low-income countries, alcohol is a factor in between
33% and 69% of fatally injured drivers, and between 8% and 29% of drivers who were
involved in crashes but not fatally injured (World Health Organization, 2004).
    Sobriety checkpoints have been evaluated by a number of studies in a wide variety
of contexts, and the general consensus is that these checkpoints significantly reduce
tra c accidents and fatalities. Several recent meta-analyses (Peek-Asa, 1999; Erke
et al., 2009; Elder et al., 2002) suggest that sobriety checkpoint programs reduce
accidents by about 17% to 20%, and tra c fatalities by roughly the same amount.
These results are not entirely conclusive, however, because most of the existing

                                          6
literature has struggled with a variety of challenges and limitations. First, to our
knowledge no previous research has used a randomized trial, raising concerns of
endogeneity based on the location and timing of the interventions. Second, the
vast majority of research has been conducted in developed countries, and consists
of increases in checkpoints over and above what is already a relatively high standard
of enforcement. Thus little is known about the impact of carryout out sobriety
checkpoints in a low income context, or versus a counterfactual of essentially zero
enforcement.
    The law and economics and crime prevention literatures, recently reviewed by
Chalfin and McCrary (2017), have investigated the impact of crackdowns more broadly,
often under the rubric of "hot-spot" policing. Much of the literature argues for
increasing returns in enforcement e ort: switching from broad but low-level policing
to more focused and intense patrols can be e ective in reducing crime (Weisburd and
Telep, 2014). Perhaps the strongest experimental evidence comes from the Sherman
and Weisburd (1995) evaluation of the Minneapolis hot spot policing experiment, a
randomized field trial that led to a 25%-50% decrease in disorder events in hot spots
that received roughly twice as many police patrols as control areas. A natural concern
(Sherman, 1990) lies in the possibility of crime being displaced to other locations-if
criminals are relatively mobile and do not have strong preferences over locations, then
crackdowns may simply shift crime from one place to another and not decrease overall
lawbreaking. Here, experimental evidence is mixed. While some studies find limited
displacement e ects of foot patrols in crime hotspots into surrounding areas, (Ratcli e
et al., 2011) others find that crime in control areas near hotspots actually decreased
relative to more distant control areas (Weisburd and Green, 1995; Dell, 2015). The
only such study conducted with police outside a high income country, Blattman et al.
(2017) finds suggestive evidence of displacement of property crime away from streets
with randomly increased police patrols in Bogota, but little displacement of violent
crime. More evidence on displacement comes from recent work in Chile by Andres
and Mobarak (2019), who show that vendors learn to disguise illegal fish sales from
regulators and argue that more intense enforcement facilitates this learning. This
heterogeneity in results is perhaps not surprising, since displacement e ects depend
heavily the location-specificity of the crime and the police enforcement approach, in
particular the length of the crackdown.
    One of the factors potentially driving the success of hot-spot policing is the


                                          7
"experiential" e ect: that (potential) criminals learn from their encounters with the
police. Several recent studies (Anwar and Loughran, 2011; Wilson et al., 2017) model
this learning in a Bayesian framework, showing evidence that encounters with the
police cause individuals to update their beliefs on the probability of detection. While
this literature studies learning, it does not model the "exploration" incentive­that
individuals are interested in "seeing what they can get away with". Moreover robust
evidence on the speed of criminal learning about specific police initiatives remains
lacking. Sherman (1990) argues that many of the non-experimental drunken driving
crackdowns show post-project decreases in accidents lasting even longer than the
projects themselves. However, other studies find that program e ects are short-
lived and disappear quickly after the intervention (Weisburd and Telep, 2014). Thus
the ability of lawbreakers to adjust to police behavior-both in terms of reducing or
shifting criminal behavior during a crackdown and in terms of returning to criminal
behavior after a crackdown-remains a central and open empirical question in the field
of criminal behavior.
    Finally, this study relates to a large theoretical and empirical literature on estimating
models of learning (reviewed by Ching et al. (2017) and Foster and Rosenzweig (2010)
in the context of developing countries). This paper di ers from much of the existing
criminology and development economics literature in that we estimate a structural
learning model and apply it to the determination of optimal policy (for an exception
in a very di erent context, see Bai, 2018). In contrast to the marketing and industrial
organization literature, we use variation induced by a randomized experiment, rather
than cross-market conditions. The structure of the learning model di ers from the
previous literature as well: instead of learning about a fixed parameter, such as the
quality of a product, agents in our model learn about a police crackdown in which
the intensity of enforcement varies over time in a correlated manner across di erent
checkpoint locations.


2.1    Drunken Driving Enforcement in India
In India, highway safety laws of all kinds are generally enforced by fixed checkpoints
manned by personnel from the local police station. Police in our intervention used the
"selective breath checkpoint" methodology: barriers were arranged on the roadway,
and o cers signaled selected vehicles to pull over as they passed through the barriers.


                                            8
Police personnel then questioned the driver on their identity, destination, etc., while
observing the driver's demeanor and smelling their breath. If the police suspected
the driver to be drunk, then according to the o cial procedure they would order
them to blow into a breathalyzer, following the results of which the driver was either
charged or released.1 The printed results of a handheld breathalyzer are considered
su cient proof of drunkenness in court. Once caught, drunken drivers' vehicles were
confiscated by the police, and the driver was required to appear in court to pay a fine
or potentially face jail time, although imprisonment is never observed in our data.
The fine amount depends largely on the judgment of the local magistrate, with a
maximum fine of Rs. 2000 (roughly $50) for the first o ense. The driver must then
return to the police station to recover the vehicle from the police parking lot.
    Even this o cial procedure leaves many factors to the discretion of the police, in
particular the choice of how many, and which, vehicles to pull over for questioning and
potential testing. Ideally the police should target vehicles with the highest probability
of drunkenness, and in conversations the police often noted that if they saw a vehicle
with a family, or driven by elderly people they assumed that the driver would be
unlikely to be drunk and let it pass. Unscrupulous police o cers are faced with
another decision: whether to follow the o cial ticketing procedure or instead to
solicit (or accept) a bribe from the accused drunken driver. However, as long as our
crackdown strategies do not di erentially a ect the integrity of the police,2 the legality
of the punishment received by arrested drunken drivers is not key to understanding
which enforcement strategy would be most e ective. Drivers expecting either a bribe
or a formal citation face a strong incentive to avoid being arrested for inebriated
driving.
    Sobriety checks of this kind were extremely rare prior to the intervention and
in the control police stations during the intervention. Outside the intervention,
breathalyzers had not been widely distributed and without a breathalyzer it would
have been extremely di cult for the police to prosecute a suspected drunken driver.
As a result, with the exception of some police stations in Jaipur, the state capital, the
police essentially did not implement sobriety check points. We observe that during the
experiment control police stations hardly ever used them to carry out checkpoints.
  1
    This protocol is commonly used in US sobriety checkpoints as well.(Elder et al., 2002)
  2
    We examine this issue in Section 5 using data from courts and find no relationship between
checkpoint strategy and legal prosecution of drunken drivers.



                                              9
In the 925 nights that surveyors visited control police stations, on only 7 (0.76%)
occasions did they witness the police carrying out a checkpoint.
    Conversations with the police and our personal observations at the checkpoints
suggest that all suspects knew that driving under the influence was illegal, though
many seemed quite surprised to encounter a checkpoint with a breathalyzer. Thus
when interpreting the quantitative magnitudes of the reduced form parameters, we
should bear in mind the context of no previous enforcement. Specific results might
di er if the experiment had been done in an area with a long history of sobriety
checkpoints, although we argue that the qualitative evidence of learning and displacement
reveal more general facts about law enforcement. The structural estimation allows us
address this question more directly by estimating optimal enforcement policies both
with drivers' beliefs as estimated from the context of the intervention, and also with
beliefs that are in expectation correct, as one would imagine in areas where citizens
are very familiar with police strategies.


3    The Intervention
The anti-drunken driving program was implemented as a large-scale randomized
control trial (RCT), consisting of a control group (with no program) and an intervention
group with three overlapping experiments, each varying a di erent aspect of how the
campaign was implemented:
    First, the location of the checkpoints was randomized into one of two strategies:
either the spot best suited to preventing accidents due to drunken driving according to
the police, or rotated among three locations, with each night's site chosen at random.
All locations were chosen by the local chief of police as the best suited to catching
drunken drivers. Second, the frequency of the checkpoints was randomized to be 0
(for control stations), 1, 2, or 3 nights per week. Third, the duration of the program
was randomized: the crackdown phased out in certain stations up to a month prior
to the end in other stations. In all interventions, checkpoints were held from 7:00pm
to 10:00pm which was when peak drunk driving took place according to the police.
    The program took place in two phases, an initial pilot, from September-early
October 2010, and a larger roll-out from September to the end of November 2011.
The initial pilot covered 2 districts and 40 police stations, and the second covered 11
districts and 183 police stations serving a territory of 125,000 km2 with a population

                                          10
of approximately 30 million. Treatment status was assigned randomly, stratified by
district, whether a station was located on a national highway, and total accidents
between 2008-2010. The assignment of police stations to treatment groups during
both rounds of the intervention is reported in Table 1. The 2010 and 2011 interventions
were identical in implementation, with the exception that in 2010 all checkpoints
occurred twice a week and the program lasted at most 1.5 months. In the analysis
and results stated below, we combine data from both intervention periods and control
for any time trends using month fixed e ects.
    Together with the enforcement strategy RCT, we also randomly varied the incentives
of the personnel carrying out the checkpoint. Checkpoints were sta ed by either
police o cers from the local police station (the status quo outside the intervention)
or a dedicated team selected from the police reserve force and monitored by GPS
devices installed in their vehicles. The design is summarized in Table 1, and in the
remainder of this section we explain the design choices in detail.


3.1    Checkpoint locations
To test the central theory of learning by potential and actual drunken drivers, we
randomly assigned police stations to hold checkpoints at either a single location, or
a rotating set of three locations. Before randomization, the police chief selected and
rank-ordered the three best spots to catch drunken diver in their area. In the fixed
location group, the checkpoints were always carried out at the best location, at the
same time, and to the greatest degree possible, on the same day every week, although
scheduling di culties occasionally made this impossible. In contrast, rotating checkpoints
moved among the three best locations for catching drunken drivers. Each police
station's rotation was predetermined in advance by the research team.
    The di erences among locations, in particular that the third best location usually
has far fewer passing vehicles than the first, a ect our analysis of these two program
options. In regressions estimating the overall impact of the di erent strategies we
consider the entire area under the police's jurisdiction and we do not control for
checkpoint location fixed e ects or characteristics, since these are themselves an
outcome of the program choice. In the structural estimation of the learning model,
however, we allow the public's preferences and beliefs about checkpoint probability to
di er across the 3 locations in order to see how public behavior at a specific checkpoint


                                          11
responds to the enforcement strategy.


3.2     Checkpoint frequency and duration
The variation in checkpoint frequency was designed to identify the shape of the
relationship between the intensity of police enforcement and driver behavior. Discussions
with the police determined that it was not feasible to carry out more than 3 checkpoints
per week per police station, thus giving us the final randomization categories of 1, 2,
or 3 checkpoints per week (and, of course, 0 in the control group). These frequencies
were at the police station level, not the road level; for example in a rotating group
police station with a frequency of 2 checkpoints per week, each of the three roads
would have a checkpoint twice every three weeks.
    The date of the last checkpoint, and hence the duration of the crackdown, was also
randomized at the police station level. In the shorter, September 2010 intervention
stations phased out randomly over the first 2 weeks of October. In the longer,
2011 intervention, some police stations stopped checks after two months (Sept.-Oct.),
while others continued for a full three months (Sept.-Nov.). This variation assists in
separately identifying the post-intervention e ects of the crackdown from any seasonal
trends in drunken driving, since at the same date di erent stations had either ceased
to hold checkpoints or were continuing them. It also gives us more insights into
potential drunken drivers' return to driving under the influence: in early December
2011 we conducted one final round of checks. At this point some stations had not
carried out a prior checkpoint for a over a month, whereas others had performed
checks only a few days earlier3 .


3.3     Checkpoint personnel
Previous work with the Indian government (Banerjee et al. (2008)) and the Rajasthan
Police (Banerjee et al. (2012)) suggests that the implementation of government initiatives
often decreases dramatically in the medium term if the civil servants implementing
the project are not su ciently motivated. To gain further insight on the role of
monitoring and motivation in project implementation, as well as to guard against a
failure of the project due poor implementation, the anti-drunken driving campaign
   3
    At the final check, the duration of time since the last checkpoint ranged from 1 to 44 days in
di erent police stations.


                                               12
was carried out by two sets of police sta , with di erent motivation, monitoring, and
characteristics. In one group, checkpoints were manned by the sta of the police
stations under whose jurisdiction the checkpoint sites fell--the status quo in the
Rajasthan Police. The second group were drawn from the Police Lines, a reserve
force of police often considered to be a punishment posting. Police lines teams were
monitored by GPS devices in their vehicles, and were informed that good performance
on this assignment might improve their chances for transfer out of the police lines.
Generally we found that the police lines teams were more likely to carry out intended
check point. A complete analysis of this portion of the intervention is not within the
scope of this paper, but we control for it when relevant in the analysis of the other
branches of the intervention.


4     Data
To evaluate the e ects of the anti-drunken driving campaign we draw on a combination
of administrative data on road accidents and deaths, as well as data on vehicles passing
and stopped at checkpoints collected by surveyors hired for this program.


4.1    Administrative Data
This study's main results on accident and death rates are drawn from administrative
accident reports by the police. For each accident on which data has been collected
properly we know the police station, date and time of the incident, the number of
individuals killed or injured, and the types of vehicles involved. Unfortunately we do
not know whether drunken driving contributed to the accident, nor can we reliably
link accidents with the sobriety checkpoints.
    We obtained monthly accident data from August 2010 through October 2012 and
daily data from August 2010-December 2011. For January and February 2012 the
data is not disaggregated by day and night­which is unfortunate since the intervention
was always in the evening when most drunken driving presumably occurs. Our main
results exclude these two months, but we also show pooled results for day and night
together and then use the data from these two months.
    Summary statistics are presented in panel A of Table 2, with statistics presented
for control stations. The data, displayed at the police station/month level, shows


                                          13
that control police stations have roughly 0.12 accidents per day and 0.05 deaths. Of
these, roughly 1/3rd occur at night. For lack of a direct measure of accidents caused
by drunkenness the number of night accidents and deaths may provide an outcome
that varies more with the level of drunkenness than the overall total.


4.2    Survey Data
We supplemented the police administrative data with additional data on police activity
at the checkpoints collected by surveyors sent to monitor randomly selected checkpoint
locations. Surveyors visited both on nights when the police were conducting anti-
drunken driving checking and on nights when they were not, as well as at locations
that the control police stations had identified as the best checkpoint sites prior to
those stations being assigned to the control group. After arriving at the designated
stretch of road, the surveyor counted the number of passing vehicles, categorizing
them by type into motorcycles, cars, luxury cars, trucks, autorickshaws, buses, and
other. If the police were conducting a checkpoint, the surveyor also counted the
number of vehicles stopped and the number that proved to be drunk. Finally, the
surveyor recorded the arrival and departure dates of the police from the checkpoint
location.
    After the end of the usual monitoring of checkpoint and non-checkpoint locations
during the intervention, the surveyors also collected data from a special final round
of checkpoints held in the week immediately after the main portion of the program
had concluded. These checks were held once in all stations, regardless of earlier
treatment or control assignment, and they were always held at the location designated
as the second best location to catch drunken drivers. Hence in the fixed checkpoint
intervention stations (and the control stations) there had previously been no enforcement
at these specific locations, whereas in the rotating stations there had previously been
checking at these exact spots. On these nights police were asked to set aside their
normal practice of stopping only vehicles with a higher probability of containing
drunken drivers and conduct checks either randomly or at a fixed interval of cars (e.g.
one in ten get stopped). Surveyors were present for all of these final checks, where
they recorded the fraction of drunken drivers.
    The summary statistics of the data collected by these monitors is displayed in
panels B-D of Table 2. Panel B displays the number of vehicles passing by the check


                                          14
points on the average night, using surveyor counts from the locations identified by
the control police stations as where they would have carried out the checkpoints.
Fewer vehicles pass the second and third checkpoint locations than the first; this
is particularly noticeable in the medians. Overall, police stopped 13.1% of passing
vehicles, roughly 105 per checkpoint. The majority of these were motorcycles, of
which 11.5% or 40 per checkpoint were stopped. Panels D shows the e ectiveness of
the crackdown in catching drunken drivers in treatment stations: on average police
caught 1.85 drunk drivers per checkpoint, primarily motorcycles. Our best estimates
of the average fraction of drunken drivers in the underlying population come from
the final checking night when checks were conducted in a more systematic fashion
in control stations which had previously not had any enforcement activity. Panel E
shows the results from these checks: a 2.23% overall drunkenness rate, and a rate
of 3.36% for motorcyclists. Car drivers had substantially lower drunkenness rates,
perhaps partly due to the fact that many cars in India are driven by professional
chau eurs.


5    Reduced Form Predictions & Results
Driver actions, and hence accident and arrest rates, are a complex function of the
utility of drunken driving, the cost of encountering the police, and beliefs about the
intensity of checking, its status, and duration. However, much of the intuition behind
our results can be shown in a simplified model in which drivers choose only whether
to drink and drive on one road, learn only about whether the crackdown is permanent
or temporary, and follow very simple strategies. Suppose that all drivers are initially
unaware of the crackdown, and upon encountering the police for the first time choose
to cease drinking and driving for temporary period then resume. If they encounter
police a second time, they cease permanently. The police crackdown then a ects
drunken driving via three margins. First, it alerts drivers that enforcement is ongoing
and triggers their temporary sobriety period. Second, it a ects the length of the
sobriety period. Third, it a ects the share that are re-encountered and thus convinced
to permanently stop o ending. The police choice of intensity versus duration of the
crackdown, and their overall budget, a ects each of these margins di erently. For
brevity, we relegate the formal details of the model to Appendix Section A1.8, and
present its main results to guide interpretation of the reduced form findings.

                                          15
  1. Persistence: The impact of the crackdown will carry on after the last checkpoint
     is finished: some drivers will be temporarily sober, and others will have permanently
     ceased drinking and driving.

  2. Scope: A crackdown implemented on just one road will be less e ective than
     one implemented on all (or many) roads, even at a lower intensity, as long as
     drivers are strategic and learning is fast enough.

      (a) If drivers initially believe that police would (almost) never put checkpoints
          on alternate routes, the intensity of a fixed one-road crackdown will not
          matter for overall drunken driving, since no drivers are pushed into sobriety.
          Intensity does matter for multi-road checking, since higher intensity will
          clear the roads faster and (potentially) induce some drivers to permanently
          cease inebriated driving.

  3. Reversion and intensity: In equilibrium, drivers understand that the police face
     a binding budget constraint in which more intense crackdowns are necessarily
     shorter. So when potential criminals observe an intense crackdown they cease
     o ending for a shorter interval and thus a revert more rapidly to crime after
     the crackdown has ended.

  4. Reversion and scope: A crackdown implemented at many locations, forcing
     drivers into sobriety, will exhibit faster post-crackdown reversion to drinking
     and driving on the most preferred road than one in which drivers can avoid the
     police by drunken driving on an alternate route.

We test these predictions using reduced form results from OLS or fixed e ect (FE)
regressions of accidents and deaths on all program categories.
    We begin with a simple summary of the e ects of the program on accidents in
Table 3. The primary outcome is the number of accidents and deaths in the entire area
covered by the police station (including, but not restricted to, the 3 main roads on
which check points were to happen in rotating stations) during daylight, nighttime, or
both. All regressions are at the police station-month level, except in cases where the
intervention began or ended mid-month in which case we split the month into treated
and untreated observations and weight according to the number of days in each. Table
3 displays coe cients on the interaction between a treatment station dummy (any
treatment) and a dummy for during or 90 days post intervention, including police

                                          16
station and month fixed e ects. We find a significant decrease in the number of
nightly accidents (17%) and deaths (25%). There is no significant impact during the
day or in the merged day and night data (column 5), which is reassuring since all
the check points took place at night, though as we will comment later, there could
be a strategic reaction on the daily accidents. These coe cients imply that over the
17,616 station-nights of the crackdown and post-intervention period, approximately
70 deaths were averted because of the campaign.
    One of the main hypotheses of interest is the di erence between the e ectiveness
of rotating and fixed check points. Table 4 separates the treatment groups in these
two subgroups (pooling observations with di erent numbers of check points for the
time being), and, as before, interacting treatment indicators with variables denoting
dates during or after the intervention, controlling for month and police station fixed
e ects. This table makes clear that the impacts of the intervention on accidents and
death are largely driven by the rotating check points police stations. Accidents at
night went down by 29% and night deaths dropped 30% in these police stations, both
significant at the 10% or 5% level. In contrast, there are no significant impacts in the
fixed police stations and the point estimates are much smaller (2 to 8 times). The
di erence between fixed and rotating stations is significant for night time accidents,
though not for deaths. Note that there is an increase in day time accidents in rotating
police stations.
    Our learning model predicts that the e ect of the intervention should be increasing
over time, as more drivers notice the checkpoints and begin avoidance, and should
persist for some time after the intervention ends, since it is not clear it has ended
and many drivers will have been temporarily or permanently pushed into sobriety.
Table 5 provides evidence for these claims. We see that the decline in nighttime
accidents in rotating stations is almost equally strong both during and after the
intervention. Coe cients on nighttime deaths show a similar pattern, though they
are not significant. Interestingly, the disaggregated analysis in Table 5 shows an
increase in daylight accidents in rotating check stations during the intervention, but
no similar result in the fixed check stations. This may be due to dedicated drunken
drivers who shift their alcohol consumption earlier in the day in the rotating stations,
but can simply continue drunken driving at the same time on alternate routes in the
fixed stations. Overall, the evidence suggests that the basic insight of the crime and
punishment literature is very powerful: checking at rotating locations does lead to a


                                          17
greater reduction in accidents and deaths (the ultimate outcome the police wants to
a ect).
     Table 6 further decomposes the program e ect by the intensity of checking. As
the number of rotating checkpoints per week increases, the negative e ect on night
accidents increases (column 3), further demonstrating the e ectiveness of this intervention
strategy. The e ect of rotating monitoring on road deaths also increases from 1
to 2 checkpoints per week, though the coe cient on 3 checkpoints per week is
(insignificantly) smaller than 2 per week. The coe cients values do not suggest
increasing returns to intensity in this range of police enforcement although the standard
errors are large at this level of treatment disaggregation. As predicted by the model,
increased intensity has no e ect on night accidents or deaths in stations in police
stations with fixed checkpoints.
     We now turn to the data collected by surveyors on the number of drunken drivers
apprehended at the police checkpoints. Figure 9.1a shows the drunken drivers caught
during a given checkpoint night in fixed and rotating location, as a function of the
checkpoint frequency to which the station was assigned. We see that as long there
are 2 or more checks per week, more inebriated drivers seem to be caught at rotating
stations despite the fact that rotating checks are held in ex-ante worse locations.
Moreover, in fixed locations, the number of drivers caught per night of checking
declines with the intensity of checking (which was randomly assigned), while this is
not the case in the rotating location, suggesting that in the fixed interventions drivers
are shifting to alternative routes and doing so more when the frequency of checks is
higher but in the rotating intervention there was no alternative route to switch to.
     Even if learning is going on, fixed checks should apprehend more drunken drivers
than random checks at the start of checking since they are performed at the best
place. We investigate this in Figure 9.1b, which focuses only on week 1 and 2. At
one check point per week, this is what we find: the number of drunk drivers caught is
significantly greater in fixed. However this e ect disappears when checking becomes
more frequent. Even in the first two weeks, random checking does as well as the fixed
location in stations with 2 or more checks per week. This is probably because there
is learning already within the first two weeks and it is easier to learn about the fixed
location than when the location jumps around. In other words, people appear to
learn extremely fast about the police's strategy, especially when it is fixed and as a
result, random checks tend to dominate even early in the intervention period. Figure


                                          18
9.1c shows the data after 6 weeks, once learning is presumably complete: there is a
clear pattern where fewer and fewer drunks are caught per night when the checking
is more frequent at fixed locations, but not at random locations.
    Table 7 present the analogous regressions on the number of drunk drivers caught.
Column 1 shows that, on the average night, 0.13 more drunk drivers, or 10% more,
are caught at rotating check locations than in fixed locations. This number is not
significant, but note that without strategic behavior we should expect to see fewer,
rather than more drivers apprehended, since the rotating checkpoints are held at less
productive locations. That this is due to strategic avoidance behavior (rather than
by people drinking less) is strongly suggested by the result in column 2. In fixed
locations, the more frequent the checks, the fewer drunks are caught per night. That
e ect entirely disappears in random locations. Since we see no significant e ects of
the fixed checkpoint intervention on road accidents and deaths, these results suggest
changing routes is an attractive option for drivers, but there is no desirable route to
switch to in the case of rotating checks. Column 3 shows evidence of learning: as the
number of weeks passes, the di erence between fixed and rotating location increases.
Finally column 4 puts the two together, and shows that as the number of past checks
increases, the di erence between rotating and fixed grows. Both columns 3 and 4
include police station fixed e ects, so the impacts of di erent checking strategies over
time are estimated from entirely within-police station variation.4 Strikingly, these
results are robust to limiting the data to the 194 checkpoints held on road 1 in either
rotating stations with 3 checks per week, or fixed stations with 1 checkpoint per week.
In this sample, checkpoint 1 is manned once per week in both types of intervention,
but we still find a significant negative e ect of the number of previous checkpoints in
fixed stations, and no such e ect in rotating stations.
    Columns 5-8 of Table 7, presents the analogous regressions using the number of
passing cars and motorcycles as the outcome variable. Since these could be counted
by surveyors posted at potential checkpoint locations in the control stations, we can
estimate, in row 1, the overall impact of the intervention relative to no checking.
   4
    A potential concern is that many scheduled checkpoints did not occur due to police non-
compliance with the intervention. If this 'attrition' is correlated with the potential number of
drunken drivers caught, it may bias the estimates of program impacts. We test this by recoding
all nights when police did not perform a scheduled checkpoint as 0 drunk drivers caught. The
results, in Table A1 are qualitatively the same as those in Table 7. While the absolute magnitude
of coe cients in columns 3 and 4 are smaller, likely due to the introduced measurement error, the
signs and relative magnitudes are the same as in the main results.


                                               19
Column 5 shows that this impact is substantial: compared to control stations the
intervention caused a 28% decrease in vehicles passing the checkpoint locations. In
contrast to the impact on drunken drivers, these e ects are not significantly di erent
in rotating versus fixed checkpoint stations. Estimates without station fixed e ects
(Column 6) are too noisy to be informative, but once station FEs are introduced we
find very significant decreases in passing vehicles over time (columns 7, 8) in both the
rotating and fixed stations. The large magnitude of the decrease in passing vehicles
cannot be explained solely by drunken drivers, who probably comprise only 2-3% of all
tra c. However we do not know how non-drunken drivers perceived the checkpoints.
It could be that other violators (say drivers without a license) were also attempting
to avoid checkpoints. Or they might just be reacting to the delays and harassment
caused by the checkpoints. Understanding the sources of this reaction is important
for assessing the overall welfare implications of the intervention, but is beyond the
scope of this study.
    The checkpoint survey data provides more direct insights into the how the drivers
learn about the end of the intervention. Table 8 displays the results of the intervention
on the number of vehicles passing the former checkpoint sites on the nights after the
end of the intervention. Columns 1 and 2 show counts at the former checkpoint on
road 1; consistent with the theory we find 43%-50% fewer vehicles from both rotating
and fixed checks, approximately the same as during the intervention. Though evidence
of reversion is noisy, the coe cient in column 2 on the number of days since the final
checkpoint is much larger and close to significant only in police stations with rotating
checkpoints; this is consistent with the theoretical prediction that driver's avoidance
interval for location 1 is shorter when the checkpoints rotate because there is no easy
outside option that allows drunk drivers to avoid all checks. The theory also suggests
di erential e ects of rotating and fixed checks on roads 2 and 3, since drivers in fixed
stations will move to these routes while drivers in rotating checkpoint stations will
avoid them. Results in columns 3 and 4 confirm these predictions, with an increase
in passing drivers in fixed stations (though not significant, p = .166), and a decline
in rotating stations. As time passes after the intervention, the number of vehicles on
roads 2 and 3 significantly decreases in fixed stations, presumably as drivers revert to
their preferred route. Curiously however, we see no corresponding increase in passing
vehicles on road 1 as days go by after the intervention. In rotating stations we see no
signs of reversion.


                                           20
     Our final direct measure of the impact of the interventions occurred at the last
night of checking. As described above, this final check was always held at checkpoint
location #2, including in the fixed checkpoint stations and control stations which
had previously conducted them exclusively on route 1 (in the fixed stations) or never
(in the controls). This allows us to measure the displacement e ect even in the
fixed-location stations which, by definition, is only possible to do a single time before
a ecting the subsequent beliefs of drivers in that area. Since all checks in control
police stations were conducted by teams from the police lines, we control for the
type of police team conducting the checkpoint to avoid conflating the lines team and
control station e ects. Table 9 shows these results from the 109 police stations which
conducted this check. 5
     Consistent with earlier results, we find strong evidence of drunken drivers avoiding
checkpoints. Overall, the number of drunken drivers caught in a station with any
intervention is 67% lower than in the control stations. We do observe significant signs
of drivers returning to illegal drunkenness as time passes since the last crackdown, but
this is slow: at the estimated coe cient values it would take 91 days for the impact of
the crackdown to fully dissipate. Column 2 shows that the avoidance e ect increases
with the frequency of checking, and that overall reversion may be increasing with the
frequency of checking, although the reversion results are not significant. Results from
the rotating checkpoint stations (columns 3 and 4) are not substantially di erent,
with the exception that reversion may be slower and is significantly increasing in the
intensity of the crackdown. This confirms the model prediction that drivers temporary
intervals of sobriety are shorter with more intense checking (if they expect the police
to be budget constrained).
     Surprisingly, the results from fixed checkpoints also show very significant decreases
in final check drunken drivers relative to the control (columns 5, 6), even though final
checkpoints were at location #2, but in fixed stations there was only checking at
location #1. Thus one might have expected that checking on road 1 would lead to
displacement of drivers onto road 2. However, in fact the net e ect of checks on road
1 seems to have been to reduce them on roads 2 as well. As we will show below,
this result is not inconsistent with the model, since drivers might have had priors
   5
    Since only 109 stations actually conducted the final check (60% of the total), there is a potential
concern that compliance may be correlated with the intervention categories. Appendix Table A2
tests for di erential compliance across intervention branches. We find no evidence to suggest this
occurred.


                                                  21
that checking on road 2 would also be intense in the event of a crackdown. If they
occasionally travel both roads, and notice a checkpoint on road 1, they would then
conclude that any drunken driving might be too risky. These results highlight the
value of estimating crime displacement patterns, and developing a structural model
to interpret the results and design policy accordingly.
    In addition to our analyses of the main impacts of the anti-drunken driving
campaign and its reduced form e ects on driver behavior, for robustness we examine
several additional mechanisms and outcomes. These analyses are discussed at length
in Appendix Section A2 with tables in Appendix Section A3; here we briefly summarize
their results. We examine spillover e ects to nearby police stations, both in terms
of accidents and deaths, as well as the number of drunken drivers apprehended.
Consistent with relatively isolated and independent nature of police stations in rural
Rajasthan, we find no significant spillovers. If di erent treatment arms (particularly
the rotating vs. fixed interventions) were correlated with di erent police behavior
on other dimensions, this might a ect our interpretation of the results. We examine
the relationship between the intervention and police implementation of checkpoints,
as well as the share of drunken drivers who paid a fine in court (a proxy for lack of
police misconduct). Neither outcome is significantly di erent between rotating and
fixed interventions, although we find that police implementation in 3 checkpoints per
week stations is lower than in less intense interventions. Finally, we examine the
possibility that individuals might also learn about police activity while driving sober
or though social learning from friends. If this were the case, we might expect a very
rapid decrease in drivers caught the day or two after a checkpoint as news spreads
rapidly, even if only a few individuals personally witnessed the checkpoint. In fact, we
find no particularly strong e ects of checkpoints in the very short-term. Thus while
we cannot fully rule out forms of learning outside the model, we find no evidence of
their implications in the data.


6     Structural Estimation
6.1    Empirical Model
While the simplified model introduced in Section 5 (and formally presented in Section
A1.8) suggests the mechanisms behind drivers' and police decisions, estimating the


                                          22
parameters of drivers' preferences and beliefs and designing the optimal police enforcement
strategy requires a more detailed model of driver behavior. First, let the utility that
agents receive from drunken driving be dr for r oe {1, 2, 3}, the roads potentially
checked by police. If they encounter the police, agents experience disutility c.6
Drivers are uncertain about police checking intensity on each road; driver i's beliefs
about the probability of encountering a checkpoint on road r at night t is distributed
     1            2
Beta ­irt
        /     /
          , --irt   , where ­irt
                             /
                                 and --irt
                                       /
                                           are the parameters of the Beta distribution with
                                       1             2
expected intensity /irt = ­irt    /     /
                                    / ­irt + --irt
                                               /
                                                   . Similarly, we assume drivers believe
that the crackdown has some probability of ending each night, with this probability
distributed Beta (­it
                    ÷     ÷
                      , --it ) with expectation ÷it = ­it   ÷
                                                              / (­it
                                                                   ÷
                                                                      + --it
                                                                           ÷
                                                                              ). Both /irt and ÷it are
defined as conditional on the checking being ongoing at the start of the current period.
Finally, drivers have beliefs about the probability
                                                3Ó               that a crackdown        4  is currently
                                                                Ô3
ongoing, fiit . These 12 variables, it =            /        /
                                                   ­irt , --irt       , ­it , --it , fiit constitute the
                                                                         ÷      ÷
                                                                 r =1
state variables in the driver's decision problem.

6.1.1    Choice Probabilities

At the beginning of each period, agents choose whether to drink and drive, and if
so on which road, or take an alternative action which we refer to as abstaining from
drinking and driving by staying at home.7 They perform their highest-utility action,
taking into account possible value of information, and observe the results: if they
drink and drive they may witness a check point, while if they remain home they learn
nothing about police activity on that night. Based upon these observations, they
update their beliefs on the state of checking during period t. Their posterior beliefs
are then adjusted for the possibility ÷it that the crackdown ended between periods,
and these beliefs become the priors in the next period, it+1 .
    Consistent with the implementation of anti-drunken driving campaign by the
Rajasthan police, we assume that drivers are not aware of the start date of the
   6
      The c parameter encompasses multiple factors a ecting driver's disutility of encountering a
checkpoint: their subjective probability of being detected by the police, their costs in time and
money if they are detected, the time and anxiety of waiting to be inspected at a checkpoint even
if not detected, etc. Since our experiment is not well-suited to disentangle these factors, we simply
model the aggregate expected disutility.
    7
      Our primary approach thus assumes that the cost of exploratory driving while sober is always
above the return it would generate, and thus does not include this option. We examine this issue in
further detail below.




                                                  23
enforcement.8 This implies that, until they encounter the first checkpoint on the
road, drivers' beliefs remain constant. Period 0 beliefs about the duration of the
crackdown (÷i0 ) should therefore be interpreted as pertaining to the remaining period
of the enforcement campaign. In control police stations, where drivers never encounter
a checkpoint, we assume drivers' beliefs remain constant throughout the intervention
period.
    We also assume that drivers believe that the crackdown consists of a single discrete
interval of enforcement and does not start and stop several times in short succession.
These beliefs correspond with the actual reality of Rajasthan Police crackdowns, and
make the specification of learning behavior much simpler. In particular, if a driver is
checked for the second (or more) time on a given night she is sure that the crackdown
has persisted for all nights since her initial encounter with the police. Therefore each
of her previous driving experiences, including those in which she did not encounter
the police, is equally informative of the intensity of the current crackdown.
    Drivers' behavior is not entirely deterministic: they experience random shocks
that encourage them to drink and drive when it would otherwise be too risky, or
to stay at home when they might otherwise go out for a drink. These shocks a ect
driver's actions, their information about police activity, and hence their beliefs in
future periods. Thus even if all drivers have the same priors at the beginning of
the crackdown (as we assume they do), by period t they will have a distribution of
state variables h (xt , `t ; 0 ) where xt denotes the history of checkpoints in the police
station from periods 1 to t, and `t denotes the past history of shocks for all drivers
in the jurisdiction. An individual driver's beliefs in period t, it (xt , `it ; 0 ), are a
function of his own shocks `it as well as the the history of checkpoints in his station;
for conciseness we suppress this dependence in subsequent notation.
    If the utility of driving drunk on road r is dr and the expected cost when encountering
a police checkpoint is c, the static deterministic component of utility of driving on
road r at time t is
                                 ur ( it ) = ur = dr + fiit /irt c                   (6.1)

where we normalize the static utility of staying at home to 0.
  The evolution of driver's dynamic utility depends upon the outcome of driving. If
   8
    We considered randomizing an information campaign announcing the crackdown across police
stations. However, since we could not guarantee that all drivers would be informed in the time
available for this campaign, we defer the analysis of this counterfactual policy to Section 6.4 based
upon the estimated structural parameters.


                                                 24
the driver witnessed a police checkpoint on road 1, we denote his posterior beliefs as
  it+1 (check1 ), if sees no checkpoint, then his beliefs become i,t+1 (nocheck1 ). Beliefs
following travel on roads 2 and 3 are defined analogously, and those staying at home
are i,t+1 (home). Dynamic utility, incorporating the preference shocks is then,
              Y
              _v (
              _          it )   + `i1t    = u1 + " (fiit /i1t V (                  (check1 )) + (1  fiit /i1t ) V (             (nocheck1 ))) + `i1t
              ] 1
              _                                                           i,t+1                                       i,t+1

V ( it ) = max . . .                      ...
              _
              _                                  !           "
              _
              [vH (                                  1
                          it )   + `iHt   = "V       i,t+1       + `iHt
                                                                                                                                (6.2)
    Consistent with much of the empirical learning literature (Ching, Erdem, and
Keane, 2013), we assume that the choice-specific shocks in 6.2 are distributed IID
extreme value type 1. Incorporating these shocks, the fraction of potential drunken
drivers who choose to drive on road r on night t is µrt :
               /
                               exp (vr ( it ))                                     1
                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                            2
       µrt =         q                                                        dh       it ;   0 , {dr }r=1 , c, xt1 , `t1       (6.3)
                 i   rÕ exp (vr Õ ( it )) + exp (vH (                 it ))


6.1.2    Evolution of beliefs

Once drivers have made their choice of road and observed any police activity, the
evolution of their beliefs is a simple application of Bayes rule to the Beta distribution.
Let Iit be an indicator equal to 1 if the agent has witnessed a checkpoint on any road
prior to night t. Agents' expectation that the crackdown ends after night t (again,
conditional on it being in progress in period t), is ÷it = ­     ~0
                                                                  ÷
                                                                    / (~
                                                                       ­0÷
                                                                           + --it
                                                                               ÷
                                                                                  ). Because
drivers never conclusively observe that the crackdown has ended, their beliefs about
its duration evolve only as the --it÷
                                      term in this Beta distribution grows over time:


                                                       +1 = --it + Iit
                                                   ÷          ÷
                                                 --i,t

In this case ÷it+1 evolves deterministically based solely on the time passed since the
driver first encounters a checkpoint: conditional on the crackdown being ongoing in
period t, Pr [÷ = ÷~|X ] = (1  ÷~)t . Intuitively, as time passes drivers infer that if the
crackdown is still ongoing then the chance that it ends in each period is likely to be
increasingly low.9
    In contrast, beliefs about the intensity of the crackdown do depend upon drivers'
actions and observations after they are aware of the police campaign. Consider a
   9
    Since the driver never conclusively observes the end of the crackdown, ­
                                                                           ~t÷
                                                                               =­
                                                                                ~0÷
                                                                                    for all t. This
reduces the number of endogenously evolving state variables to 11.


                                                                 25
driver who has chosen to take road r in period t, and saw a checkpoint. Posteriors
beliefs on the expected checking intensity on road r, are
                                                /
                                              ­irt  +1
                                /ir,t+1   = /
                                           ­irt + --irt
                                                    /
                                                        +1

If the driver does not pass a checkpoint in period t, but has encountered one in the
past (and thus knows the crackdown is underway) the ­irt    /
                                                              +1 term in the numerator is
replaced with ­irt but the denominator remains the same. If the driver had chosen to
                   /

remain at home, her beliefs about checking intensity would not evolve: /irt = /ir,t+1 .
As mentioned above, if the driver has never encountered a checkpoint, his beliefs
remain static: /irt = /ir0 .
      Once a driver observes that the crackdown has begun, each time he travels on a
road his belief about the intensity of police checking becomes more precise. This is
modeled through the --irt/
                           term, which evolves according to --ir,t
                                                                /
                                                                  +1 = --irt +1. As above,
                                                                          /

  /
--irt remains unchanged in the period before the driver is aware that the crackdown
has begun, and if the driver chooses to remain at home or drive on any road other
than r.
      The final element about which the driver learns is the probability that the crackdown
is indeed in progress. If the driver encounters a checkpoint on either road, she knows
with probability 1 that the crackdown was in force during period t, and thus that
the probability of checking in the next period is fii,t+1 = 1  ÷it . If she drives on
road r but sees no police checkpoint, then her posterior reflects the fact that this
observation may either be because the crackdown has ended, or because the police
did not implement a checkpoint on that night although the crackdown is still ongoing.
Thus her posterior belief, adjusted for the fact that the crackdown might end between
t and t + 1 is


                                                    fiit (1  /irt )
                      fiit+1 = (1  ÷it )
                                            fiit (1  /irt ) + (1  fiit )

    This learning behavior can generate complex patterns of travel and staying home
by the drivers. To illustrate these strategies, Figure 9.2 shows the simulated histories
of two drivers, the first in a station with only checking on road 1, and the second in
a station that also has checking on alternative roads 2 and 3. The parameters used


                                             26
to simulate these histories are those estimated from the data, and the sequence of
checkpoints are also chosen from two real stations in the data. The background of
the graphs denotes the road on which the driver is traveling: blue for road 1, red for
2, green for 3, and gray if the potential driver is staying home. The solid black line
(and the left-hand axis) shows his belief regarding the probability that the checking
is ongoing at the beginning of the period, fit . The blue, red, and green lines show,
respectively, /1t , /2t and /3t , and their scale is shown on the right-hand axis.
    The driver in Panel A encounters a checkpoint on road 1 on night 23 of the
crackdown. His beliefs about /1 spike upwards since (as we discuss below) drivers
have very di use priors about the initial probability of checking on road 1. His belief
about the likelihood that the crackdown is ongoing (fit ) also shoots up, reaching about
75%. For several weeks afterwards the driver has a positive belief that a crackdown is
ongoing but, due to low prior beliefs about the probability of a crackdown on road 2
and (especially) 3, his drunken driving activity on these alternate roads is only slightly
decreased. Finally, at night 74 the driver returns to road 1 and, not encountering
a checkpoint, revises his posterior belief about the intensity of checking on road 1
downward to around 55%. Further trips on road 1 in periods 84 and 89 cause further
reductions in /1 and eventually driver activity returns to normal.
    Panel B depicts the history of a (particularly unlucky) driver in a police station
with checking on all roads.10 This driver initially encounters a checkpoint on road 2
at night 20. Again, fit rises to about 75%, but since his priors on /2 are very precise,
there is not a visible increase in /2,21 . The driver's awareness that the crackdown
might be ongoing is su cient to dissuade her from driving on roads 1 and 2, although
she continues to drive on road 3 where /3 is almost 0. Unfortunately (for her) she
encounters a checkpoint on road 3 at night 39, which increases her posterior on /3 to
about .34 and sends fit over .8. After about 3 weeks of sobriety, she re-attempts to
drive drunk on road 2 at night 65, only to encounter a police checkpoint immediately.
This scares her away from drunken driving for the remainder of the intervention. Note
that height of the spikes in fit become greater and the (negative) subsequent slope of
the fit graph becomes less steep after each successive checkpoint. This is caused by
drivers' posteriors about ÷t becoming lower and lower.
  10
    This history was chosen for illustrative purposes and contains more interaction with the police
than typical.




                                                27
6.1.3   Alternative Empirical Models

An important element of the theory presented above is that agents change their
beliefs about the parameters of police strategy over time. To evaluate the role
of this learning in explaining the patterns observed in the data, we estimate an
alternative "No Learning" model in which agent's beliefs on {/r }3      r =1 and ÷ remain
constant. Equivalently, one might also say that prior beliefs about these parameters
are infinitely precise. This alternative model does still include learning about whether
the crackdown is ongoing­thus when drivers encounter a checkpoint their fit = 1, but
the value of ÷ (the rate at which fit decays) is not a ected by the number or timing
of encounters with the police.
    A fundamental result of the theoretical literature on learning in economics is
that forward looking agents value information and base their actions partly on the
incentive to increase their quantity of information. Yet empirical work on learning
has often found that this "exploration" motive has a minimal e ect on improving
model fit (Ching et al., 2017). Specifying this alternative, "myopic" model can
be done by simply setting " = 0 in Equation 6.2. The assumption of myopia is
particularly interesting to explore in this setting, given the substantial literature on
alcohol induced myopia and its e ect on the choice to drive drunk (Giancola et al.,
2010).
    The model presented above does not include either social learning or sober driving
for the purpose of learning about the presence of police enforcement. Both of these
extensions would allow drivers to learn about police activity without paying the cost
of encountering a checkpoint, thereby speeding learning about the beginning and
end of the crackdown. Unfortunately our intervention is limited in the information
it can reveal about such behaviors, since none of the treatment wings specifically
manipulated either of these mechanisms. We therefore focus our empirical investigation
of these factors on a single, admittedly extreme, alternative model in which all drivers
in a police station are instantaneously aware of any checkpoint that occurs on any
road in that area. This captures the case in which social learning is perfect and/or
drivers are able to costlessly check all roads for police activity every night. Learning
is exogenous, driver beliefs are homogeneous, and the agent's problem is equivalent
to the static choice of the highest expected payo road. Details of this alternative
model are presented in Appendix Section A2.1.



                                          28
6.2      Estimation
We estimate the structural model using simulated method of moments. In short,
we first match the number of drunken drivers caught and road accidents on each
night with the corresponding numbers predicted by simulating the model given the
history of checkpoints and checkpoint locations in each station. This generates a
residual which we use to create a GMM criterion which minimizes the correlation
of the residuals and instruments generated from the random assignment of police
stations to the di erent treatment arms.
    The model contains 3Óthree sets of parameters.    4    The first are the initial conditions of
                                   Ô3
drivers' beliefs, 1 = ­r0 , --r0
                           /     /
                                           , ­0 , --0 . Since there had never previously been
                                              ÷     ÷
                                      r =1
an anti-drunken driving crackdown in the area where the project was implemented,
we set fi0 = 0. In addition to 1 , we estimate 4 preference parameters: the driver's
utility of drunken driving on roads 1, 2, and 3, and their disutility of encountering
                     1             2
a checkpoint: 2 = {dr }3   r=1 , c   .11 Combined, these form the 12-element parameter
vector that determines driver behavior and hence allows the calculation of the optimal
police crackdown strategy. The third set of parameters, 3 , is a vector of nuisance
parameters controlling for other exogenous characteristics of the police station jurisdiction
and checkpoint implementation that may a ect police e ectiveness or the local number
of potential drunken drivers, but not the drivers' learning and decision process. We
discuss the elements of 3 further in the estimation section below.
    We follow a four step procedure to generate the model predictions of the number
of accidents and drunken drivers caught which we subsequently take to the data.
First, we numerically solve for the value function V ( it ). This is complicated by
the relatively high number (8) of continuous state variables and the infinite-horizon
nature of the problem, making backwards induction impossible.12 Although heuristic
algorithms (e.g. Scott (2010)) can achieve near-optimal payo s in bandit problems
as the number of periods increases, agents' exploration behavior in these heuristic
approaches may be very di erent than under the optimal strategy. We therefore
prefer to directly compute the optimal driver strategy using value function iteration,
but do so on a finite grid of the state space. When the future state falls between the
  11
     The baseline specification sets the discount rate to " = .95, but we present results with alternative
values.
  12
     Because this case falls into the category of restless correlated Bandit models, the Whittle Index
results that simplify calculating the optimal solution in most restless Bandit models do not apply.



                                                   29
grid points, we interpolate.
    Second, we simulate agents' actions as they encounter the sequence of checkpoints
that occurred in each police station. For each of the 223 stations in the data we
generate H = 5, 000 simulated histories of potential drunken drivers' choices on each
night of the crackdown and for up to 90 days afterwards. However, as discussed
above not all of the assigned checkpoints were actually conducted by the police
and we only have data on the implementation status of 76% of the checkpoints
(either through surveyor observation or GPS tracking of the police vehicle). Thus
in 24% of cases we do not know with certainty whether a checkpoint was actually
implemented. We incorporate this fact into the simulations by allowing the fraction
of agents who encounter an assigned checkpoint to be less than 1 whenever the actual
implementation status is unknown, and specifically to depend upon the treatment
group of the police station. We first run a probit regression of an indicator that
the police implement the checkpoint on the fully interacted set of all intervention
categories (including the police line intervention, which a ects implementation, as we
saw in Table A2), plus variables indicating checkpoints that occurred in the early,
middle, or late stage of the intervention, and other police station characteristics.13
From this regression we predict each unobserved checkpoint's compliance probability
and use this to determine how many of the simulated agents choosing to drive on
that road would encountering the checkpoint on that night. For example, suppose
100 simulated agents in station i find it optimal to drive drunk on road 2 on night t,
when there was a checkpoint assigned on road 2, and station i would be predicted to
implement the checkpoint with 75% probability. Then 100  .75 = 75 agents would
experience the checkpoint, and hence update their beliefs negatively about checking
on road 2, while the remaining 25 would see no police presence and update positively.
    The third step is to calculate each driver's probability of travel on each road using
the choice probability in Equation 6.3, and average these over all simulated drivers
to generate an estimate of the share of drunken drivers on each route on every night.
To smooth the objective function, we calculate the mass of drivers on each road using
summed choice probabilities, not the realized choices. This is an application of the
smoothing technique discussed in Bruins et al. (2018).
  13
     This regression is analogous to column 1 of Table A2, with the inclusion of the interactions of the
intervention categories as a variety of additional control variables. Specifically, we include dummies
for the day of the week, whether the station is on a National Highway, the total past accidents in
the station, urban/rural status, 2010 or 2011 intervention, and district fixed e ects.


                                                  30
    The fourth and final step is to incorporate the simulated probability of drunken
driving on each road r (µsrt ) into model of the number of accidents observed (Ast )
and drivers arrested (Nsrt ). This requires modeling three additional factors: the total
number of potential drunken drivers, their propensity to get into an accident (to
match them with the number of accidents observed), and the local police e ectiveness
at catching them (to match data on drivers arrested). Since our model has little to
say on these issues, we model them as two vectors of nuisance parameters, 3           Acc
                                                                                          and
3 which are associated with the number of accidents and arrests, respectively.
  Arr

    We model the baseline accident rate as a reduced form function of district fixed
e ects and indicators for urban or rural location, proximity to a National Highway, day
of the week, and the number of past accidents. We also include dummy variables for
assignment to the fixed and rotating intervention treatments to control for any random
baseline di erences in assignment; as described below our identifying variation derives
from changes in accident rates between the stations over the course of the intervention.
The vector of these controls for a given station-night is wst    Acc
                                                                     and the corresponding
coe cients on these variables are the vector 3 . This baseline accident rate, expressed
                                                  Acc
        1           2
as exp wst AccÕ Acc
               3      in the estimation, is shifted by the intervention since it is multiplied
by the share of potential drunken drivers who choose to take any of the 3 roads
            q
modeled: 3    r=1 µsrt . The structural equation for the number of accidents also includes
an intercept to account for the presence of non-drunken driving related accidents: even
if all drivers remained sober (µsrt = 0's, r, t), road accidents would still occur.
    We include the same vector of controls when modeling baseline police e ectiveness
in catching drunken drivers, but also include variables related to the checkpoint itself:
the number of vehicles stopped, and the time spent at the checkpoint, each included
as a 3rd degree polynomial. We also include controls for whether the checkpoint
occurred on the final check or was conducted by a Police Lines team, since these
checkpoints may have been di erentially better or worse at identifying law-breakers.
We combine all these controls into a checkpoint-level vector wsrt     Arr
                                                                          , with their impact
on the number of drunks caught parameterized by 3 , which enters the model as
                                                            Arr
     1           2
exp wsrt    3 . This baseline is then shifted by the model's prediction of the share
        ArrÕ Acc

of drivers drunk on that road-night, µsrt . We do not include an intercept in the
structural equation for arrests, since if all drivers chose to remain sober there would
be no arrests for drunken driving.
    The total number of accidents in police station s on night t, Ast , and arrests of


                                             31
drunken drivers, Nsrt , caught on road r is,
                              A      3
                                              B
                                     ÿ             1         2
                     Ast =      1+         µsrt exp wst
                                                     AccÕ Acc
                                                         3    + 'st
                                                                 Acc
                                                                                    (6.4)
                                     r=1
                                       1           2
                    Nsrt = µsrt exp wsrt
                                     ArrÕ Acc
                                         3    + 'srt
                                                 Arr
                                                                                    (6.5)

where ' Acc
         st and 'srt are IID mean-0 error terms capturing factor such as holidays,
                  Arr

idiosyncratic weather conditions, shocks to police manpower, etc. Let the stacked
vector of structural errors be ' . If all scheduled checkpoints were conducted as
planned, then each station's checking history would be random, and E [' |wsrt , hsrt ] =
0. In this case we could estimate the structural  parameters by simply searching for
the  vector that minimizes ' subject to some loss function. However, since only about
63% of the scheduled checkpoints occurred, we must take into account the possibility
of correlation between the checkpoint histories and the residuals. This might occur,
for example, if police are more active in implementing the intervention when or where
there is a larger problem with drunken driving.
    To address this source of bias, we employ a non-linear GMM estimator that uses
functions of the assigned checkpoints as instruments. Since this assignment was
randomized by the intervention team, as discussed in Section 3, it is by definition
orthogonal to any unobservable components of checkpoint e ectiveness. In practice
we include 18 variables in the instrument vector, Z , divided into one set for the
accident moments Z Acc , and another for the arrest moments Z Arr .
    The 8 instruments in Z Acc contain interactions of indicator variables designating
whether fixed and rotating strategies were used in a police station with the number
of prior assigned checkpoints (2 instruments), and those same interactions further
interacted with number of weeks since the end of the intervention (2 instruments).
These identify the di erential decrease in accidents in fixed and surprise police stations
during the intervention, and the eventual reversion of accident rates in both types of
stations. Z Acc also includes indicators for the night immediately after a checkpoint,
and the interaction of these indicators with the number of previous checkpoints.
Both of these variables are separated by fixed and rotating checkpoints, for a total
of 4 more instruments. These allow identification from the very short-term learning
e ect, which helps to identify the share of drivers who witness a checkpoint and are
thus deterred from drunken driving on the following night.


                                             32
    The vector of instruments based upon survey and arrest data, Z Arr contains 10
elements. The first 2 are simply indicators for whether the checkpoint was held on
the 2nd or 3rd choice roads­these identify the relative utility of the di erent roads.
The next 4 instruments are the interactions of the number of previous checkpoints
held in a police station with a indicator for whether the police station had fixed or
rotating checkpoints and, if the checkpoints were rotating, separate instruments for
each type of road on which the checkpoint was held (1,2, or 3). The last 4 instruments
come from the final check, and contain the interaction between indicators for fixed or
rotating checkpoints with a indicator variable for data from the final checks, as well
as these same variables interacted with the days since the previous checkpoint.
    Letting Z be the matrix of instruments and Á be the vector of residuals, the GMM
objective function is the the standard,

                                                  1
                          min (Z Õ ' ()) (Z Õ W Z )   (Z Õ ' ())
                                        Õ
                          oe


We employ 2-stage GMM, first solving for the values of  that minimize the GMM
criterion with W = (Z Õ Z )1 , then re-estimating the parameters using the optimal
weighting matrix. The estimation is complicated by the non-smooth criterion function
and the presence of local minima. To ensure that we have identified the global
minimum we first use the Particle Swarm global optimization algorithm to identify
the neighborhood of the global minimum, then use the Nelder-Mead algorithm to
refine the solution.


6.3     Results: Structural
6.3.1   Primary Specification

Table 10 presents the results estimation of the structural parameters. To simplify the
interpretation of the results, we report transformations of the structural parameters
that are more easily interpretable than the fundamental beta distribution of driver's
beliefs.
    Rows 1-4 display the parameters of the drivers' utility functions. Since the location
and scale of these coe cients are determined by the value of the outside option to
drinking and driving (normalized to 0) and the standard deviation of the extreme
value shocks (fi /6) the values of these coe cients per se cannot be readily interpreted.


                                            33
The relative sizes are informative, however. At 5,842 the perceived disutility of
being caught by the police is hugely greater than the benefit to drinking and driving,
showing that sobriety checkpoints are an e cient tool for crime prevention if deployed
e ectively. Consider a pre-crackdown scenario in which drivers perceive 0 risk of being
caught drunk: this corresponds to the first night of checking in each police station.
The estimated parameters suggest that the majority of potential drunken drivers
(63.3%) will not be driving drunk on any of the roads under consideration, while
14.4% would be inebriated on road 1, 11.0% on road 2, and 11.3% on road 3. While
the standard errors on this parameter are large, this is due to the fact that the GMM
criterion is not very sensitive to changes in the cost of encountering a checkpoint once
it becomes so large that drivers are dissuaded for long periods once they learn of the
campaign. For example, the GMM analogue to the LR test (Newey and West, 1987)
of the hypothesis that c = 0 yields a 2 statistic of 36.2, significantly rejecting the
null.14 While these results, taken alone, are not surprising, they provide in inputs to
designing a more e ective strategy for preventing drunken driving.
    Rows 5 and 6 contain the driver's priors on the duration of the crackdown. Drivers
initially believe that the crackdown will end with 20.7% probability after just one
night and that the expected duration of the crackdown is only about 3 days. This is
consistent with what senior police o cers told us of past police enforcement of tra c
laws, which consisted of only 1 or 2 checkpoints per initiative. However, the drivers
do adjust their beliefs about enforcement duration if they witness a prolonged police
crackdown. The initial precision of priors on ÷ implies that if a driver witnesses a
second checkpoint 30 days after they first become aware that the crackdown has
begun, their belief about the probability of the campaign ending the next night
drops to 13.70%. Standard errors on these parameters are quite large, although once
again if we test parameter restrictions implying larger deviations from the estimated
parameters the LR tests strongly reject the restrictions. For example, testing ÷ = 0
(permanent crackdowns) yields an 2 statistic of 112.4, while a test of the restriction
÷ = 0.95 (very short crackdowns) yields a 2 statistic of 23.0, both significantly
rejecting the restrictions.
    Finally, rows 7-12 show the initial priors on the expected intensity of checking on
  14
    Since the restriction c = 0 implies that driver behavior is totally una ected by the police
crackdown and thus the µsrt shifters are constant, this restriction can also be seen as a broader
specification test of the whole model.



                                               34
roads 1,2, and 3. Estimated beliefs are substantially di erent across all three roads.
On road 1, we estimate a prior on the checking intensity of /1,0 = .090, but extremely
rapid learning of ­1/
                     ,0 + --1,0 = 6.1 ú 10 . These extremely di use priors imply that
                            /             7

the prior mean is only relevant for agents who know that a crackdown is ongoing, but
have not yet been stopped on road 1, that is after they have been stopped on road 2 or
3 in the rotating station. Hence standard errors on /1,0 are very large. Once drivers
encounter a checkpoint on road 1 their posterior rises to almost 1 (as in Panel A of
Figure 9.2). These very di use priors rationalize the empirical observation that the
number of drunken drivers on the road 1 decreases very soon after the intervention
has begun.
    Conversely, on road 2 agents have a much lower but non-zero prior on checking
intensity of /0B = 0.006, though their priors are much more precise with ­    ~0     ~/
                                                                                 B + --0B =
                                                                               /

8, 807. These parameter help rationalize the empirical result that the intervention
was most e ective at reducing accidents in the rotating stations (Table 4), but at
the time of the final check there was a roughly equal displacement e ect on the
road 2 in the fixed and rotating stations (Table 9). This implies that agents are
e ectively dissuaded from driving on road 2 for the duration of the intervention since
the expected disutility of driving on road 2 (fit  .006  5, 942 = fit  35.6) is su cient
to prevent travel on road 2 even for quite low beliefs about the probability of police
activity (fit ). The deterrence e ect occurs even when drivers have not personally
witnessed a checkpoint on road 2 (as in the fixed checkpoint intervention). However,
after the intervention, once fit falls very low, drivers' average beliefs about /2 remain
low even in the rotating stations, since they are not substantially revised upwards
by experience. Thus the share of drunken drivers in road 2 in the post-intervention
period is not very di erent in the rotating or fixed police stations.
    Finally, the estimated parameters suggest that drivers' prior beliefs about the
probability of police patrolling the 3rd road are extremely low: /3,0 = 7.567 ú 107 .
Encountering checkpoints on road 1 (as in the fixed intervention) has little impact
on individuals' expected utility of drunken driving on the 3rd road, since agents do
not expect to encounter the police there even if a crackdown is ongoing. However, if
they do observe a checkpoint on road 3 (as in the rotating intervention) they update
their posteriors very quickly because ­3     /
                                              ,0 + --3,0 = 0.009. These parameter help
                                                     /

rationalize the finding in the data that the fixed checkpoint location intervention is
not e ective at reducing drunken driving (because agents move to road 3), but the


                                            35
rotating intervention can be e ective because after moving to road 3 agents learn very
rapidly about police presence there.
    In Figure 9.3 we present graphs of the share of agents drinking and driving in the
stations of each branch of the intervention. The blue-solid line shows the share on
road 1, the red-dotted line on road 2, and the orange-dashed line on road 3. The first
row of sub-graphs, illustrating the fixed intervention stations, demonstrates clearly
the spillover e ects resulting from checking on only 1 route. The share of drunken
drivers on road 1 drops sharply in the first days of the campaign, particularly in the
stations with 3 checks per week. At first, the number of drivers on road 2 drops
as well, since agents infer that if there is checking on route 1, there is also likely
to be checking on 2 as well. However, this rebounds quickly as drivers' perceived
likelihood of the crackdown continuing drops and they become willing to drive on
road 2 again, where they never personally witnessed a checkpoint. In contrast, the
number of drunken drivers on route 3 increases over the first month of the campaign
as agents are displaced from routes 1 and 2. This causes the overall impact of the
intervention to be limited in the fixed stations. The second row of Figure 9.3 shows the
corresponding graphs from the rotating intervention stations. Here we see a decrease
in drunken driving on all 3 roads, leading the program to be more e ective overall.
The rate of decease is slowest on road 3, since drivers perceptions of risk on this road
are not strongly a ected by checking on roads 1 and 2.
    Can this model of driver behavior provide a reasonable approximation to the
observed results of the crackdown implemented by the Rajasthan Police? While we
cannot conduct an out-of-sample test (there was no variation in enforcement outside
this program), it is not a forgone conclusion that the model results would closely
match the reduced form results in Section 5. This is partly mechanical­there are
substantially more moments (or reduced form results) than estimated parameters
(12), and the moments estimated do not exactly correspond to the reduced form
results. More substantively, the functional forms of Bayesian updating and the
assumptions of common Beta-distributed priors place considerable structure on the
impact of crackdowns on driver behavior. For example on a given road, increased
enforcement must lead to fewer drunken drivers, and the magnitude of this impact
must be decreasing in the long-run.
    Given these degrees of freedom, we evaluate model fit by simulating a data set of
accidents and drunken drivers caught based upon the model, estimated parameters,


                                          36
and actual police checkpoint implementation patterns, then re-running the same
reduced form regressions used in the analysis of the actual data in Section 5 on this
simulated data set. Maintaining the same order of reduced form regressions as Section
5, we begin with the accidents analysis. Here the moments matched by the model are
quite di erent from the reduced form regression specifications which include police
station (rather than district) fixed e ects, additive rather than multiplicative controls,
and are at the monthly (instead of daily) level. Column 1 Table A7 shows police
station-FE analysis of the simulated data predict that fixed and rotating checkpoint
locations perform similarly in reducing night accidents, with a slight edge for the fixed
strategy. Since this contrasts with the (admittedly noisy) actual results in Table 4
which show the rotating stations performing better, what explains this deviation? In
column 2 we show that switching to a district-FE specification restores the result that
the rotating intervention reduces accidents more than the fixed-checkpoint strategy,
albeit at a di erent level of variation (daily vs. monthly). Since the only police-station
level data that enters the simulation is the performance of the sta in implementing
checkpoints, this suggests that the discrepancy is due to correlations between police
compliance carrying out checkpoints and the fixed treatment status (within district).
These are captured by the police station fixed e ects, but not in the structural
estimation.
    The model's predictions on the dynamics of drunken drivers caught at checkpoints
match the reduced form estimates well. The simulated results in Table A8 show the
exact same patterns of decreasing e ectiveness in fixed but not rotating police stations
as in the corresponding columns 1-4 of Table 7, including those with police station
fixed e ects (columns 3-4). The model is also able to match the results from the final
check quite closely. Table A9 (corresponding to Table 9) shows substantially fewer
drunken drivers caught at the #2 road at the final check, and that this di erence
is are greater in the fixed checkpoint stations where there was no enforcement on
road 2. Simulated reversion in faster in the fixed-checkpoint stations (columns 5 vs.
3)­also matching the empirical data. Thus, with the exception of the police-station
FE accident regressions, the model can match the main empirical findings well. In
particular, the apparent paradox that the fixed checkpoint intervention causes greater
displacement of drunken drivers on the unpatrolled road 2 but is less e ective than
the rotating intervention at catching drunken drivers on road 1 or stopping accidents
(with district FEs) can be rationalized by the beliefs and structure of the model.


                                           37
6.3.2   Alternative Specifications

In addition to our primary model, we present three alternative specifications to
illustrate the ways in which the di erent parameters and assumptions a ect the
estimated results. In the first of these, we eliminate all learning by drivers about
checkpoint intensity or the duration of the crackdown. This corresponds to setting
                   Ó    Ô3
the parameters --0    /
                       r r=1 = OE, --0 = OE, so that drivers initial priors about /r and ÷
                                     ÷

remain constant over time. We do allow drivers to learn about whether the crackdown
is ongoing (fit ), so that they correctly conclude that the crackdown is still continuing
if they observe a checkpoint. Since this specification is nested within our primary
model, the di erence in estimated parameters and policies demonstrates the potential
bias in not taking learning into account. Given the importance of learning in the
baseline model, it is perhaps not surprising that the value of the GMM criterion is
almost twice as high in the "no learning" model. The values of dr increase slightly,
causing an increase in the initial rate of drunken driving and thus faster learning
about the beginning of the crackdown. Perhaps the main di erence is that /3,0
is now substantially higher at 0.022. This value is su cient to cause substantial
deterrence on road 3 even in the fixed checkpoint intervention­thus the no-learning
model predicts that the fixed checkpoint campaign should be more e ective that it
actually was.
    Our second alternative specification assumes that agents are capable of learning
about all parameters of the crackdown, but are myopic when selecting their choice
of road. This corresponds to setting " = 0 in the driver's value function, as opposed
the value of " = .95 used in the main specification. Re-estimating the model under
this alternative specification column 3 of Table 10 shows very little change in the
estimated parameter values or model fit. This lack of sensitivity to the discount rate
can be attributed to the very high cost of being apprehended by the police relative to
the low value of active exploration. For example, consider an agent who is stopped
by the police on road 1 on the first night of the crackdown, when beliefs are at their
most malleable. The estimated parameters imply that the dynamic value of driving on
road 1, which captures the value of the information gained through experimentation,
is only 1.06% higher than the dynamic value of remaining at home where no new
information will be gathered. Yet the expected cost of driving on road 1 is 4, 122.23
versus a utility value of 8.98 for not driving at all. Thus while a bandit model of the
type estimated here might, in principle, have a substantial role for exploration and

                                           38
an incentive for information gathering, the estimated parameters in this context are
such that this e ect is essentially absent.
    The fourth and final alternative specification we examine is the case of costless
learning about the state of the crackdown, as discussed in Section 6.1.3. This could
correspond either to a case in which agents can costlessly "explore" all roads while
sober to monitor police actions, or in which drivers perfectly inform each other
whenever anyone passes a checkpoint (as in the app "waze", which was not available
to our drivers at the time but may be available in other contexts). Perhaps not
surprisingly, this alternative model generates hugely di erent parameter estimates
than the baseline model. Results in column 4 of Table 10 show values of dr around
42­implying that agents drink and drive essentially every night in the absence of
the intervention. This high utility of drunken driving is combined with a equally
high cost of getting caught (47,568), and the belief that police crackdowns will end
immediately with probability of almost 1 (÷ = 0.999). Similarly, priors on police
enforcement on each road are estimated at almost 1, although standard errors on
these parameters are very high. The implied pattern of driver actions is a dramatic
fluctuations between all agents drinking and driving, then all agents remaining sober
for a few days, then all agents driving again, etc., as shown in Figure A1 which
displays the simulated actions of drivers in this model. Although this pattern of
behavior appears counterintuitive, the value of the GMM criterion is only moderately
higher than the baseline model (0.0097 vs. 0.0087). However, this similarity is due to
the alternatingly large and small values of the residuals in the costless learning model
canceling out in the summation of the GMM criterion. If, instead, we compare 1
minus the ratio of the sum of squared residuals to the total sum of squared variation
(an informal analogue of the R2 statistic) for the data on drunken drivers caught, we
find that it is 0.35 for the baseline model, but only 0.10 for the model with costless
learning. Thus, on a night-by-night basis, the model with individual learning seems
to deliver a much better fit than if we were to assume perfect social (or costless)
learning.


6.4    Optimal Enforcement Strategy
With the estimated structural parameters in hand, we proceed to calculating the
optimal crackdown strategy. To simplify the exercise, we set two constraints on the


                                          39
design of this strategy. The first is to impose an ex-post budget constraint: we assume
that the police department has enough budget to carry out 20 checkpoints per police
station in every 90 days.15 The second is to limit the police optimization problem to
two parameters: the duration of the crackdown in terms of nights, and the fraction
of checkpoints to be conducted o of the primary road (that is, on roads 2 and 3).
Once these parameters are set, the specific timing of the 20 checkpoints is determined
randomly with uniform probability on each night of the campaign, subject to the
constraint that any station cannot carry out two checkpoints on the same night.
    While this strategy would, by definition, be less e ective than an unconstrained
optimal strategy, it has the advantages of being more transparent, easier to calculate,
and adhering more closely to the theoretical problem analyzed in Section A1.2.16
Since the actual Rajasthan anti-drunken driving intervention also complies with these
constraints, one can interpret this counterfactual strategy as the best possible way
to have designed the intervention that was carried out in Rajasthan, subject to the
same constraints faced in reality.
    The enforcement strategies suggested above do not take into account potential
partial compliance with the crackdown protocol by the police. However, as we show
in Table A2, the police are less likely to carry out a crackdown when the intensity
of enforcement is high (particularly in the 3-checkpoint per week intervention). To
incorporate this factor into the design of the counterfactual policy, we adjust the
probability of a crackdown occurring to be (.615  .139 (F ú )) where F ú represents
the assigned station-level frequency of checking and (·) is the Normal CDF.17
These strategies may be more reasonable than those that assume full compliance,
particularly for policies that imply very high intensity checking.
    The estimated parameters imply that the optimal strategy incorporating partial
compliance (shown in Table 11) is to spread the 20 checkpoints over 82 days, and to
place 7 of them on road A, dividing the other 13 across the roads 1 and 2. These
results are consistent with the implications of the simple theoretical model developed
in Section A1: the police are most e ective when they spread the crackdown di usely
  15
     This is close to the average number of checkpoints per station conducted in the second round
of the intervention (22.4 over 3 months) which we were informed by the police was the largest
crackdown they would implement.
  16
     In particular, the police might want to have crackdown intensities change in more complex
patterns over time.
  17
     These parameters were estimated from the police implementation data in a probit regression
analogous to column 2 of A2, except using a continuous measure of assigned frequency.


                                               40
over a longer period. Of the 90 day cycle considered, almost all would be included in
the crackdown. The allocation of checkpoints fairly evenly across roads derives from
two implications of the parameters estimated in the structural model. First, drivers'
estimated utilities are not hugely di erent across routes, thus there is no need to
increase the risk of apprehension in any particular location in order to e ectively
dissuade criminals there. Second, because agent's priors on the risk of driving on
roads 2 and (especially) 3 are low, the police must allocate forces to all areas in order
to prevent diversion of criminal activity away from road 1. This campaign causes a
36% drop in the rate of drunken driving. If we consider partial compliance (Columns
4-6) the optimal strategy is basically unchanged, although somewhat less e ective
with a decrease in drunken driving of 25%.
    An alternative strategy employed by many police departments is to announce the
beginning of a sobriety campaign publicly, for example by radio advertisement, with
the goal of dissuading drunken drivers immediately. In the second row of Table 11
we examine this alternative strategy, while maintaining the assumption that drivers'
beliefs are as estimated at the beginning of the intervention. In fact, the Rajasthan
police did consider a pre-intervention awareness campaign, so this counterfactual
reveals the outcomes if that awareness campaign had been implemented. Computationally,
to solve for the optimal policy we simply set fi0 = 1, and evaluate the grid of policy
options as before.
    The results, in row 2 of Table 11 imply that optimal duration should fall slightly-
from 82 to 77 days, while the fraction of checkpoints on road 1 drops from 35% to
20%. The reason for this shift is straightforward: if the police announce a crackdown,
most citizens will assume that road 1 will be targeted and will cease driving there
following the announcement even without actually witnessing a checkpoint. However,
since citizens (essentially) do not believe that there will be checking on road 3, the
only way for the police to dissuade them from driving there is to conduct checkpoints
at that location. The prior announcement of the campaign substantially improves its
e cacy: the rate of drunken driving now drops by 46%. Again, incomplete police
compliance has little e ect on the overall strategy but decreases its e ectiveness.
    As discussed above, the intervention occurred in a setting in which there had
previously been no enforcement of drunken driving laws. Thus the parameters estimated,
and the optimal crackdown policies estimated from those parameters, could only
extend to analogous contexts. However, the full structural model allows us to investigate


                                         41
how these policy implications would di er in other settings, for example in cases
where checking had been ongoing for some time and the population was familiar
with police strategies. To operationalize this counterfactual we hold constant the
                        1            2
estimated utilities 2 = {dr }3
                             r =1 , c , while imposing that the driver's beliefs 1 =
3Ó            Ô3                  4
   /
  ­r 0 , -- /
           r0 r =1
                        ÷
                     , ­0     ÷
                          , --0       be equal, in expectation, to the police strategies and have
very low variance.
    To specify these equilibrium beliefs, first we set the number of prior trips, a
measure of the precision of the prior beliefs, at ­r   /
                                                        0 + --r0 = ­0 + --0 = 10 which
                                                              /     ÷     ÷      6

captures the fact that beliefs are likely to be slow to change once citizens are very
experienced. Second, we define the beliefs about police intensity to be correct in
expectation. Let Qú  r be the number of checkpoints allocated to road r for a crackdown
lasting T days; citizen's long-run equilibrium beliefs about checkpoint intensity are
/r,0 = Qú r /T . Likewise citizens beliefs about the ending probability of the campaign
are, ÷0 = 1/T .
    The third row of Table 11 shows that the "long-run" optimal policy estimates are
substantially di erent from the optimal crackdown given the estimated beliefs. In this
case a short and highly focused campaign is best: a duration of 21 days, and 75% of
checkpoints on road 1. Because there is minimal learning, the goal of the crackdown
is simply to inform as many drivers as soon as possible that checking has started and
thus clear the roads rapidly of drunken drivers. The reasoning for the emphasis on
road 1 is that most drunken drivers are located on road 1, so focusing the crackdown
on this location is the fastest way to show them that the police are enforcing the law.
It is still optimal to put 25% of enforcement on roads 2 and 3, since otherwise in
equilibrium drivers will know that these locations are safe and will immediately shift
to these routes. This strategy is extremely e ective: drunken driving decreases by
90%. One reason for the increased e ectiveness in equilibrium, relative to the initial
sobriety campaign in row 1, is that beliefs about the average duration (21 days)
are much longer than agents' estimated beliefs about crackdown duration in the data
(about 3 days). Thus the initial discovery that the police are enforcing the law creates
a much longer period of sober driving. Furthermore, once drivers encounter police on
road 1, they know there is a significant chance of apprehension on roads 2 and 3, thus
maximizing the negative displacement e ect. In this situation accounting for partial
compliance does make a di erence in the strategy, extending the optimal duration
to 43 days and shifting the location of 95% of checkpoints to road 1. However, the

                                                      42
impact on drunken driving is not very sensitive to changes in checkpoint allocation
in this scenario­putting to 50% of checks on road 1 increases drunken driving by only
3%.
    The final counterfactual we examine, in the fourth row of Table 11 presents the
optimal policy if drivers have equilibrium beliefs about the parameters of the sobriety
campaign and the police can give full prior warning of the beginning of the campaign.
In the case the campaign is extremely e ective under virtually all parameters of the
crackdown. The e ectiveness of the campaign is increasing in the duration of the
crackdown­with a duration of greater the 31 days the numerical computation rounds
the share of drunken drivers down to exactly 0 and the program is 100% e ective!
E ectiveness is not highly sensitive to the allocation across routes, as long as there is
some non-zero probability of a checkpoint at all locations. While this counterfactual
admittedly pushes the model quite far from its original setting, it does highlight the
e ectiveness of prior warning about checkpoints in a known (in equilibrium) anti-
sobriety campaign. This corresponds quite closely with the strategies of many US
police departments, whose announcements often specify not only the beginning of
the campaign, but also the exact locations and times of the checkpoints.18


7     Conclusion
This paper presents the results from a randomized experiment on the enforcement of
drunk driving campaign in Rajasthan India, which was designed to test a model of
criminal learning and strategic behavior. The central conclusion is that there is clear
evidence of learning, hence police interventions focused on the single location with the
highest prior concentration of criminal activity are rapidly undone by the diversion of
criminal activity to other areas. In contrast, an intervention spread across multiple,
initially less promising, locations causes a significant decrease in road accidents and
deaths. However, just as drivers learn about the beginning of police enforcement,
they also learn that it has come to an end­we see a slow reversion of driver behavior
and a return to drink and driving after the intervention.
    These results provide the data for a structural estimation of the parameters of a
 18
    For example, the Connecticut state police announce a checkpoint at the "Intersection
of Route 67/Mountain Road in Oxford -- 7 p.m. Dec. 30 to 3 a.m. Dec. 31. [2018]"
https://www.ctpost.com/local/article/Connecticut-State-Police-announce-DUI-checkpoints-
13486655.php.


                                           43
model of learning by potential drunken drivers. The structural parameters confirm
many of the qualitative implications of the reduced form data: drivers' priors on the
intensity of checking on many (but not all) locations change quickly. They also show
the two main factors underlying the main results: the estimated "cost" of encountering
a police checkpoint is very high (causing rapid behavioral adjustment), but there
are certain locations where citizens do not expect the police to be checking. This
combination is central in reproducing the results found in the data.
    These parameters provide the basis for the evaluation of a range of counterfactual
policies. We find that the optimal crackdown, given the conditions and constraints
present in Rajasthan at the time of the project, implies a relatively long-term e ort
that spreads 20 checkpoints over 82 days. This ensures that drivers are dissuaded
for a long time by gradually revising their (initially low) beliefs on duration of
the crackdown upwards. This emphasizes the situation-specificity of the optimal
crackdown: if driver's initial beliefs were consistent with a longer campaign, it would
not be necessary to convince them by conducting such a long intervention. Indeed,
when we alter our assumptions to require citizens' beliefs about police activity to
be correct in expectation, we find that the optimal police strategy becomes one of a
short, intense crackdown mostly done in one location.
    Our results suggest several areas where future research could contribute greatly to
illuminating the relationship between crime and punishment. There is little evidence
on the role of social learning in the e ectiveness of police enforcement strategies,
although in certain contexts this may be quite important. This would be more
challenging to study, perhaps requiring individual level data on (potential) law-
breakers. A relatively new strand of research in the criminology literature (Sloan et al.,
2014) investigates the insights that behavioral economics might bring to understanding
criminal behavior. Insights from the behavioral literature could be incorporated
into the design of future randomized policing experiments, and explicitly tested in
structural modeling of the outcomes. Finally, the very high predicted e cacy pre-
announcing a crackdown raises the possibility that the police may wish to announce
crackdowns that are subsequently never actually implemented. Because citizens would
come to expect this, the equilibrium e ectiveness of such a policy is another important
question that we leave to future research.




                                           44
References
Andres, G.-L. and A. M. Mobarak (2019). Slippery fish: Enforcing regulation under
 subversive adaptation. Technical Report 12179, Institute for the Study of Labor
 (IZA).

Anwar, S. and T. A. Loughran (2011). Testing a bayesian learning theory of deterrence
 among serious juvenile o enders. Criminology 49 (3), 667­698.

Bai, J. (2018). Melons as lemons: Asymmetric information, consumer learning and
  quality provision. Mimeo, Harvard Kennedy School.

Banerjee, A., R. Chattopadhyay, E. Duflo, D. Keniston, and N. Singh (2012, March).
  Improving police performance in Rajasthan, India: Experimental evidence on
  incentives, managerial autonomy and training. Working Paper 17912, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Banerjee, A. V., E. Duflo, and R. Glennerster (2008). Putting a band-aid on a
  corpse: incentives for nurses in the indian public health care system. Journal of
  the European Economic Association 6 (2-3), 487­500.

Blattman, C., D. Green, D. Ortega, and S. Tobón (2017). Place-based interventions
  at scale: The direct and spillover e ects of policing and city services on crime.
  Technical Report 23941, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bruins, M., J. A. Du y, M. P. Keane, and A. A. Smith Jr (2018). Generalized indirect
  inference for discrete choice models. Journal of Econometrics 205 (1), 177­203.

Chalfin, A. and J. McCrary (2017). Criminal deterrence: A review of the literature.
 Journal of Economic Literature 55 (1), 5­48.

Ching, A. T., T. Erdem, and M. P. Keane (2013). Learning models: An assessment
 of progress, challenges, and new developments. Marketing Science 32 (6), 913­938.

Ching, A. T., T. Erdem, and M. P. Keane (2017). Empirical Models of Learning
 Dynamics: A Survey of Recent Developments, pp. 223­257. Cham: Springer
 International Publishing.

Clarke, R. V. and D. Weisburd (1994). Di usion of crime control benefits:
  Observations on the reverse of displacement. Crime prevention studies 2, 165­184.

                                         45
Davis, A., A. Quimby, W. Odero, G. Gururaj, and M. Hijar (2003). Improving
 road safety by reducing impaired driving in. London: DFID Global Road Safety
 Partnership.

Dell, M. (2015). Tra cking networks and the mexican drug war. The American
  Economic Review 105 (6), 1738­1779.

Eeckhout, J., N. Persico, and P. E. Todd (2010). A theory of optimal random
  crackdowns. American Economic Review 100 (3), 1104­1135.

Elder, R. W., R. A. Shults, D. A. Sleet, J. L. Nichols, S. Zaza, and R. S. Thompson
  (2002). E ectiveness of sobriety checkpoints for reducing alcohol-involved crashes.
  Tra c Injury Prevention 3 (4), 266­274.

Erke, A., C. Goldenbeld, and T. Vaa (2009). The e ects of drink-driving checkpoints
  on crashes: a meta-analysis. Accident Analysis & Prevention 41 (5), 914­923.

Foster, A. D. and M. R. Rosenzweig (2010). Microeconomics of technology adoption.
  Annu. Rev. Econ. 2 (1), 395­424.

Giancola, P. R., R. A. Josephs, D. J. Parrott, and A. A. Duke (2010). Alcohol myopia
  revisited: Clarifying aggression and other acts of disinhibition through a distorted
  lens. Perspectives on Psychological Science 5 (3), 265­278. PMID: 26162159.

Habyarimana, J. and W. Jack (2011). Heckle and chide: Results of a randomized
  road safety intervention in kenya. Journal of Public Economics 95 (11), 1438­1446.

Hörner, J. and A. Skrzypacz (2017). Learning, Experimentation, and Information
  Design, Volume 1 of Econometric Society Monographs, pp. 63­98. Cambridge
  University Press.

Mookherjee, D. and I. P. Png (1994). Marginal deterrence in enforcement of law.
 Journal of Political Economy 102 (5), 1039­1066.

Newey, W. K. and K. D. West (1987). Hypothesis testing with e cient method of
  moments estimation. International Economic Review , 777­787.

Peden, M., R. Scurfield, D. Sleet, D. Mohan, A. A. Hyder, E. Jarawan, C. D. Mathers,
  et al. (2004). World report on road tra c injury prevention.


                                         46
Peek-Asa, C. (1999). The e ect of random alcohol screening in reducing motor vehicle
  crash injuries. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 16 (1), 57­67.

Ratcli e, J. H., T. Taniguchi, E. R. Gro , and J. D. Wood (2011). The Philadelphia
  foot patrol experiment: A randomized controlled trial of police patrol e ectiveness
  in violent crime hotspots. Criminology 49 (3), 795­831.

Ross, H. L. (1993). Punishment as a factor in preventing alcohol-related accidents.
  Addiction 88 (7), 997­1002.

Scott, S. L. (2010). A modern Bayesian look at the multi-armed bandit. Applied
  Stochastic Models in Business and Industry 26 (6), 639­658.

Sherman, L. W. (1990). Police crackdowns: Initial and residual deterrence. Crime
  and justice 12, 1­48.

Sherman, L. W. and D. Weisburd (1995). General deterrent e ects of police patrol in
  crime "hot spots": A randomized, controlled trial. Justice quarterly 12 (4), 625­648.

Sloan, F. A., L. M. Eldred, and Y. Xu (2014). The behavioral economics of drunk
  driving. Journal of health economics 35, 64­81.

Weisburd, D. and L. Green (1995). Policing drug hot spots: The Jersey City drug
 market analysis experiment. Justice Quarterly 12 (4), 711­735.

Weisburd, D. and C. W. Telep (2014). Hot spots policing: What we know and what
 we need to know. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice 30 (2), 200­220.

Wilson, T., R. Paternoster, and T. Loughran (2017). Direct and indirect experiential
 e ects in an updating model of deterrence: A research note. Journal of Research
 in Crime and Delinquency 54 (1), 63­77.

World Health Organization (2018).       Global status report on road safety 2018.
 Technical report, Geneva, Geneva.




                                          47
8   Tables

                   Table 1: Police station treatment assignment

                                               Implementation Sta
    A. Sep.-Oct. 2010 Round: 16 control police stations
                                  Police Lines Teams      Police Station Teams

                      Rotating     5 stations @ 2/week    7 stations @ 2/week
     Checkpoint
      Strategy
                       Fixed       6 stations @ 2/week    6 stations @ 2/week

    B. Sep.-Nov. 2011 Round: 60 control police stations
                                  Police Lines Teams      Police Station Teams

                                  8 stations @ 1/week     10 stations @ 1/week
                      Rotating    11 stations @ 2/week    9 stations @ 2/week
                                  10 stations @ 3/week    12 stations @ 3/week
     Checkpoint
      Strategy
                                   9 stations @ 1/week    14 stations @ 1/week
                       Fixed       7 stations @ 2/week    13 stations @ 2/week
                                   9 stations @ 3/week    11 stations @ 3/week




                                         48
                        Table 2: Summary Statistics

                           Obs.     Mean        SD      Median     Min.    Max.

A. Police station daily mean accidents and    deaths (Control stations)
Accidents                77357     0.12        0.36      0         0    4
Deaths                   77357     0.05        0.27      0         0    13
Night Accidents          77357     0.04        0.19      0         0    3
Night Deaths             77357     0.02        0.16      0         0    13

B. Total vehicles passing police checkpoint locations in control stations
Location 1                 238     941.02 726.48       672.5     117 4862
Location 2                 244     932.66 914.84        612      123 4998
Location 3                 256     895.33    888.9      571       38   4743

C. Vehicles stopped by police at   checkpoints
Total                    837        105.28 108.26          69        1     1180
Motorcycles              837         39.9    47.04         25        0     357
Cars                     837        22.16    35.24         10        0     435
Trucks                   837        19.52    35.25          9        0     580

D. Drunk drivers caught by police at checkpoints
Total                    837      1.85     2.36             1        0      21
Motorcycles              837      1.03     1.63             0        0      14
Cars                     837       0.2     0.59             0        0       7
Trucks                   837      0.23     0.61             0        0       5

E. Percentage found drunk in control police stations at final check
Total                   4988    2.23%      2.18%
Motorcycles             2202    3.36%      3.25%
Cars                    1383    0.72%      0.72%
Trucks                   571    1.93%      1.89%

F. Police checkpoint attendance
Checkpoint occurred       1580 62.50%         23.45%
Arrived on time           980   54.54%        24.79%
Stayed until 10:00pm       980  72.23%        20.06%
The total vehicle category also includes vans, jeeps, buses, autorickshaws, and
other (mostly tractors). The lower number of night deaths observations is due to
the fact that this data is not available for January and February 2012.




                                       49
                                  Table 3: Pooled Results

                                  Daylight                  Darkness              Day & Night
                              (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)
                           Accidents      Deaths      Accidents     Deaths           Deaths
Treatment during &           0.0032        -0.0023    -0.0056úú     -0.0040ú         -0.0036
post intervention           (0.0037)      (0.0029)     (0.0024)     (0.0021)        (0.0031)


Month FE                       Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes
Police Station FE              Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Mean of dep. variable         0.085        0.029         0.033        0.016           0.045
N                             5090         4724          5090         4724            5090
This table presents the impact of all (pooled) sobriety checkpoint interventions on the number
of monthly road accidents and deaths from August 2010-October 2012. The during & post
intervention variable is positive for the duration of the sobriety crackdown and 90 days
afterwards. Accident/death counts have been re-normalized to the per-day level. Each
observation corresponds to a police-station month, with months that span the beginning or
end of the intervention divided into 2 observations using daily accident/death data and weighted
accordingly. All data was taken from police administrative reports, as collected in both treatment
and control police stations. Hourly death data was not available for some months, hence columns
2 and 4 have fewer observations. Column 5 displays total deaths (daylight and nighttime) during
the entire study period, including for dates when the hour of the accident was not recorded.
Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the police station level. ú p < 0.10, úú p < 0.05, úúú
p < 0.01




                                               50
                      Table 4: Fixed vs. Rotating Pooled Results
                                   Daylight                  Darkness             Day & Night
                               (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)
                            Accidents      Deaths     Accidents      Deaths          Deaths
Fixed checkpoints             -0.0021      -0.0041       -0.0016      -0.0029         -0.0046
during & post                (0.0045)     (0.0033)      (0.0029)     (0.0023)        (0.0035)
intervention
Rotating checkpoints         0.0084ú       -0.0005     -0.0096úúú    -0.0050ú         -0.0026
during & post                (0.0045)     (0.0036)      (0.0028)     (0.0029)        (0.0041)
intervention


Month fixed e ects              Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
Police Station FE               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes
Mean of dep. variable          0.085        0.029        0.033        0.016           0.045
P-value of test fixed =       0.0398        0.378       0.0130        0.473           0.660
rotating e ect
N                              5090         4724          5090         4724            5090
This table presents the impact of fixed and rotating checkpoint interventions on the number
of monthly road accidents and deaths from August 2010-October 2012. The during & post
intervention variable is positive for the duration of the sobriety crackdown and 90 days
afterwards. Accident/death counts have been re-normalized to the per-day level. Each
observation corresponds to a police-station month, with months that span the beginning or
end of the intervention divided into 2 observations using daily accident/death data and weighted
accordingly. All data was taken from police administrative reports, as collected in both treatment
and control police stations. Hourly death data was not available for some months, hence columns
2 and 4 have fewer observations.
Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the police station level. ú p < 0.10, úú p < 0.05, úúú
p < 0.01




                                               51
               Table 5: Fixed vs. Rotating, During & Post Intervention

                                      Daylight                   Darkness            Day & Night
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)
                               Accidents      Deaths      Accidents      Deaths         Deaths
Fixed stations during             -0.0014      -0.0011      0.0021        -0.0021        -0.0024
intervention                     (0.0064)     (0.0041)     (0.0045)      (0.0027)       (0.0047)
Fixed stations post               -0.0025     -0.0073ú      -0.0043       -0.0039        -0.0062
intervention                     (0.0049)     (0.0042)     (0.0034)      (0.0030)       (0.0044)
Rotating stations during         0.0112ú       0.0029      -0.0099úú      -0.0052        -0.0020
intervention                     (0.0065)     (0.0048)      (0.0041)     (0.0034)       (0.0056)
Rotating stations post            0.0065       -0.0044     -0.0092úú      -0.0048        -0.0029
intervention                     (0.0055)     (0.0041)      (0.0035)     (0.0039)       (0.0048)


Month fixed e ects                 Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Police Station FE                  Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Mean of dep. variable             0.085         0.029        0.033        0.016          0.045
N                                 5090          4724         5090         4724           5090
This table presents the impact of fixed and rotating checkpoint interventions on the number of
monthly road accidents and deaths from August 2010-October 2012. The during intervention
variable is positive for the duration of the sobriety crackdown, and the post intervention variable
is positive for 90 days afterwards. Accident/death counts have been re-normalized to the per-
day level. Each observation corresponds to a police-station month, with months that span the
beginning or end of the intervention divided into 2 observations using daily accident/death data
and weighted accordingly. All data was taken from police administrative reports, as collected
in both treatment and control police stations. Hourly death data was not available for some
months, hence columns 2 and 4 have fewer observations.
Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the police station level. ú p < 0.10, úú p < 0.05, úúú
p < 0.01




                                                 52
                  Table 6: Fixed vs. Rotating, Intensity of Checking

                                           Daylight                   Darkness            Day & Night
                                       (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)
                                    Accidents        Deaths     Accidents     Deaths         Deaths
Rotating checkpoints1/week            0.0090          0.0007      -0.0074      0.0043         0.0025
during & post intervention           (0.0083)        (0.0077)    (0.0053)     (0.0054)       (0.0082)
Rotating checkpoints2/week            0.0059          -0.0017   -0.0094úú    -0.0093úú        -0.0073
during & post intervention           (0.0064)        (0.0037)    (0.0038)     (0.0040)       (0.0050)
Rotating checkpoints3/week           0.0106ú          0.0002    -0.0116úúú    -0.0061ú        -0.0006
during & post intervention           (0.0062)        (0.0063)    (0.0041)     (0.0034)       (0.0064)
Fixed checkpoints 1/week              -0.0073         -0.0023     -0.0027      -0.0026        -0.0035
during & post intervention           (0.0063)        (0.0054)    (0.0038)     (0.0031)       (0.0049)
Fixed checkpoints2/week               0.0020          -0.0031     -0.0013      -0.0019        -0.0016
during & post intervention           (0.0066)        (0.0042)    (0.0043)     (0.0036)       (0.0053)
Fixed checkpoints3/week               -0.0022         -0.0072     -0.0007      -0.0035       -0.0095ú
during & post intervention           (0.0063)        (0.0048)    (0.0044)     (0.0032)       (0.0051)


Month FE                                Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes
Police Station FE                       Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes
Mean of dep. variable                  0.085          0.029       0.033        0.016          0.045
N                                      5090           4724        5090         4724           5090
This table presents the impact of fixed and rotating checkpoint interventions on the number of
monthly road accidents and deaths from August 2010-October 2012. The during intervention variable
is positive for the duration of the sobriety crackdown, and the post intervention variable is positive
for 90 days afterwards. Accident/death counts have been re-normalized to the per-day level. Each
observation corresponds to a police-station month, with months that span the beginning or end of the
intervention divided into 2 observations using daily accident/death data and weighted accordingly.
All data was taken from police administrative reports, as collected in both treatment and control
police stations. Hourly death data was not available for some months, hence columns 2 and 4 have
fewer observations.
Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the police station level. ú p < 0.10, úú p < 0.05, úúú
p < 0.01




                                                53
                                                      Table 7: Checkpoint surveys during intervention

                                                 Drunk drivers and motorcyclists caught                                   Cars and motorcycles passing

                                               (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)

     Treatment                                                                                                -150.267ú        -65.989
                                                                                                               (86.260)       (130.658)

     Rotating checkpoint                      0.130          -1.001ú                                            0.208          -32.860
     station                                 (0.189)         (0.518)                                          (74.392)        (83.159)

     Frequency                                              -0.519úú                                                           -42.536
                                                             (0.199)                                                          (43.020)

     Rotating checkpoint                                     0.586úú                                                           25.996
      frequency                                              (0.235)                                                          (18.340)

     Weeks of checking                                                      -0.099úúú                                                      -17.528úúú
54




                                                                             (0.026)                                                         (4.201)

     Rotating checkpoint                                                     0.091úú                                                          1.506
      weeks of checking                                                      (0.035)                                                         (5.375)

     Number previous                                                                        -0.041úúú                                                       -8.507úúú
     checkpoints                                                                             (0.012)                                                         (2.182)

     Rotating checkpoint                                                                     0.032ú                                                           2.024
      number previous                                                                        (0.016)                                                         (2.604)
     checkpoints

     District FE                               Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
     Police Station FE                         No              No              Yes                Yes            No             No             Yes             Yes
     Mean of dep. variable                    1.257           1.257           1.257              1.257          527.0          527.0          527.0           527.0
     N                                         852             852             852                852           2645           2645           2645            2645

     This table reports the intensity and dynamic e ects of the sobriety crackdown on the number of drunken drivers caught (columns 1-4) and vehicles passing
     the checkpoint location (columns 5-8). All outcome variables are based on data collected by surveyors sent to monitor the checkpoints. The frequency of
     checking variable is the number of checkpoints per week: 1, 2, or 3. The weeks of checking variable is the number of weeks that have elapsed since the
     first checkpoint. The number of previous checkpoints is the number of checkpoints assigned prior to the given night, after the start of the intervention. All
     specifications include controls for whether the police station is located on a major highway, the pre-intervention accident rate, and assignment to the police
                                                                                             ú           úú             úúú
         Table 8: Passing cars and motorcycles post-crackdown

                                          Road 1                  Roads 2 & 3
                                    (1)            (2)      (3)           (4)
Treatment                        -214.1úú                  -13.87
                                  (71.45)                 (43.41)
Days since last checkpoint        1.761                    -3.774
                                 (4.003)                  (3.216)
Fixed checkpoints                              -224.4úú                  191.5
                                                (79.33)                 (128.0)
Fixed checkpoint                                0.155                   -11.77úú
days since last checkpoint                     (3.556)                   (5.261)
Rotating checkpoints                           -289.0úú                 -107.0úú
                                                (115.6)                  (40.37)
Rotating checkpoint                             17.13                    1.597
days since last checkpoint                     (15.91)                  (4.636)

District FE                        Yes           Yes       Yes            Yes
Control mean                      488.0         488.0     501.5          501.5
N                                  145           145       347            347

All columns report outcomes on the number of cars and motorcycles observed
passing the former checkpoint locations in the weeks after the sobriety checkpoint
intervention was over. Data collected by surveyors monitoring the locations. All
specifications include controls for whether the police station is located on a major
highway, the pre-intervention accident rate, and whether the surveyor was counting
1-way or 2-way tra c. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ú p < 0.10, úú
p < 0.05, úúú p < 0.01




                                          55
                      Table 9: Drunk drivers caught on final check

                                       All Stations       Rotating checkpoints      Fixed Checkpoints
                                       (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
Treatment                           -1.322úú    -0.286     -1.250       -0.447      -1.301úú      0.560
                                     (0.447)   (0.663)    (0.799)      (1.269)       (0.574)     (1.463)
Days since last checkpoint          0.017ú      -0.012     0.001        -0.057      0.033úúú      -0.007
                                    (0.008)    (0.026)    (0.018)      (0.033)      (0.009)      (0.039)
Frequency                                       -0.503                  -0.340                    -0.954
                                               (0.280)                 (0.368)                   (0.541)
Days since last last                            0.015                  0.027*                     0.021
checkpointfrequency                            (0.012)                 (0.012)                   (0.020)

District FE                            Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
Control mean                          1.953      1.953     1.953         1.953        1.953       1.953
Mean treatment e ect, @ freq         -1.089     -1.064     -1.236       -1.177       -0.856      -0.875
=2
P-value of mean treatment            0.0114     0.0105    0.0594        0.0778        0.118       0.102
e ect
N                                     108        108         77           77           74          74
This table reports the impact of the interventions on the number of drunken car and motorcycle
drivers caught at the final check conducted after the end of the intervention in all police stations,
including control stations. Columns 1 and 2 compare pooled treatment police stations with control
stations, columns 3 and 4 compare rotating checkpoint stations with controls, and columns 5 and
6 compare fixed checkpoint police stations with controls. Outcome data collected by surveyors sent
to monitor the final checkpoints. All specifications include controls for whether the police station
is located on a major highway, the pre-intervention accident rate, and whether the final check was
conducted by a team from the local station or district Police Lines.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. ú p < 0.10, úú p < 0.05, úúú p < 0.01




                                               56
                             Table 10: Structural Parameters

Interpretation               Parameters                  Baseline           No             Myopic          Riskless
                                                          Model           Learning                         Learning
                                                           (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)

Utility of drunken                    d1                   -1.541           -1.355           -1.379         42.787
driving on road 1                                         (0.766)          (0.219)          (0.749)        (48.607)
Utility of drunken                    d2                   -1.809           -1.436           -1.626         42.667
driving on road 2                                         (0.873)          (0.212)          (0.786)        (49.575)
Utility of drunken                    d3                   -1.780           -1.415           -1.656         42.838
driving on road 3                                         (0.734)          (0.215)          (0.468)        (48.485)
Disutility of                         c               5,942.684           7,771.940     5,594.131      47,567.846
                                                                                                       !           "
encountering                                         (20,111.04)         (28,512.67)   (20,5972.21)    1.003 ú 106
checkpoint
                                         ­÷
Prior on crackdown           ÷0 =       ÷
                                           0
                                      ­ 0 + --0
                                              ÷            0.315            0.148            0.287           0.999
ending probability                                        (0.643)          (0.033)          (0.681)         (0.087)
Strength of prior on            ÷
                               ­0 + --0
                                      ÷
                                                           20.670             -             26.264           70.539
crackdown ending                                         (101.230)                         (165.883)       (805.219)
probability
                                         ­/
Prior on road 1            / 1 ,0 =    /
                                           1,0
                                      ­1,0 +--1/           0.090            0.226            0.094           0.999
                                                ,0
intensity                                                 (4.603)          (0.756)          (2.098)         (0.351)
Strength of prior on           / + --/
                              ­1 ,0  1,0             6.050 ú 107              -        3.654 ú 107      258.516
road 1 intensity                                       (0.685)                            (0.455)      (3388.131)
                                         ­/
Prior on road 2            / 2 ,0 =    /
                                           2,0
                                      ­2,0 +--2/           0.006            0.031            0.007           0.999
                                                ,0
intensity                                                 (0.030)          (0.098)          (0.124)         (0.757)
Strength of prior on           / + --/
                              ­2 ,0  2,0                 8,807.176            -        11,992.953        157.103
                                                     !               "                 !           "
road 2 intensity                                         2.555 ú 106                   5.926 ú 106     (1330.756)
                                         ­/
Prior on road 3            / 3,0 =     /
                                           3,0
                                      ­3,0 +--3/     3.060 ú 106            0.022      2.035 ú 107           0.999
                                                ,0
intensity                                              (0.008)             (0.069)        (0.007)           (0.345)
Strength of prior on           / + --/
                              ­3 ,0  3,0                   0.009              -              0.004      1405.658
road 3 intensity                                         (12.360)                           (5.102)    (11014.146)


Value of GMM                                               .0087           .0175            .0090           0.0097
Criterion

Structural parameters estimated using techniques and specifications described in Section 6. Standard
errors in parentheses calculated using delta method.
                                                     57
                 Table 11: Optimal Crackdown Strategy and Duration

                 Prior                              Implementation Compliance
                Warning                     Full                                    Partial

                           Duration      Pct. on         Decrease    Duration     Pct. on      Decrease
                                         road 1         in drunken                road 1      in drunken
                                                          driving                               driving
                               (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)

Estimated         No        82 days        35%            36.1%       83 days       35%          25.0%
beliefs
                  Yes       77 days        20%            46.6%       81 days       35%          36.5%

Equilibrium       No        21 days        75%            89.9%       43 days       95%          71.7%
beliefs
                  Yes      >31 days        35%            100%       >31 days       35%          100%

This table displays the parameters and e ectiveness of the optimal anti-drunken driving campaign
that allocates 20 checkpoints over up to 90 days and across 3 locations. E ectiveness is measured
by the undiscounted share of agents drinking and driving on any road over the 90 days after the
first checkpoint. Parameters used in rows 1 and 2 ("Estimated beliefs") are all as estimated in
the baseline model. Parameters used in rows 3 and 4 are as estimated from the data for drivers'
utilities, but with beliefs constrained to equal police strategies in expectation; see details in Section
6.4. Counterfactual strategies estimated in rows 1 and 3 assume (as was the case in the empirical
intervention) that drivers have no prior warning of the beginning of drunken driving enforcement.
Rows 2 and 4 assume that all drivers are informed of the beginning of the campaign. Columns 1
and 4 show the duration of the optimal campaign, and columns 2 and 5 show the share of checks
allocated to road 1. The remaining checks are equally divided between roads 2 and 3. Columns 3
and 6 show the decrease in drunken driving induced by the campaign relative to the share of drivers
drinking and driving on the night just prior to the first checkpoint.




                                                   58
9   Figures

              Figure 9.1: Drunken drivers caught over time
                   (a) Whole intervention learning results




                          (b) Pre-learning results




                          (c) Post-learning results




                                     59
                                                         Figure 9.2: Example of Agents' Simulated Actions and Beliefs

                                                                                                                           Fixed Checkpoints
                                               1                                                                                                                                                                            1
           Prob. crackdown continuing ( t )




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   )              rt
                                              0.8                                                                                                                                                                           0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Intensity of checking (E[
                                              0.6                                                                                                                                                                           0.6


                                              0.4                                                                                                                                                                           0.4


                                              0.2                                                                                                                                                                           0.2


                                               0                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                      10                20              30                   40                        50            60                 70                     80          90
                                                                                                                                         Period
                                                                                                                        Rotating Checkpoints
                                               1                                                                                                                                                                            0.35
           Prob. crackdown continuing ( t )




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              )                rt
                                              0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Intensity of checking (E[
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.25

                                              0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.15
                                              0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1
                                              0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.05

                                               0                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                      10                20              30                   40                        50            60                 70                     80          90
                                                                                                                                         Period
                                                                                                                                  E[ 1t ]              E[ 2t ]     E[ 3t ]
                                                                                                                 t




                  Figure 9.3: Simulated Drunken Driving Probabilities Across Interventions
                                                          1/Week, Fixed                                                2/Week, Fixed                                                    3/Week, Fixed
0.16                                                                                         0.16                                                                 0.16

0.14                                                                                         0.14                                                                 0.14

0.12                                                                                         0.12                                                                 0.12

 0.1                                                                                          0.1                                                                  0.1

0.08                                                                                         0.08                                                                 0.08

0.06                                                                                         0.06                                                                 0.06

0.04                                                                                         0.04                                                                 0.04

       0                                  20        40          60          80   100   120          0    20      40          60          80      100        120          0   20   40          60          80   100   120



                                                         1/Week, Surprise                                             2/Week, Surprise                                                 3/Week, Surprise
0.16                                                                                         0.16                                                                 0.16

0.14                                                                                         0.14                                                                 0.14

0.12                                                                                         0.12                                                                 0.12

 0.1                                                                                          0.1                                                                  0.1

0.08                                                                                         0.08                                                                 0.08

0.06                                                                                         0.06                                                                 0.06

0.04                                                                                         0.04                                                                 0.04

       0                                  20        40          60          80   100   120          0    20      40          60          80      100        120          0   20   40          60          80   100   120




                                                                                                              Road 1         Road 2           Road 3




                                                                                                                          60
Appendix
A1       Theory
A1.1      Setup
If police enforcement strategy were fixed in perpetuity, and drivers knew this strategy,
their problem would be a static choice of whether to cease drunken driving, continue
to drink but avoid the checkpoints, or drive drunk on their favored routes in spite of
the checkpoints. However, the assumption of complete information is an unlikely one
in this context: potential drunken drivers did not know that there would be such an
intervention and even after it started there was no o cial announcement. So potential
law-breakers could only learn about it from their own experience or that of others.
Furthermore, based on their experience with enforcement of other laws, drivers are
likely to believe that anti-drunken driving strategies are not fixed, but rather take the
form of discrete "crackdown" periods of intense enforcement. They also did not know
how long the intervention was meant to continue and were not told when it ended.
Drivers could only make inferences about the duration of the program and whether
it had ended based on their individual and collective experiences.
    To illustrate the trade-o s inherent to designing policy in an environment in which
agents can learn to avoid enforcement, we analyze a simplified version of the structural
model that we take to the data in Section 6.1. The model falls into the class of "restless
two-armed Bandit" models, in which agents learn about the payo s of choices while
the payo s themselves are changing over time. A homogeneous set of agents of mass
1 choose between drunken driving, from which they get utility flow d, or an alternate
activity from which they get utility s. We refer to this activity as "staying home"
or "sobriety", although we later consider the possibility that their alternative may
be drunken driving in another location. For the population relevant to this model,
d > s, so that in the absence of any enforcement they would prefer to drink and
drive. Checkpoints are held with instantaneous hazard rate /, (which we refer to as
"intensity") and the cost to the agent of getting caught drunk driving is c < 0. We
assume that
                                       d + /c < s                                  (A1.1)

so that if agents were sure that a crackdown is ongoing, this would be su cient to

                                            1
(temporarily) end drunken driving.
    Drunken drivers only learn about the existence of the crackdown when they first
encounter a checkpoint. We assume that at this moment they know with certainty
that a crackdown of intensity / is happening, although they do not know for how long
it has gone on.19 However, all agents believe that with the same prior probability
1  p0 the enforcement is only temporary, and if this is the case the police have a
hazard rate ÷ of ending enforcement, while with probability p0 they believe that the
police have adopted a strategy of permanently enforcing drunken driving laws.20 Thus
agents' decision to cease drinking and driving after the announcement of anti-drunken
driving campaign may be only temporary. After some time, it may be optimal for
them to return to drunken driving if they believe that the crackdown is likely enough
to have ended.
    The goal of the police is to choose / and ÷ to minimize the number of drunken
drivers subject to a budget constraint. We assume, in this simplified example, that
police commit to a {/, ÷ } policy and that these values are public knowledge, but the
start date and permanence of the crackdown is not. If checking is permanent then
we show the police choice is trivial: they should implement the highest intensity of
checking that their budget permits. However, if the police have a policy of temporary
crackdowns, or if the budget is too low to support a permanent level of / that
satisfies equation A1.1, then there is clearly a trade-o between a shorter, more
intense crackdown versus a more prolonged, lower intensity crackdown. In this case,
under restrictions detailed below, the optimal policy may be to implement the longest,
lowest intensity crackdown that satisfies A1.1.
    The analysis is complicated by the fact that drivers may make several switches
between periods of sobriety and exploratory bouts of drinking and driving. To
enable a clearer exposition, we make use of the fact that because A1.1 holds, after
first learning of the enforcement campaign agents immediately commence a single
temporary interval of sobriety before returning to drunken driving. The following
proposition shows conditions under which drivers attempt a single (rather than multiple)
  19
     In particular they have no priors about when the checks started and therefore do not update on
the probability of their being permanent based on when they first observe a check.
  20
     While the case of a permanent "crackdown" is extreme, it allows for a simpler exposition of the
main factors a ecting agents' and policing strategy. Our structural model in Section 6.1 relaxes this
assumption and allows drivers to learn about the permanence of the campaign from a continuous
distribution of expected crackdown durations.



                                                 2
period of temporary sobriety before giving up on drunken driving.

Proposition. There exists a value pú such that for p0 Ø pú the agent's optimal
strategy is to cease drunken driving for a finite interval following their first encounter
with police, and stop permanently following the second encounter with police.

Proof. Let p
           ¯ be the belief about the permanence of checking such that if a driver is
checked and his belief is that checking is permanent with probability p  ¯, then he will
be indi erent between a policy of giving up drunken driving forever, or an alternative
of remaining sober for an additional a finite period · , then stopping permanently if
caught again. Since the driver's belief that checking is permanent, pt ,

                                                    p0
                                     pt =                                          (A1.2)
                                            p0 + (1  p0 ) e÷t

is increasing in t, any driver stopped at a time such that pt > p
                                                                ¯ will cease drinking
and driving forever. p¯ is implicitly defined by:
           A            B
    s          1  er·            er· 1                    Ë1     2              È2
      =                     s+         ¯ [Wperm ] + (1  p
                                       p                ¯) 1  e÷· d + e÷· Wtemp
    r            r                r

Substituting the optimal stopping time · and solving for p
                                                         ¯ yields:

                                                 ds
                                       ¯ =
                                       p                                           (A1.3)
                                               d  Wperm

    We now show conditions which ensure that, for p0 high enough, the optimal
temporary stopping time · after the first check is such that p· > p       ¯. Combining
the expressions for p                                            ¯, the duration of time
                      ¯ and pt yields an implicit expression for t
after the agent's first check when p ¯ is reached:
                                                    3              4
                                   ¯       p0           s  Wperm
                                 ÷ t
                                 e     =
                                         1  p0            ds

                                                                               ¯: after
In order for the proposed strategy to be optimal, it must be the case that · Ø t
the driver's initial period of sobriety, if he returns and is checked then permanently
not drinking and driving will be preferable to another temporary interval of sobriety.




                                                3
This is true if,

                                                               ¯
                                                           · Ø t
                                      3                    4                       A               B
                         (÷ + r) s  Wperm                                              d  Wperm
                      p0                                           Ø 1  p0
                            r      ds                                                  d  Wtemp

which is bound to hold for p0 high enough.
    Consider a driver at time zero, the moment after the first encounter with a
checkpoint, and hence immediately after he has first learned that a crackdown is
in force. Let Wperm be the net expected present value of future utility discounted to
time zero, in the state of the world where checking is permanent and Wtemp is the
corresponding number in the state of the world where checking is temporary. His
valuation of not drinking and driving for · periods before resuming is:
                     3            4               3                                 5                           64
                         1  er·                                                      !            "d
    V (· ; p0 ) =                     s + er·         p0 [Wperm ] + (1  p0 )             1  e÷·      + e÷· Wtemp (A1.4)
                            r                                                                      r

if his subjective discount factor of r. This valuation incorporates the three possible
states of the world upon his return to drunken driving. With probability p0 the
campaign is permanent, in which case he receives (the net present value of) utility
Wperm . Alternatively, it may have ended during his interval of sobriety, in which case
he enjoys utility d in perpetuity. Finally, it may be temporary, but still continuing at
the time he returns to drunken driving; in this case he receives Wtemp . Both Wtemp and
Wperm incorporate the driver's strategy of forever ending drunken driving if checked
again, and can be written:
                                          1            2                                     1             2
                              d+/ c+               s                   d
                                                                           (÷ + r) + / c +             s
                    Wperm =                                Wtemp =
                                                   r                   r                               r
                                      (/ + r)                                      (÷ + / + r)
Not surprisingly, holding all else constant, higher intensity of checking (/) decreases
both Wperm and Wtemp , and longer lasting crackdowns (low ÷ ) decrease the value of
Wtemp . Solving equation A1.4 for the utility-maximizing sobriety interval · yields
                                              Q                            1                 2R
                                      1 a         (1  p0 ) (÷ + r)             d
                                                                                    Wtemp
                          ·ú =          ln
                                                                               r
                                            1                         2b
                                      ÷    r (1  p0 ) r + p0 Wperm  r
                                                      d             s



   Intuitively, in deciding how long to temporarily stop drinking and driving, agents
trade o two opposing forces: a longer delay postpones the time until they can start
drinking and driving again, but it improves their expected utility of returning to

                                                               4
illegal drinking if checking is temporary. A temporary halt to drunken driving will
only be optimal if A1.1 holds and

                                                 d              s
                                   (1  p0 )        + p0 Wperm >
                                                 r              r

which just says, that being sober for ever does worse than always drinking and driving
without ever caught as long as checking is temporary (the best case scenario) and
getting the average expected value of the chosen strategy if it is permanent. If this
condition fails, they should just stop permanently. The more that agents believe that
checking is permanent (p0 high) the longer their interval of temporary sobriety will
be.
    The attractiveness of the outside option s also influences the duration of time
during which agents temporarily cease drinking and driving. It can be shown that
^· ú /^ (d  s) < 0, meaning that the greater the utility that drivers get from drinking
and driving on their preferred road where the police might catch them (relative to
their outside option), the shorter will be their temporary period of sobriety. This
has implications for our interpretation of s: if the alternative is to drink and drive
on another (unpatrolled) road in which case the outside option is good (d  s small)
we would expect a long discouragement period. In contrast, if the outside option is
to cease drinking entirely (d  s large), we would expect a shorter discouragement
period.


A1.2         Government's objective function
The police want to minimize the number of people drinking and driving in all future
periods. To accomplish this, they have a budget which allows for Q checkpoints in net
present value terms, discounted by the government discount factor fl. For simplicity
we assume the budget is flexible in the sense that the budget constraint must only
bind in expectation, but not ex-post:21
                                  / OE           3/ t          4
                                                                          /
                            Q=           e÷t ÷          eflx /dx dt =                          (A1.5)
                                   0               0                    fl+÷

Because of the stationarity of the crackdown strategy, every driver's expected amount
of future drunken driving after being apprehended is the same: we denote this as .
 21
      In our later counterfactuals we impose that the budget constraint must also be satisfied ex-post.


                                                        5
The police objective function can then be written as the sum of two terms,


                       / OE           3/ x 1                 2                                  4
                                                  (÷ +/)z            (÷ +/)x      (÷ +/)x
        min D =                flx
                              e                e            ÷ dz + e           +e           /       dx (A1.6)
         ÷ ,/           0                 0
                            ÷+fl           /
                  =                   +
                       fl (÷ + / + fl) (÷ + / + fl)

The first term captures drunken driving by agents who have not yet encountered a
checkpoint; if the crackdown is not permanent (÷ > 0) some will continue to drink
and drive, oblivious to the crackdown. The second term is the discounted total of all
lawbreaking by drivers who will, at some point, encounter a checkpoint.
   If checking is permanent, then the government's objective function is simply:
                                                                 A     A          BB
                                      1       /                             1
                                  =       +
                                                         ú
                       Dperm                        efl·
                                    / + fl (/ + fl)                        /+fl

and since ^· ú /^/ > 0, ^ D^/
                            perm
                                 < 0, the optimal policy is to simply set / = Qfl as long
as equation A1.1 is satisfied (otherwise just set / = 0, since the drivers just ignore
checking.
    If the police choose a temporary crackdown, their policy choices are more complex.
Once a drunken driver has been caught, his expected future amount of drunken driving
is,

                                      C       D
                                              / OE                                A                 B
                   1       efl·   2                                1
        temp    = 1e        ÷·
                                  +e e
                                     ÷· fl·
                                                   e(/+÷+fl)t 1 + ÷ + /0 dt
                            fl                 0                   fl
                      A                  A                 BB
                       1       21                ÷+fl
                = efl· 1  e÷·      + e÷·                                  (A1.7)
                                fl         fl (÷ + / + fl)

Again, there are two terms, the first accounting for the possibility that checking
ends while the agent is abstaining from drunken driving, and the second for the
chance he returns during the crackdown and may be caught. Holding · constant, the
comparative statics are straightforward: a more intense crackdown (high /) and/or a
longer lasting one (low ÷ ) both reduce the drunk driving. With unlimited resources
the police would naturally want to carry out constant checkpoints over a very long
period.
   However, a change in police enforcement policy will also a ect drivers' decisions


                                                        6
of how long to temporarily cease drinking and driving. A higher intensity / increases
· which makes the return to drunken driving occur further in the future, which is
desirable for a police department that seeks to end drunken driving in the present
(fl > 0). On the other hand, a higher · makes it less likely that drivers recommence
drinking before checking has ended; this has the cost that they are less likely to
be caught a second time, and therefore end drunk driving permanently. It can be
shown however that on net an unconstrained police department would want to make
checking as intense as possible.
    The calculus can change dramatically when budget constraint is binding. Higher
intensity crackdowns now necessitate shorter (expected) duration 1/÷ , and in all our
numerical examples,22 induces shorter · intervals from the agents. Because of the
countervailing e ects of / and ÷ increasing / while respecting the budget constraint
has no e ect on drunken driving by uninformed drivers (the first term in equation
A1.6). The expression for the amount of drunk driving collapses to:

                                                  C         A                 BD
                             1
                                                        ú
                                    Q   efl·                             Q
                   D =           +                          1e   ÷· ú
                       fl (1 + Q) 1 + Q  fl                             1+Q

and some algebraic manipulations show that ^ D/^/ > 0, except if ^· ú /^/ >> 0,
which, as we mentioned, is never the case in all our simulations. Thus our previous
result for an unconstrained police department is reversed: subject to the budget
constraint in A1.5 the optimal police strategy is to have a prolonged crackdown of
the minimal intensity necessary to satisfy A1.1 and thus dissuade drunken drivers.


A1.3        Extensions
We consider several extensions that move the simple theory developed above closer
to the structural model estimated in Section 6.1. First, suppose that drivers are
unsure about the intensity of the crackdown. At night t of the crackdown, they
believe that with probability qt it is /h , and with probability 1  qt it is /l < /h .
If q0 /h + (1  q0 ) /l is low enough, drivers will not immediately cease drinking upon
being stopped, but will instead continue to drink and drive until their beliefs about qt
and pt become pessimistic enough that they either temporarily or permanently stay
 22
      We have not however been able to show this analytically.



                                                 7
home. This is likely to to occur sooner if checking is more intense, and thus drivers
will begin their interval of sobriety when they are still relatively confident that the
program is temporary (pt low). A higher / intensity will cause, on average, lower
pt and, based on the finding ^· /^ p0 > 0 from the simpler model, shorter · , and
hence a more rapid return to the road. This reinforces the trade-o in the choice of
/: police can either clear the roads of drunken drivers quickly, but face a relatively
rapid reversion, or tolerate more drunkenness in the short run in exchange for more
permanent dissuasion.
    We next consider the case in which drunken drivers can switch to less preferred
roads where they hope that police enforcement will be lower. Let road 1 denote the
best road for drunken driving (perhaps it is near the local bar), and road 2 designate
an alternate less convenient choice, with respective utilities d1 > d2 . If drivers are
unsure whether the police know their avoidance routes they may attempt to drink
and drive on the less preferred road temporarily period before either returning to
the preferred road or, if stopped on the alternate road, stay home temporarily or
permanently. Adding this option to the previous model causes the number of cases to
become cumbersome to analyze algebraically (though our numerical model below does
allow for it). To provide clearer insights, we consider only the case when police are
beginning a permanent checking routine, but drivers believe that enforcement might
be temporary. We assume that priors on the duration/permanence of the crackdown
are the same on each road, and that parameters are such that drunken drivers, once
caught on road A, will cease o ending for a time interval of length ·¯, before returning
to drink and drive on road B . If dA is su ciently close to dB , drivers will remain on
road B for indefinitely long, since posteriors on checking risk on road A will always
be weakly higher. If subsequently apprehended on road B , they stop permanently.
The total number of drunken drivers on both roads are
                / OE                          / OE          3/ t 1          2           4
        D =            e(/A +fl)t dt + efl·
                                          ¯
                                                     eflt            e/A x /A e/B (tx) dx dt (A1.8)
                 0                             0              0
                  1          ¯         /A
            =           + efl·                      .
                /A + fl        (fl + /B ) (/A + fl)

This expression once again divides the total number of law-breakers into two groups:
the first term in equation A1.8, which represents drivers who have not been stopped
on road A. The second term accounts for those who have moved to drink and drive
on road B .

                                                     8
    This simplified example captures many of the key trade-o s between fixed and
rotating checkpoints. It is clear that a fixed crackdown on road A with a high intensity
/A will push drunken driving onto road B , while high intensity in B will mean less
enforcement on A and therefore a higher fraction of drunken drivers initially on A
will continue undisturbed. The exact trade-o between /A and /B depends on the
police discount factor and drivers' beliefs (through ·   ¯); a few examples illustrate the
extreme cases. First, consider a highly patient police force with fl = 0: in this
case D = 1//A + 1//B and the optimal choice is clearly to have equal enforcement
on all roads. On the other hand, if police are less patient and ·       ¯ is large, perhaps
because drivers suspect that checking may indeed be permanent, then the optimal
policy is to focus on clearing road A quickly, and thus to have high /A and low /B .
This rationale would be strengthened further if ·   ¯ could be exogenously increased, for
example through jail time.
    We have so far neglected the possibilities of social learning about police enforcement
or agents safely gaining information by exploratory driving while sober. Incorporating
either of these would substantially complicate the model; social learning in a similar
environment is itself the subject of an active theoretical literature recently summarized
in Hörner and Skrzypacz (2017). In reduced form, risk-free exploration would speed
up the impact of the crackdown on reducing drunken driving, and reduce its persistence
after the checkpoints have ended. While a similar generalization is not possible in
the case of social learning without further assumptions, in the extreme case in which
all potential law-breakers learn the exact beginning and end of the crackdown from
the experience of others, their optimal strategy would clearly be to remain sober for
exactly the duration of the enforcement, and the optimal crackdown would spread
the minimal e ective intensity over as long a period as possible. It is reasonable to
assume that there is some amount of social learning in the world, but as we will see,
there is a good deal of persistence in driver behavior suggesting that learning is slow
and social learning is imperfect at best.
    In summary, the model implies the following predictions on the reduced form
impacts of the intervention:

  1. Persistence: The impact of the crackdown will carry on after the last checkpoint
     is finished: some drivers will be temporarily sober, and others will have permanently
     ceased drinking and driving.


                                            9
  2. Scope: A crackdown implemented on just one road will be less e ective than
     one implemented on all (or many) roads, even at a lower intensity, as long as
     drivers are strategic and learning is fast enough.

      (a) Furthermore, the intensity of the crackdown will not matter for overall
          drunken driving if it is implemented on just one road, since no drivers are
          pushed into sobriety. Intensity does matter for multi-road checking, since
          higher intensity will clear the road faster and (potentially) induce some
          drivers to permanently cease inebriated driving.

  3. Reversion and intensity: A more intense crackdown causes a shorter period of
     temporary sobriety, and thus a more rapid reversion after the crackdown has
     ended.

  4. Reversion and scope: A crackdown implemented at many locations, forcing
     drivers into sobriety, will exhibit faster post-crackdown reversion to drinking
     and driving on the most preferred road than one in which drivers can avoid the
     police by drunken driving on an alternate route.


A2      Further Reduced Form Analyses: Robustness
        & Alternative Mechanisms
Between-Station Spillovers

While our focus has been on the within-station main e ects and spillovers of the
sobriety checkpoints, it is possible there may also have been cross-station spillovers.
In principle these might be positive or negative: drivers avoiding checkpoints near
their own stations might move into di erent police jurisdictions, or citizens might
hear that a crackdown has begun in a nearby town and infer that it has also begun
in their own area. On the other hand, the isolated nature of many police stations in
rural Rajasthan, the fact that they cover a very large catchment area, and the history
of relatively independent enforcement would both serve to attenuate any spillovers.
    We quantify the geographical extent of the spillovers in Table A3, which examines
accidents and deaths, and Table A4 which examines the number of drunken drivers
caught at the checkpoints. In short, neither table shows robust evidence of between


                                          10
station spillovers. Panel A of Table A3 displays the pooled e ects of any intervention
on accidents and deaths, analogous to Table 3, now including controls for the number
of stations with any checkpoints in 10, 20, and 40 kilometer radii. None are significant,
and size of the main e ects are very similar to those in Table 3. Panel B disaggregates
the main e ects and spillovers by fixed and rotating police stations, analogous to Table
4. Of the 30 spillover e ects estimated, only 1 is significant at the 5% level and it
relates to the outcome of daytime accidents, suggesting it may be the result of chance.
    Results from the checkpoint surveys in Table A4 are equally insignificant once we
control for police station fixed e ects. Columns 1 and 2, which do not include station
e ects (only district fixed e ects), show that police stations with many treated close
neighbors (stations in 10 km) have more drunken drivers caught, whereas stations with
many treated areas far away (20 and 40 kms) have fewer. However, as in Blattman
et al. (2017), the distribution of treated neighbors is not random, so this likely reflects
the fact that areas with dense police stations are inherently di erent (more densely
populated, higher crime, etc). Controlling for PS fixed e ects in columns 3 and 4
removes this bias, and accordingly the coe cients on the spillover terms in columns
3 and 4 are smaller and insignificant. Similarly, column 5 shows that proximity to
other treated police stations has no e ect on the number of drunken drivers caught
in the final check. Thus we find very limited evidence that inter-station spillovers
are important in the prosecution of drunken drivers, confirming our focus on the
intra-station dynamics of criminal behavior.

Social Learning and Sober Exploration

Our primary model focuses on driver learning from personal experience encountering
police checkpoints while engaged in risky drunken driving. However, it is possible
that individuals might also learn about police activity while driving sober or though
social learning from friends who have encountered the police checkpoints. While
these mechanisms are di cult to identify solely with data on aggregate accidents and
arrests, we can gain some insights from the immediate response of road accidents to
police checkpoints. Consider a model in which agents engage in drunken driving only
occasionally, say with 10% probability, and thus only 10% of individuals personally
witness a checkpoint. If drivers learn only through personal experience, the immediate
impact of the check point will be muted, since only 1% (= .1  .1) of the informed
agents would have engaged in drunken driving the following day anyway. Any e ects

                                            11
of the crackdown will appear gradually and smoothly. In contrast, if there is costless
exploration or social learning, one might expect a large immediate e ect of a checkpoint
on drunken driving and hence on road accidents the following night, since a much
larger fraction of the potential drunken driving population will be informed. Thus
the empirical drop in road accidents on the night immediately following a checkpoint
may be informative about other mechanisms of individual learning.23
    Table A5 presents regression specifications examining the immediate impact of
checkpoints on night accidents and deaths in the following days (unlike our main
results, these regressions are estimated using daily data). Columns 1 and 2 focus on
the impact after exactly 1 night, with separate coe cients for the fixed and rotating
stations. The results show no significant 1-night post checkpoint e ect on accidents or
deaths, for either intervention. The coe cient on main e ect of the surprise treatment
remains negative, statistically significant, and of a similar magnitude as in the main
specification. However, this specification may be overly restrictive if there is social
learning but the news of the intervention takes some time to disseminate. Therefore
in columns 3 and 4 we include 2 and 3 day lags of the checkpoint indicator. Once
again, we find no significant immediate e ects of the checkpoints. Thus while we
cannot fully rule out forms of learning outside the model, we find no evidence of their
implications in the data.

Implementation of the Crackdown Intervention

As we anticipated when designing the Police Lines intervention, implementation of
the assigned checkpoints was far from perfect. Of the 1,565 checkpoints that the
surveyors visited, only 980 (63%) were actually implemented by the police. This
partial compliance would substantially modify the interpretation of our results if it
were correlated with the treatment assignment in the intervention, for instance if fixed
checkpoints were less likely to be carried out. In Table A2 we examine the impact
of the treatments on police implementation of the intervention. Columns 1-3 focus
on whether the checkpoint occurred (using OLS, Probit, and focusing on the final
checks only), while columns 4 and 5 examine the duration of the checkpoint and the
number of vehicles stopped, respectively. The most striking finding is that the Police
  23
    In principle, the number of arrests on the following night would also be informative when police
implemented another checkpoint the next night. However, since consecutive checkpoints may have
a ected arrest numbers through multiple channels (for example, police e ort and morale) we focus
on the accident data.


                                                12
Lines teams substantially outperformed the station-based teams on all outcomes­for
example column 1 shows they were 44% more likely to carry out a checkpoint. We
also find that the police perform worse in stations with 3 checkpoints assigned per
week, perhaps due to fatigue or burn-out. This a ects the cardinal interpretation of
our reduced form results: areas with 3 checkpoints per week did not have exactly
3 times greater intensity than those with 1 checkpoint per week. However, realized
enforcement intensity is still increasing in assigned intensity. Reassuringly, we find
no evidence that implementation is correlated with treatment assignment to fixed or
rotating checkpoint locations. There is a fairly large (though insignificant) negative
coe cient on the variable indicating that the checkpoint was held o the main road,
which is likely due to the fact that some of the routes 2 and 3 had low volumes of
tra c. In conclusion, the partial implementation of the intervention does not change
the main qualitative conclusions of the reduced form results. It does, however, require
that we use instrumental variables in the structural estimation, an approach we that
we outline below.

Legal or Informal Sanctions for Drunken Drivers

After stopping a drunken driver, police may fail to follow the legal ticketing procedure,
either because they choose to release the driver with a warning or because they prefer
to take a bribe rather than register an o cial ticket. If this behavior were uniformly
prevalent in the Rajasthan Police, it might weaken the strength of the intervention
and reduce the e ects. In fact, as our results show, drivers seemed very concerned
about the consequences of being stopped while drunken driving, so punishments seem
to have been quite strong whether legal or extra-judicial. A more serious issue is
the potential correlation between the strength or legality of the punishment and
the intervention. We examined this issue by collected the court records on drunken
driving cases legally prosecuted over the course of the intervention, since all drunken
drivers were required to report to court to pay their fine. These documents contained
the name of the police station issuing the ticket, so we were able to generate a
measure of the number of legal tickets issued by each police station over the course
of the intervention. Table A6 contains the regression of this measure on dummy
variables for various intervention categories. In column 1 we see that regressing legal
cases on an indicator variable for rotating checkpoint police stations yields a large,
though insignificant, coe cient. This is not surprising since this intervention was

                                           13
relatively more e ective. In columns 2 and 3 we control for the number of drunken
drivers that surveyors observed being caught in the police station (a noisy measure
of the total) and indicator variables for the other interventions. Introducing these
controls substantially reduces the size and significance of the rotating checkpoints
variable, as expected. Thus while we cannot observe the exact share of o enders
legally prosecuted, we find no evidence that the legal treatment of drunken drivers is
correlated with the rotating or fixed checkpoint intervention.


A2.1     Driver beliefs under costless social learning or riskless
         exploration
As a robustness check to our baseline model of independent individual learning, we
estimate an alternate model in which we assume that all drivers are informed after
a checkpoint has occurred. Driver decisions, conditional on beliefs, are therefore not
forward looking because the driver's evolution of beliefs in the next period does not
depend on his contemporaneous decision to drink and drive. This implies that, within
a police station, all agents have the same beliefs about the intensity and duration of
the police crackdown. The set of possible outcomes is reduced to four: no checkpoint
occurs, or a checkpoint on road r oe {1, 2, 3}. Let It be an indicator variable equal to
one if any checkpoints have been held on any roads prior to t, that is if the crackdown
has begun. Evolution of beliefs are then,
    No checkpoint:

                                 fit+1 = (1  ÷t ) fit
                                  ~t
                                 -- ÷     ~÷
                                     +1 = --t + It
                                                ~ rt
                                                ­ /
                               /r,t+1 =          ~rt
                                          ~ rt
                                          ­  /
                                               +-- /
                                                     + It
                               ~          ~
                                 r,t+1 = --r,t + It
                                  /         /
                               --




                                          14
Checkpoint on r:

                     fit+1 = (1  ÷t )
                      ~t
                     -- ÷     ~÷
                         +1 = --t + 1
                                   ~ rt
                                   ­ /
                                        +1
                   /r,t+1 =             ~
                              ~ rt + --rt
                              ­  /       /
                                           +1
                   ~          ~
                     r,t+1 = --r,t + 1
                      /         /
                   --
                                        ~r
                                        ­ /
                   /rÕ ,t+1 =
                                           Õt

                                          ~
                                ~ rÕ t + --r
                                ­  /        /
                                             Õt + 1

                   ~/Õ
                   --           ~Õ +1
                              = -- /
                     r ,t+1       r ,t




                                  15
A3    Appendix Tables

                 Table A1: Checkpoint surveys during intervention

                                         Drunk drivers and motorcyclists caught
                                         (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)

     Rotating checkpoint               0.096        -0.813ú
     station                          (0.136)       (0.432)
     Frequency                                      -0.362úúú
                                                     (0.135)
     Rotating checkpoint                            0.458**
      frequency                                     (0.188)
     Weeks of checking                                           -0.044úú
                                                                  (0.019)
     Rotating checkpoint                                           0.036
      weeks of checking                                           (0.025)
     Number Previous                                                           -0.016úú
     checkpoints                                                                (0.007)
     Rotating checkpoint                                                        0.010
      number previous                                                          (0.010)
     checkpoints

     Police Station FE                  No            No            Yes          Yes
     District FE                        Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
     Mean of dep. variable             0.806         0.806         0.806        0.806
     Observations                      1352          1352          1352         1352

     This table reports the intensity and dynamic e ects of the sobriety crackdown on
     the number of drunken drivers caught, with the number of drunken drivers caught
     set to 0 if the police did not implement the checkpoint. Results corresponds with
     columns 1-4 Table 7, except that in Table 7 checkpoints that were not implemented
     are dropped from the data.
     All outcome variables are based on data collected by surveyors sent to monitor
     the checkpoints. The frequency of checking variable is the number of checkpoints
     per week: 1, 2, or 3. The weeks of checking variable is the number of weeks that
     have elapsed since the first checkpoint. The number of previous checkpoints is
     the number of checkpoints assigned prior to the given night, after the start of the
     intervention. All specifications include controls for whether the police station is
     located on a major highway, the pre-intervention accident rate, and assignment to
     the police lines intervention.
     Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the police station level. ú p < 0.10, úú
     p < 0.05, úúú p < 0.01

                                               16
                     Table A2: Implementation of intervention

                              (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)                    (5)
                           Checkpoint Checkpoint Checkpoint Duration               Number
                           occurred   occurred   occurred       of                 vehicles
                            - OLS      - Probit   - Final   checkpoint             stopped
                                                  Check
                                                   OLS
Fixed checkpoints                                        0.006
                                                        (0.106)
Rotating checkpoints         -0.001        0.000          0.06         -1.856        -0.235
                            (0.046)       (0.153)       (0.067)       (5.443)       (7.893)
Intensity 2/week             0.021         0.047         -0.009        -4.827      -16.280ú
                            (0.049)       (0.154)       (0.065)       (4.982)       (9.455)
Intensity 3/week            -0.105ú       -0.328úú       -0.057      -11.701úú      -15.624
                            (0.053)        (0.163)      (0.080)       (5.041)       (9.786)
Locations 2 or 3             -0.024        -0.105                      -0.326        -2.786
                            (0.038)       (0.132)                     (4.779)       (6.090)
Police lines teams          0.284úúú      0.921úúú      0.337úú      23.653úúú    25.390úúú
                            (0.035)       (0.117)       (0.120)       (4.439)      (6.886)

District FE                   Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
Mean of dep. variable        0.641         0.641         0.599        159.293       62.537
N                            1353          1353           182           867          867
The outcome variable in columns 1-3 is an indicator equal to 1 if the assigned checkpoint
was implemented by the police during the main intervention. The outcome variable in
column 4 is the analogous indicator for the final checks. The outcome variable in column
5 is the duration of the checkpoint in minutes (from the time the police arrived, to when
they stopped checking), and the outcome in column 6 is the number of cars and motorcycles
checked. Columns 5 and 6 use only data conditional on the checkpoint being conducted.
All data on outcomes were collected by surveyors monitoring the police checkpoints. All
specifications include controls for whether the police station is located on a major highway,
the pre-intervention accident rate.
Standard errors in parentheses. ú p < 0.10, úú p < 0.05, úúú p < 0.01




                                             17
                     Table A3: Accidents and Deaths - Spillovers

                                           Daylight                    Darkness          Day & Night

                                     (1)              (2)        (3)              (4)        (5)
                                 Accidents       Deaths      Accidents       Deaths        Deaths

                                 Panel A. Spillovers main e ects
Treated station                    0.00331      -0.00216   -0.00567úú        -0.00394ú     -0.00347
during & post intervention        (0.00372)    (0.00294)    (0.00235)        (0.00213)    (0.00317)

Treated stations in 10 km          0.00091        0.00079     0.00055         0.00004      0.00077
during & post intervention        (0.00116)      (0.00094)   (0.00100)       (0.00069)    (0.00099)

Treated stations in 20 km          -0.00017       -0.00035    -0.00122        -0.00106     -0.00122
during & post intervention        (0.00197)      (0.00151)   (0.00169)       (0.00104)    (0.00167)

Treated stations in 40 km          -0.00056       -0.00073    0.00072         -0.00074     -0.00135
during & post intervention        (0.00181)      (0.00178)   (0.00104)       (0.00102)    (0.00193)

                         Panel B. Spillover results by intervention scope
Fixed checkpoints                  -0.002        -0.004        -0.002      -0.003           -0.004
during & post intervention        (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.002)          (0.004)

Rotating checkpoints               0.008ú          -0.001     -0.009úúú       -0.005ú       -0.003
during & post intervention         (0.005)        (0.004)      (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.004)

Fixed checkpoints in 10 km         0.006úú         0.001       0.000           0.001        0.002
during & post intervention         (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.002)         (0.002)      (0.003)

Fixed checkpoints in 20 km          0.000          -0.002      -0.001         -0.003ú       -0.005
during & post intervention         (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.003)         (0.002)      (0.003)

Fixed checkpoints in 40 km          0.001          0.000       0.000           -0.001       -0.001
during & post intervention         (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.002)         (0.001)      (0.003)

Rotating checkpoints in 10 km       -0.004         0.001       0.001           0.000        0.000
during & post intervention         (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.002)         (0.002)      (0.003)

Rotating checkpoints in 20 km       -0.001         0.001       -0.001          0.001        0.003
during & post intervention         (0.003)        (0.002)     (0.002)         (0.002)      (0.003)

Rotating checkpoints in 40 km       -0.001         -0.002      0.001           -0.001       -0.002
during & post intervention         (0.003)        (0.002)     (0.002)         (0.001)      (0.003)

Month FE                            Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
Police Station FE                   Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
Mean of control                    0.0849         0.0293      0.0329          0.0165       0.0454
N                                   5090           4724        5090            4724         5090

See note on the analogous regressions in Tables 3 and 4 for details on variables and
specifications.
                                                18
                       Table A4: Drunk Drivers Caught - Spillovers

                                           Main intervention                  Final check

                                  (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)

Treatment station                                                          -1.021úú   -0.756ú
                                                                            (0.378)   (0.443)
Rotating checkpoints                         -0.246                                    -0.376
                                            (0.246)                                   (0.328)
Weeks of checking               -0.063ú    -0.109úú   -0.060ú   -0.108úú
                                (0.033)     (0.043)   (0.035)    (0.046)
Rotating checkpoints                        0.068ú               0.075ú
 weeks of checking                          (0.038)              (0.038)
Treated stations in 10 km       0.719úúú      0.557                         -0.196     -0.025
                                 (0.258)    (0.516)                        (0.157)    (0.443)
Treated stations in 20 km        -0.452ú     -0.319                         -0.137     0.656
                                 (0.265)    (0.376)                        (0.332)    (0.799)
Treated stations in 40 km       -0.413úú   -0.789úú                         -0.423     -0.057
                                 (0.199)    (0.344)                        (0.284)    (0.390)
Treated stations in 10 km       -0.045úú     -0.007    -0.024    0.019
 weeks of checking               (0.019)    (0.042)   (0.023)   (0.054)
Treated stations in 20 km         0.050ú      0.043      0.03    -0.001
 weeks of checking               (0.028)    (0.041)   (0.031)   (0.049)
Treated stations in 40 km         0.033      0.061      0.017    0.015
 weeks of checking               (0.026)    (0.040)   (0.025)   (0.041)
Rotating checkpoints in 10 km                0.243                                     -0.329
                                            (0.945)                                   (0.725)
Rotating checkpoints in 20 km                -0.285                                    -1.494
                                            (0.576)                                   (1.102)
Rotating checkpoints in 40 km                0.742                                      -0.67
                                            (0.453)                                   (0.627)
Rotating checkpoints in 10 km                -0.051              -0.056
 weeks of checking                          (0.088)             (0.095)
Rotating checkpoints in 20 km                 0.01                0.058
 weeks of checking                          (0.069)             (0.074)
Rotating checkpoints in 40 km                -0.033              0.018
 weeks of checking                          (0.058)             (0.061)

District FE                       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
Police Station FE                 No         No        Yes        Yes        No         No
Mean of dep. variable            1.237      1.237     1.237      1.237      1.22       1.22
N                                 866        866       866        866       109        109

See note on the analogous regressions in Tables 7 and 9 for details on variables and
specifications.




                                             19
              Table A5: Short-term E ect of Checkpoints on Accidents

                                                            Darkness
                                    (1)           (2)           (3)                (4)
                                 Accidents       Deaths      Accidents            Deaths
Fixed checkpoints                 -0.00145      -0.00285      -0.00089            -0.00284
during & post                    (0.00357)     (0.00235)     (0.00385)           (0.00257)
intervention
Rotating checkpoints            -0.00878úúú     -0.00393     -0.00883úú           -0.00352
during & post                    (0.00326)     (0.00323)      (0.00356)          (0.00359)
intervention
Fixed checkpoint                  0.00374       0.00374       0.00502             0.00422
1 night before                   (0.00554)     (0.00437)     (0.00522)           (0.00425)
Rotating checkpoint               -0.0014       -0.00342      -0.00145            -0.00347
1 night before                   (0.00544)     (0.00403)     (0.00542)           (0.00402)
Fixed checkpoint                                              -0.00614            -0.00293
2 nights before                                              (0.00498)           (0.00383)
Rotating checkpoint                                           -0.00074            0.00122
before
2 nights                                                     (0.00555)           (0.00406)
Fixed checkpoint                                              0.00133             0.00227
3 nights before                                              (0.00541)           (0.00424)
Rotating checkpoint                                           0.00083             -0.00366
3 nights before                                              (0.00575)           (0.00396)

Month FE                            Yes             Yes         Yes                 Yes
Police Station FE                   Yes           Yes           Yes                 Yes
Mean of control                   0.03558       0.01682       0.03558             0.01682
N                                  94,276        94,276       94,276              94,276
This table presents the impact of fixed and rotating checkpoint interventions on the number
of daily road accidents and deaths from August 2010 through December 2011. The variables
indicating a rotating/variable checkpoint 1, 2, or 3 nights before are station-level indicators
equal to 1 if a checkpoint was carried out on any road in the past 1, 2, or 3 nights. The during
& post intervention variable is positive for the duration of the sobriety crackdown and up to
90 days afterwards. All data was taken from police administrative reports, as collected in both
treatment and control police stations.
Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the police station level. ú p < 0.10, úú p < 0.05, úúú
p < 0.01



                                               20
           Table A6: Legal Prosecution of Drunken Drivers

                                            Cases Processed by Court
                                     (1)             (2)            (3)

Rotating checkpoints                4.258           2.871          -0.615
                                   (4.338)         (3.997)        (3.311)
Drunk drivers caught in                           5.467***         2.445
station
                                                   (1.475)        (1.602)
2 checkpoints per week                                          10.625***
                                                                 (3.236)
3 checkpoints per week                                          17.663***
                                                                 (4.072)
Police lines teams                                              17.685***
                                                                 (4.915)


District FE                          Yes            Yes             Yes
Mean of dep. variable               25.55          25.55           25.55
N                                    112            112             112
The outcome variable is the number of drunken driving tickets that were
processed by the criminal court. Criminal cases in the court records were linked
to the police station from which the ticket originated. Several local courts were
not willing to share data. All specifications include controls for whether the
police station is located on a major highway, the pre-intervention accident rate,
and district fixed e ects.
Standard errors in parentheses. ú p < 0.10, úú p < 0.05, úúú p < 0.01




                                       21
Table A7: Simulated Fixed vs. Rotating Pooled Results
                                          Darkness
                                 (1)              (2)
                              Accidents        Accidents
   Fixed checkpoints            -0.00181        -0.00046
   during & post               (0.00023)       (0.00020)
   intervention
   Rotating checkpoints         -0.00137        -0.00132
   during & post               (0.00067)       (0.00023)
   intervention


   Month FE                       Yes             Yes
   Police Station FE              Yes             No
   District FE                    Yes             Yes
   Mean of dep. variable        0.03578         0.03578
   N                             55692           55692
   Results shown on nighttime accident data simulated for
   the Aug.-Jan. 2010 and Aug.-Jan. 2011 period using the
   baseline model and parameters as described in Section 6.
   Specifications are analogous to those estimated from real
   data in Table 4, with the exception of a di erent set of
   controls in Column 2. Column 2 include district fixed
   e ects and all control variables that enter the structural
   estimation: fixed or rotating treatment indicators, day of
   week, urban/rural, national highway, and the number of
   prior accidents in the police station.
   Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the police
   station level.




                              22
     Table A8: Simulated checkpoint surveys during intervention

                                  Drunk drivers and motorcyclists caught
                                  (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)

Rotating checkpoint              0.128         -0.413
station                         (0.116)       (0.292)
Frequency                                      -0.472
                                              (0.121)
Rotating checkpoint                            0.287
 frequency                                    (0.124)
Weeks of checking                                          -0.090
                                                          (0.017)
Rotating checkpoint                                        0.071
 weeks of checking                                        (0.022)
Number previous                                                         -0.040
checkpoints                                                            (0.007)
Rotating checkpoint                                                     0.025
 number previous                                                       (0.010)
checkpoints

District FE                       Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes
Police Station FE                 No           No           Yes             Yes
Mean of dep. variable            1.237        1.237        1.237           1.237
N                                 866          866          866             866
Results shown on number of simulated drunken drivers apprehended during
the 2010 and 2011 interventions, using the baseline model and parameters
as described in Section 6. The specifications are analogous to those in
columns 1-4 of Table 7.
Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the police station level.




                                         23
               Table A9: Simulated drunk drivers caught on final check

                                All Stations           Rotating checkpoints      Fixed Checkpoints
                               (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)
Treatment                     -0.794       -0.412       -0.760      -0.804        -0.902      -0.136
                             (0.140)      (0.383)      (0.188)     (0.358)       (0.170)     (0.429)
Days since last               0.009        0.001        0.004       0.013         0.017       -0.001
checkpoint                   (0.005)      (0.015)      (0.009)     (0.023)       (0.008)     (0.015)
Frequency                                  -0.185                   0.013                     -0.394
                                          (0.157)                  (0.160)                   (0.207)
Days since last                            0.004                    -0.004                    0.009
checkpointfrequency                       (0.005)                  (0.008)                   (0.007)


District FE                    Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
Control mean                 1.729        1.729         1.729      1.729         1.729            1.729
Mean treatment               -0.676       -0.666       -0.705      -0.712        -0.676          -0.685
e ect, @ freq = 2
P-value of mean             0.000524     0.000740      0.00278     0.00209      0.000257     0.000849
treatment e ect
N                              108          108          77           77            74            74
This table reports the reduced form correlations between the interventions and the number of
simulated drunken car and motorcycle drivers caught at the final check conducted after the
end of the intervention in all police stations, including control stations. The specifications
are analogous to those estimated with real data in Table 9. Columns 1 and 2 compare
pooled treatment police stations with control stations, columns 3 and 4 compare rotating
checkpoint stations with controls, and columns 5 and 6 compare fixed checkpoint police
stations with controls.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                  24
A4               Appendix Figures

Figure A1: Simulated Drunken Driving Probabilities Across Interventions - Social
Learning

                        1/Week, Fixed                                                 2/Week, Fixed                                               3/Week, Fixed
  0.8                                                       0.5                                                              0.5


                                                            0.4                                                              0.4
  0.6

                                                            0.3                                                              0.3
  0.4
                                                            0.2                                                              0.2

  0.2
                                                            0.1                                                              0.1


   0                                                         0                                                                0
        0   20    40          60          80   100   120          0   20        40          60          80      100   120          0   20   40          60          80   100   120



                       1/Week, Surprise                                              2/Week, Surprise                                            3/Week, Surprise
  0.5                                                       0.4                                                              0.4

                                                           0.35                                                             0.35
  0.4
                                                            0.3                                                              0.3
  0.3
                                                           0.25                                                             0.25
  0.2
                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                             0.2

  0.1                                                      0.15
                                                                                                                            0.15
                                                            0.1
   0                                                                                                                         0.1
        0   20    40          60          80   100   120          0   20        40          60          80      100   120          0   20   40          60          80   100   120




                                                                            Road 1          Road 2           Road 3




                                                                           25
