                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   A REQUIEM FOR "BLAME IT ON BEIJING":
        INTERPRETING ROTATING GLOBAL CURRENT ACCOUNT SURPLUSES

                                        Menzie D. Chinn
                                           Hiro Ito

                                       Working Paper 26226
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26226


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




We thank Joe Gagnon for providing data. Chinn and Ito acknowledge the financial support of
faculty research funds of the University of Wisconsin and Portland State University, respectively
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Menzie D. Chinn and Hiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Requiem for "Blame It on Beijing": Interpreting Rotating Global Current Account Surpluses
Menzie D. Chinn and Hiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 26226
September 2019
JEL No. F32,F41

                                         ABSTRACT

Global current account imbalances have reappeared, although the extent and distribution of these
imbalances are noticeably different from those experienced in the middle of the last decade. What
does that recurrence mean for our understanding of the origin and nature of such imbalances?
Will imbalances persist over time? Informed by empirical estimates of the determinants of current
account imbalances encompassing the period after the global recession, we find that ­ as before ­
the observable manifestations of the factors driving the global saving glut have limited
explanatory power for the time series variation in imbalances. Fiscal factors determine
imbalances, and have accounted for a noticeable share of the recent variation in imbalances,
including in the U.S. and Germany. For advanced economies, the financial component of the
current account has been playing an increasing role to determine the movements of the account.
Examining observable policy actions, it is clear that net official flows have been associated with
some share of imbalances, although tracing out the motivations for intervention is difficult.
Looking forward, it is clear that policy can influence global imbalances, although some
component of the U.S. deficit will likely remain given the U.S. role in generating safe assets.


Menzie D. Chinn
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu

Hiro Ito
Portland State University
1721 SW Broadway, Suite 241
Portland, Oregon 97201
ito@pdx.edu
1. Introduction
Global imbalances have once again returned to the fore of discussion. In the first decade of the
century, before the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008, large current imbalances came under
the spotlight ­ the U.S. and several European countries ran large current account deficits, which
appeared to have been financed by large current account surplus by China, other emerging markets
in East Asia, and oil exporters. The nature and importance of expanding current account
imbalances ­ both surpluses and deficits ­ dominated academic and policy debates. The onset of
the global financial crisis, accompanied as it was by a compression of current account balances,
sidelined the topic for several years. But as the global recovery has matured, the size of current
account balances for certain countries has come under the spotlight again.
           The comeback of current account imbalances of certain countries brings up the obvious
question of whether one needs to be concerned about the persistence of such imbalances. In order
to answer this question, one has to first address two issues: did the imbalances ever really go away,
and did we expect those imbalances to shrink?
           In one sense, it is clear that the imbalances ­ if they did not disappear, they at least took a
short holiday. Figure 1, based upon October 2018 IMF World Economic Outlook projections,
depicts current account balances for several somewhat arbitrary groupings, all expressed as a share
of world GDP. One observation is that the sum of deficits, and sum of all surpluses has shrunk, so
that in one sense, the degree of "imbalance" seems to be smaller in 2018 than one the eve of the
global financial crisis. The total deficit was 2.4% of world GDP in 2006; in 2016, the
corresponding estimated sum for the same groupings was 1.2% of world GDP. Admittedly
imbalances rose in the immediate aftermath of the global recession, yet even then, the imbalance
is back to 2009 levels. Moreover, the degree of imbalance is projected to further shrink over time.1
           Examining the distribution of individual country balances, it appears that the dispersion of
imbalances has also narrowed. Figure 2 depicts the distribution of current account balances,
expressed as a share of country GDP, for 2000, 2007, and 2017. Clearly, the frequency of larger
(around 20%) deficits and surpluses increased by the eve of the financial crisis. By the latest
observation, the dispersion of current account balances had reverted largely back to 2000 levels.
This point of comparison is apt to the extent that in all three cases, large parts of the world economy


1
    See also Berthou et al. (2018) and IMF (2018) for recent analyses.


                                                            1
were at or near full employment.
         A digression: besides sheer magnitude, what is a global imbalance? The terms of discussion
here define it as a current account deficit or surplus or deficit sufficiently large and persistent to
have global ramifications. Of course, the imbalances could alternatively refer to the lopsided
distribution of cross-border assets and liabilities; in some sense, mismatches there pose even
greater threats to financial stability than do current account balances.2 Imbalances could also refer
to differential degrees of economic slack in various economic regions.
         Traditionally, imbalances have referred to deficits and surpluses in the sense we have used;
of course tradition is hardly sufficient. However, we think the focus on current account balances
as the signifier of imbalances is merited because it links up with the theme of Fostering a Dynamic
Global Economy. The current account is tightly linked with the distribution of aggregate demand
across regions of the world in a more direct fashion than asset positions.
         Closer inspection of the data reveal some fascinating patterns. First, returning to Figure 1,
the composition of the imbalances has changed. The most striking of the changes is the virtual
evaporation of oil exporter current account surpluses. In 2017, they are essentially nil, with a slight
bounce back projected in the future. In addition, China's current account, as a share of world GDP,
after reaching a local peak in 2015, has continued to shrink, and is projected to do so.
         Second, what has remained the same? Even though China's share of the world current
account has shrunk, the aggregate current account balance for East Asia (China plus Japan plus
advanced Asia) has exhibited remarkable durability. The European creditor nations ­ mostly
northern European countries, including Germany ­ have as a group also exhibited a sustained
current account surplus more durable than that of the United States.
         Perhaps one can take some comfort in the fact that the imbalances are projected to shrink.
Cynics might say that it's the natural presumption to forecast reductions in the imbalances. As it
turns out, the IMF's projections on the eve of the financial crisis did not uniformly overpredict
contraction in global imbalances.
        One case where contraction of the current account surplus was forecasted, and did not occur,
was in the euro area. As of 2013, the euro area current account balance was roughly 0.6 percentage


2
 Obstfeld (2012) argues that gross flows and asset positions are likely more important for financial stability by way
of balance sheet mismatches and counterparty risk than the (relatively) small net flows represented by current
account balances. See Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2017) for an examination of the recent stall in the growth in cross-
border assets and liabilities.


                                                          2
points of world GDP larger than had been projected. Germany did not account for the majority of
this disjuncture ­ maybe a little less than a quarter in 2013. What is true is that currently ­ just as
in 2008 ­ the German current account is projected to shrink. To the extent that economic slack has
largely disappeared, the parallel is remarkable.
       Shrinking aggregate imbalances, forecasted convergence, are these reasons to relax? What
do they tell U.S. about the nature of these imbalances? Consider the durability of two current
account balances: the U.S. and East Asia in aggregate. At the same time, the rotation of surpluses
away from oil exporters and toward Germany and other northern European suggests that a one size
fits all explanation ­ such as mercantilism, or a saving glut due to underdeveloped financial
systems ­ is incomplete. In the end, a more prosaic explanation may be needed, one that relies
upon special factors and timing.
       In the next section, we recount the various explanations that have been forwarded for the
development of global imbalances. The succeeding section evaluates the empirical evidence for
each of these hypotheses, viewed through the lens of a cross-country analysis. Attribution of the
various factors to driving imbalances is shown in the succeeding section. Finally, diverging from
the formal model, we examine various policy options for dealing with imbalances, even only in a
partial manner.


2. Theories Old and New
As current account imbalances widened in the early years of the 2000s, several competing
hypotheses rose. In considering the current state of affairs, it's helpful to recount what these
arguments posited, and how they might apply in the current context.
       The approaches could be loosely grouped into the following categories. The first viewed
the current account imbalances as the outcome of optimizing behaviour, where countries with
bright growth prospects or relatively high degrees of impatience, ran deficits. We will call this the
"textbook" view. The second viewed the imbalances largely through the lens of savings and
investment balances, taking into account the role of the budget balance and demographics; the
"twin deficits" interpretation ­ associated with the mid-1980s experience in the U.S. ­ fits into this
category. A third view ascribed the imbalances to the export obsessed tendencies of (primarily)
East Asian countries. Broadly speaking, this interpretation could be called the "mercantilist view".
The "saving glut" view, most prominently associated with then Fed Governor Ben Bernanke,



                                                   3
ascribed the imbalance to underdeveloped financial systems sending excess saving to the financial
centers of the world. The "safe assets" perspective is a refinement of the saving glut argument.
Saving flows to countries that serve as producers of high quality assets.
           We briefly review these main hypotheses in turn, placing them in the context of conditions
understood to be in play at the time. The typology is necessarily broadly-brushed, but at the same
time each explanation should not be viewed as mutually exclusive.


The Textbook View
           The intertemporal approach is the mainstay of the formal approach to explaining current
account imbalances. Suppose one maximizes an intertemporal utility function subject to a budget
constraint. If agents are not constrained by borrowing restrictions, and if they have rational
expectations, then the agents should smooth consumption. In order to smooth consumption, they
borrow and save accordingly.
           In this perspective, consumption today is to equal a share of the present discounted value
of future expected net output, or net wealth. Hence, changes in consumption are due solely to
changes in either the interest rate, or changes in expectations about future net output due to
productivity shocks or reductions in investment and government spending. The current account
balances observed are optimal outcomes, and hence no concerns should arise; Obstfeld (2012) has
called this the "consenting adults" view.3
           What did this mean in the context of the question at hand? Suppose that in the early 2000's,
there was a widespread belief productivity would boom in the future. Then rather than waiting for
that anticipated productivity boom in the future to increase consumption, it makes sense for them
to start consuming more now, so as to smooth consumption as much as possible. In the context of
America in the 2000's, to consume more now means to import more and export less.
           In this perspective, deficits signal future economic strength, something that seemed
plausible given the late 1990's productivity acceleration. For the United States, deficits could result
from the relative attractiveness as a place to invest due to relatively high rates of return. This
argument would have been more convincing if GDP growth were being maintained by investment
rather than consumption and, more importantly, if the lending to the United States had taken the
form of purchases of stock and direct investment. Instead, a large proportion of capital flowing to

3
    See more recent contextualization in Obstfeld (2017).


                                                            4
the United States takes place in the form of purchases of U.S. government securities ­ not
purchases of American stocks or direct investment in its factories, as it did in the years leading up
to 2000. Moreover, the heavy involvement of foreign central banks in purchasing U.S. assets
suggests that the profit motive was not behind the ongoing flows to the United States.4
           Formal empirical analyses directed specifically at explaining imbalances were rare. Some
assessments investigated the current account dynamics for specific economies; Chinn and Lee
(2009) applied a structural VAR approach, which allows for transitory and permanent shocks to
drive the current account and the real exchange rate. The key identifying assumption is that the
current account is stationary, while the real exchange rate is integrated of order one. Using the
same approach as in Lee and Chinn (2006), they examine the U.S., the euro area and Japan, and
found that a large share of the 2004-07 U.S. current account is inexplicable using their model.5
           A formal test of the intertemporal approach, as applied to the United States, was conducted
by Engel and Rogers (2006). They model the current account as a function of the expected
discounted present value of its future share of world GDP relative to its current share of world
GDP (where the world is the advanced economies). The key difficulty in testing this approach is
in modeling expected output growth; using a Markov-switching approach, they find that the U.S.
is not keeping on a long-run sustainable path. However, using survey data on forecasted GDP
growth in the G-7, their empirical model appears to explain the evolution of the U.S. current
account remarkably well. Of course, the fact that current account behavior could only be
rationalized by possibly irrational expectations is somewhat troubling. Furthermore, the analysis
does not speak to the behavior of the economies on the other side of the ledger, i.e., the Chinas of
the world.


Fiscal Policy and Demographics
Another key set of arguments regarding the origins of the imbalances of the 2000s relied upon the
application of a conventional stories of current account ­really trade ­ deficits, rooted in the
experience of the 1980's. The combination of tax cuts and defense spending buildup resulted in an
entirely predictable, largely contemporaneous, massive deterioration of the external balances. The
collision with contractionary monetary policy only exacerbated the deterioration, but was entirely


4
    For an extensive critique of this perspective, see Chinn (2005).
5
    Some early formal analyses of the present value approach were conducted by Sheffrin and Woo (1990a, b).


                                                          5
consistent with a static Mundell-Fleming model. That "twin deficits" interpretation seemed ready
made for explaining the mid-2000's worsening of the external deficits. Then, as in the 1980's, a
surge in defense expenditures and massive tax cuts seemed an altogether too obvious candidate.
           Obviously, the twin deficits interpretation is a particularly simple one shock approach.6
Even then, other candidates were being forwarded, all well within the standard set of factors key
for the determination of external balances. For instance, demographics in the United States implied
decreasing private savings, while demographics abroad (Japan, Europe) for instance.
           These conventional motivations ­ public saving, private saving ­ could be examined in a
less formalistic approach. The saving-investment approach did exactly that; starting from the
perspective from the national saving identity which states the current account balance is, by an
accounting identity, equal to the budget balance and the private saving-investment gap. This is a
tautology, unless one imposes some structure and causality. That more comprehensive (albeit ad
hoc) approach modeled the current account explicitly focusing on the determinants of private
investment and saving, and adds those variables to the budget balance.
           Chinn and Ito (2007, 2008) examine the 1971 to 2004 period, which encompassed the
beginning of global imbalances, following the methodology used by Chinn and Prasad (2003).
Relying on a large cross country sample encompassing 18 industrial and 71 developing countries,
using non-overlapping 5 year averages of the data, they relate current account balances to a number
of explanatory variables to account for private saving and investment behavior, including
demographic variables, per capita income, trade openness, as well as variability of terms of trade
shocks and GDP growth. In addition, the budget balance enters in as a key macroeconomic policy
variable. Additional explanatory variables include net foreign assets, and capital controls.
           They find that government budget balances, initial net foreign asset positions and, for
developing countries, indicators of financial deepening are positively correlated with current
account balances. Among developing countries, they also find that higher terms of trade volatility
is associated with larger current account surpluses (or smaller deficits). Greater macroeconomic
uncertainty apparently increases domestic saving and also has a slightly negative impact on
investment. The degree of openness to international trade appears to be weakly associated with
larger current account deficits among developing countries. Note that because they include
average GDP growth and initial net foreign assets in the regressions, the saving-investment

6
    Not twins, but familial relations, according to Truman (2005).


                                                            6
approach is consistent with some aspects of the intertemporal approach (discussed above).
        Their key findings include the following. First, the budget balance is an important
determinant of the current account balance for industrial countries; the coefficient for the budget
balance variable is 0.15 in a model controlling for institutional variables. A series of robustness
checks yield the results that a one percent point increase in the budget balance leads to a 0.1 to 0.5
percentage point increase in the current account balance. For the United States, their analysis
confirms the view that it is a saving drought ­ not investment boom ­ that is contributing to the
enlargement of current account deficits, although there is some evidence of anomalous behavior
in the 2001-04 period. For the East Asian countries, Chinn and Ito find some evidence that the
external imbalances are somewhat larger than predicted by their empirical models.7
        In sum, fiscal, structural and demographic factors account for a large portion of the
variation in current account balances, across countries, and across time. Second, however, the
current account balances of the United States and China are not entirely explained by these factors,
particularly during the period of pronounced global imbalances. Those finding suggest that one
needs to look elsewhere for explanation of an important share of the variation in current account
imbalances.


East Asian Mercantilism and Self-Protection
Another prominent view attributed the East Asian surpluses to explicitly mercantilist behavior.
From this perspective, the developing countries of East Asia have followed an export led
development strategy. That export led strategy resulted in rapid growth; however, starting in the
mid-1990's, current account surpluses evolved into current account deficits, as investment boomed.
        In the wake of the 1997 financial crisis, investment levels collapsed, while saving rates
remained relatively high. Currencies depreciated sharply in the region; however, over time, East
Asian central banks maintained their currencies at fairly weak levels. For some observers, this
observation is sufficient to explain the relatively large and persistent current account surpluses in
the region. One difficulty with this explanation is that the export led development path has been in


7
 Chinn and Ito extend their analysis by accounting for endogeneity in two ways. First, they use an instrumental
variables approach, and second they replace the budget balance with the cyclically adjusted budget balance. In both
cases, the coefficient on the budget balance in both cases rises considerably, ranging from 0.45 to 0.49. The US
current account deficit in 2001-04 was significantly different from that predicted by the model, but just barely.
China's current account was within the 95% prediction band.


                                                         7
place for decades; the explanation for the sharp break post-1997 is missing. Gruber and Kamin's
(2007) findings that a dummy for East Asian countries that suffered crises in 1997-98 was
statistically and economically reconciles this issue. In other words, history matters, and the searing
experience of 1997, even after two decades, leaves an imprint on policy preferences, much like the
experience of a hundred years ago informed German monetary policy in the last half of the
twentieth century.
       While the mercantilist model explains one side of the current account imbalances, it does
not explain the other side ­ namely why it is that the United States, United Kingdom, and specific
other developed (often English speaking) countries ran ­ and continue to run -- substantial deficits.
       In a series of papers, Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber (2003, 2007, 2009) interpreted
the U.S. current account deficit as the outcome of concerted mercantilist efforts by East Asian state
actors. In this context, the financing of America's trade (and budget) deficit is and remains an
explicit quid pro quo for continued access to American markets. Their explanation argues that the
entire panoply of government interventions in East Asian economies are aimed at supporting
exporting industries.
       There are also difficulties with this thesis. Most notable is the mysterious aspect of timing:
East Asian savings began flowing to the United States in 2003. Why not earlier, if the mercantilist
impetus had been there all along? For a thorough critique, see Prasad and Wei (2005).
       An alternative interpretation for the large scale reserve accumulation has been attributed to
the self-insurance or precautionary demand. Foreign exchange reserves can reduce the probability
of an output drop induced by capital flight or sudden stop. This self-insurance motivation rose
substantially in the wake of the East Asian crises; this point was verified by Aizenman and Marion
(2003). Aizenman and Lee (2007) evaluated the relative importance of these of the various
motivations by augmenting the conventional specifications for reserve holdings with proxy
variables associated with the mercantilism and self-insurance/precautionary demand approaches.
While variables associated with both approaches are statistically significant, the self-insurance
variables play a greater economic role in accounting for recent trends.


Global Saving Glut, Safe Assets and Exorbitant Privilege
The "global saving glut" explanation was most forcefully propounded by Bernanke (2005), with
Clarida (2005a,b), and Hubbard (2005) making similar arguments. The saving glut view interprets



                                                  8
excess saving from Asian emerging market countries, accounted for by rising savings and
collapsing investment in the aftermath of the financial crisis (and to a lesser extent Europe), as the
cause of the U.S. current account deficit. Starting in 2003, the burgeoning surpluses of the oil
exporters, ranging from the Persian Gulf countries to Russia, added as sources of excess saving.
From this perspective, the U.S. external imbalance is a problem made abroad; the lack of well-
developed and open financial markets encourages countries with excess savings to seek financial
intermediation in well-developed financial systems such as the United States. Hence, a solution
may only arise in the longer term, as better developed financial systems mitigate this excess
savings problem.
        As for the saving glut variables, Chinn and Ito (2007) and Ito and Chinn (2009) find
evidence of significant interactions between financial development, financial openness, and legal
development, which may help reduce the level of current account balances through reducing
national saving. Alfaro, et al. (2008) and Gruber and Kamin (2007) also find that better quality of
government institutions and regulatory environment tends to attract capital inflow (i.e., worsen
current account balances). Blanchard and Giavazzi (2002) and Abiad, et al. (2007) find evidence
for financial integration leading to current account deterioration in the experience of the European
integration.
        There is no doubt that the financial systems of emerging Asia were less sophisticated than
those of the United States, and perhaps even those of Japan and Singapore. But this
characterization had long been true; the timing of the glut was critical.
        In a variation on the theme, Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2008) modeled the saving
glut explanation as a shortage of safe assets in the developing world.8 Safe assets ­ i.e., assets like
U.S. Treasury securities that maintain their value in even the most adverse financial events ­ can
be acquired in net by countries running a net surplus with those countries (or country) that can
generate such assets, like the U.S..
        The model can explain the timing of the onset of the saving glut. Demand for these safe
assets was sated as long the supply grew sufficiently fast relative to demand. However, with the
surge in emerging market growth, including that of China, during the 1990's and 2000's, the
demand outstripped supply. The "conundrum" ­ the failure of long term Treasury yields to rise in


8
 Mendoza, Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2009) model financial development as the increase in the degree of
enforcement of financial contracts.


                                                       9
the mid-1990s could be rationalized on the basis of this safe-asset shortage. So too can the frenetic
creation of AAA-rated synthetic bonds, in the years leading up to the U.S. financial crisis.9
        The safe asset hypothesis is closely allied with the "exorbitant privilege" argument posited
by Gourinchas and Rey (2007), and expounded at length in Eichengreen (2011). The exorbitant
privilege of being able to finance budgets cheaply is a reflection of the ability to manufacture
public safe assets.
        We think it would be fair to say that the safe assets view has come to dominate the
perspective of why the United States continues to run current account deficits; it retains a quasi-
monopoly on the production of safe assets, in the form of sovereign debt.


Intervention, or Currency Manipulation Intentional or Not
In a series of works, Joe Gagnon and coauthors (Bayoumi, et al. (2013), Gagnon et al. (2017))
have propounded the view that currency manipulation, defined as excessive foreign exchange
intervention, is the root cause of a large share of global imbalances. Intervention to weaken a
currency leads to larger current account balances than would otherwise occur. The difficulty in
quantifying this view is that by the balance of payments accounting identity, the current account
should be related (positively) to foreign exchange intervention. Bergsten and Gagnon (2017)
identify excessive intervention with currency manipulation.
        The proper approach is then to account for the endogeneity of foreign exchange
intervention, by using an instrumental variables approach. Using annual data for a set of emerging
market economies, Bayoumi, Gagnon and Sabrowski (2013), use measures such as the presence
of an IMF program, months of import coverage, whether the country is an emerging market, and
relative income, as well as presence of a sovereign wealth fund. They find that the impact of net
official flows on the current account ranges from 0.36 to 1.15 in their baseline specification, after
accounting for fiscal, demographic, growth factors, as well as the level of income.
        This argument is closely related to the mercantilist argument, to the extent that the reason
many countries ­ particularly emerging market economies ­ intervene is to gain competitive
advantage for their export industries. But unlike the standard mercantilist argument, in one
interpretation, countries can engage in currency manipulation for other reasons than pure


9
 Frankel (2006) questions whether the Caballero et al. model well explains the 2003-06 period, given that some
emerging markets were able to generate high quality assets.


                                                       10
mercantilism. It could be for "self-protection", building up foreign exchange reserves in case of a
large negative shock that would induce a drawdown of reserves (Obstfeld, et al. (2010)).
         Bergsten and Gagnon (2017) write "Manipulators have not necessarily set out primarily to
divert economic activity away from other countries." Management of monetary policy,
maintenance of financial stability, and shadowing larger neighbors exchange rate policies are all
alternative explanations that apply to different countries.10



3. Updating the Evidence on Current Account Imbalances

In order to shed light on the strength of these various hypotheses, We estimate the following model
based upon Chinn and Prasad (2003) as well as most recently Chinn, Eichengreen, and Ito (2014),
which relates the current account balance to four sets of variables:


         Fiscal variable (budget balance)
         Demographic variables (youth and elderly dependency ratio)
         Financial development variables (credit, institutional development, financial openness)
         Other control variables (growth, initial net international investment position, terms of
         trade volatility, relative income)


The current account balance and the general budget balance is expressed as a share of GDP.
Financial development is measured as the ratio of private credit to GDP. Financial openness is
measured using the KAOPEN index of Chinn-Ito (2006) and institutional development is measured
as the first principal component of law and order, bureaucratic quality, and anti-corruption
measures. Net foreign assets as a ratio to GDP (from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2007); relative
income (to the U.S.) together with its quadratic term; terms of trade volatility; output growth; trade
openness (exports plus imports as a share of GDP); a dummy variable for oil exporting countries;
and time fixed effects.
         We estimate this model using panel data for 24 industrial and 138 developing countries
between 1972 and 2016, using non-overlapping 5-year averages of the data, thereby permitting a

10
  See also Choi and Taylor (2017) who show that foreign exchange reserves have a differential impact on exchange
rates and current account balances relative to non-reserve net foreign assets. They interpret this finding as consistent
with both mercantilist and precautionary motives.


                                                          11
focus on medium-term variation in current account balances, rather than short-term, cyclical,
behavior. All the variables, except for net foreign assets to GDP, are converted into the deviations
from their GDP-weighted world mean prior to the calculation of five-year averages while net
foreign asset ratios are sampled from the first year of each five-year panel as the initial
conditions. 11 The use of demeaned series controls for rest-of-world effects. In other words, a
country's current account balance is determined by developments at home relative to the rest of
the world.12
        A large literature focuses on the contrasting saving, investment and current-account-
balance behavior of industrial and developing countries, often disaggregating further between
emerging markets (middle-income countries with relatively extensive access to international
capital markets) and other developing countries, pointing out that potential determinants of these
outcomes ­growth rates, financial development, demographic structure, for example ­ differ
importantly across these groupings. In addition, a number of studies (e.g. Alfaro, et al. 2008; Chinn
and Ito, 2007; Ito and Chinn, 2009) have suggested that the impact of these variables and not only
their values may different systematically across these groupings.13 We therefore estimate separate
regressions for industrialized countries (IDC), developing countries (LDC) and emerging market
economies (EMG), in addition to the full sample.14
        It is useful to distinguish this approach from a key competing methodology for assessing
global imbalances ­ namely the IMF's external balance approach (EBA). This framework focuses
on a higher (annual frequency) data, and allows for the inclusion of market factors such as risk
appetite (via the inclusion of the VIX) as well as policy-related variables like health spending. At
the same time, fiscal, demographic and asset variables also enter into the analyses. One way to
view the IMF's current framework is that it captures, among other things, the role of policies (like
desired levels of health spending) that would otherwise be taken as given. Nonetheless, many of
the same findings regarding fiscal policy, demographics and financial development will be found

11
   Terms-of-trade volatility (TOT), trade openness (OPN), and legal development (LEGAL) are averaged for each
country, i.e., they are time-invariant. The five year periods are 1972-76, 1977-1981, etc.
12
   The data are mainly drawn from World Bank, World Development Indicators, IMF, International Financial
Statistics, and IMF, World Economic Outlook. Further detail can be found in the Data Appendix.
13
   Based on the Solow growth model, the level of development affects rates of return across countries, which
determine the direction of capital flows. On the recent situation of global imbalances, where capital flows from
developing to developed world contrary to the prediction of the Solow growth model (the "Lucas paradox"), Alfaro,
et al. (2008) argue that institutional development also affects the direction of capital flows.
14
   Emerging economies are those classified as either emerging or frontier in 1980­1997 by the International
Financial Corporation, plus Hong Kong and Singapore.


                                                       12
using either approach.15


3.2 Just the Basics
We first proceed by examining the relationship between current account balances and "textbook"
variables (growth of income, terms of trade volatility) and saving-investment variables (budget
balance, demographics).
         This very basic specification, which admittedly incorporates a number of channels or
models, explains a substantial share of the variation in current account balances, ranging from 0.28
to 0.50, depending on the country grouping (Table 1). The highest impact is for the industrial
country grouping, highlighting the importance of the fiscal factor in external balances. In other
words, a one percentage point increase in the fiscal deficit results in a 0.42 percentage point
increase in the current account deficit. These estimates are relatively large compared the findings
in Erceg et al. (2005), Bussière (2010), Corsetti and Muller (2006), and Gruber and Kamin (2007).
To some extent, these new findings offset the earlier naysaying about an important role for fiscal
policy.16
         Moreover, the proportion of variation explained in that specification is nearly 50%. This
finding is remarkable to the extent that there are no fixed country effects ­ just time fixed effects.
Hence, there's no reason to be particularly nihilistic about the empirical determinants of current
account balances.17
         The fiscal balance is of less economic impact for the emerging market group countries.
Presumably, this is because of the procyclicality of fiscal policy in these countries. Nonetheless,
these factors remain statistically important.
         The other conventional determinant of current account balances, namely demographics,
comes into play significantly. Developing countries with higher dependency ratios (and, by the
life-cycle hypothesis, lower savings rates) generally have weaker current account balances,
although the statistically significant estimates are for youth dependency. The elderly dependency

15
   The approach adopted in this paper is very close in spirit to the IMF's precursor to the EBA, the CGER.
Discussion of the empirical results underlying the latest version of EBA is reported in Phillips et al. (2013). IMF
(2016) reports the most recent external assessment.
16
   Gagnon et al. (2017) find that the fiscal coefficient varies by financial openness, as proxied by the Chinn-Ito
index; for more open economies, the coefficient is larger.
17
   In other work, we account for the endogeneity of the fiscal balance by using proxy measures for cyclically
adjusted balances, estimated using HP filtered data. The estimated coefficients are typically higher; hence these
estimates are probably conservative estimates of the fiscal impact.


                                                          13
ratio is significantly negative for the group of EMGs.
        The other control variables, while not of central importance, largely enter in as expected.
Larger net foreign asset positions, which tend to generate a stronger income account, affect the
current account balance positively, as anticipated. The relative income terms, which tend to be
jointly, if not always individually, significant, indicate that higher income countries generally have
more positive current account balances (capital tends to flow from richer to poorer countries as
suggested by the standard neoclassical growth model ­ see e.g. Lucas 1990). Terms of trade
volatility induces precautionary saving; hence ­ except for industrial countries, higher volatility is
associated with higher current account balances. Finally, oil exporting countries have stronger
current account balances, other things equal.
        Higher income growth, to the extent it presages higher future growth, enters in with a
negative force. (A Keynesian interpretation is possible as well, wherein higher growth pulls in
more imports; however, the use of time averaged data should mitigate this effect). The effect shows
up in the full sample, and for LDCs, with statistical significance.18


3.3 Evaluating the Saving Glut and Safe Assets
The saving glut hypothesis is widely interpreted as meaning that the less developed the financial
system, the more likely savings are to be redirected externally. The difficulty is in properly
measuring financial development, a long standing challenge in empirical work. The traditional
approach of using private credit formation expressed as a share of GDP is easy, but extremely
unsatisfying, as it is a mere quantity measure. In order to allow for some nuance in this variable,
we interact the quantity measure with other institutional factors, to account for the quality of the
financial intermediation. Specifically, we enter in a measure of legal development, and capital
account openness (under the presumption that financial openness spurs financial development
(Chinn and Ito, 2006)). Interaction terms with financial development are also included; in sum,
these are defined as saving glut variables. Augmenting the basic specification in Table 2 leads to
the following results.
        The proportion of variation explained rises by about 10 percentage points. The effect of
financial development is mixed. While it is significantly positive for the group of less developing


18
  Other control variables, such as private credit to GDP (sometimes used as a proxy measure for financial
development) and trade openness are not apparently relevant.


                                                        14
countries, it is not significant for the IDC or EMG group. Unlike in Chinn, Eichengreen and Ito
(2014), we do not find as strong evidence for the hypothesis that countries with more developed
financial markets have weaker current account balances. When it is coupled with more open capital
accounts, the impact of financial development on the current account balance becomes negative
but not significantly so. The impact of more open capital accounts alone appears negative, but
again the effect is nowhere statistically significant.
        Why the failure to replicate the results in Chinn, Eichengreen and Ito (2014)? It is not
difficult to mechanically isolate the reason for the weakening of the saving glut variables.
Dropping the 2012-2016 period re-establishes the expected signs for these coefficients. Does this
mean that the saving glut is no longer? Several interpretations arise ­ first that the 2012-2016
period is beset by such idiosyncratic shocks that the effect of these saving glut variables is obscured.
Second, the saving glut effect has faded in importance over time. Yet another view is that in using
a standard measure of financial development, we fail to capture the role of safe assets. We return
to this point later on.
         What is interesting is that the fiscal and to a lesser extent demographic variables retain their
importance. The budget balance has the same impact on the current account surplus as in the
previous model, ranging from 0.29 to 0.51. This contrasts with estimates in Chinn, Eichengreen
and Ito ranging from 0.13 to 0.32. That means fiscal policy has become more influential on current
account balances in the post-crisis world.
         Figure 3 illustrates, for selected countries, the contributions of these factors to current
account balances using the estimates corresponding to those in Table 2, with the left graph
corresponding to the level and the right to changes. We group the variables into 1) the government
budget balance variable; 2) a "saving glut" group composed of the estimated contributions of
financial development, legal development, and financial openness (along with their three
interaction terms), 3) a "demography" group composed of the contributions of young and old
dependency ratios, and 4) other factors.19 The bars illustrate the contributions of these factors to
the levels of current account balances, while the lines indicate the predicted (dashed line) and
actual current account balances. 20 Comparing these bars with actual current account balances


19
   The contributions of the three groups of variables are calculated as   where xit refers to the variables
included in each of the four variable groups.
20
   By construction, the sum of the four bars should add up to the predicted values or changes in the predicted values
(the dotted line with the square nodes).


                                                         15
allows U.S. to infer the contribution of these different factors to the level and change in the current
account. A number of interesting patterns emerge.
       The predicted current account balance for the most recent five year period is not too far
       off the mark for key "countries of interest" ­ Japan, and quite interestingly Germany and
       China. For China, the predicted is almost spot on.
       While the contributions of budget balances vary over time, the contributions of the
       "saving glut" and "demography" variables tend to be relatively stable.
       The contribution of demographic factors tends to be large for industrialized countries but
       not for emerging markets.
       For the United States (and the United Kingdom to a lesser extent), although the budget
       balance is not the largest single contributor to the current account imbalance, it is a
       substantial factor. The contribution of the budget balance accounts for over one
       percentage point of the four percentage point deficit 2007-11 for the U.S. (about two
       percentage points of the four percentage point for the U.K.). Moreover, changes in the
       budget are highly correlated with changes in current account balances for these countries.
       For advanced economies, the "saving glut" variables have contributed to improving
       current accounts, i.e., the lack of financial development, legal development, financial
       openness, and their combinations would worsen current account balances. For emerging
       market economies, the lack of financial development, legal development, financial
       openness, and their combinations would improve current account balances, which applies
       for China and which is in line with the argument with the saving-glut hypothesis.
       The importance of the saving glut variables has dropped in the most recent 5 year and 10
       year periods for which data are available. This suggests that different factors are driving
       imbalances over the crisis and post-crisis period.


       The lack of importance of saving glut variables as proxied in the empirical work does not
speak directly to the proposition that demand for safe assets such as U.S. Treasuries have driven
at least the U.S. current account balance. The decompositions indicate that the U.S. current account
deficit is consistently underpredicted ­ by around 2 percentage points of GDP, over the past twenty




                                                  16
years.21 It is difficult to further identify this number with specifically a safe assets motivation in
this aggregate cross-country framework.22 However, the finding that the own-currency share in
world foreign exchange reserves ­ a proxy variable for reserve currency status ­ shows up as highly
statistically significant in Phillips et al. (2013) is further proof of the importance of the safe asset
factor.




3.4 Net Official Flows
Now that we have some evidence for the saving glut, we can still keep exploring the relevance of
the saving glut hypothesis by looking at the impact of net official flows. The capital flow from
developing economies to the industrial countries, especially the United States, goes to the
treasuries markets. In a sense, the capital flow to the treasuries markets is aimed at seeking for safe
assets. The source of the capital flow comes from active interventions by developing countries.
Hence, the question we can rephrase is, does intervention matter for current accounts?
          This is not so much a "theory" as much as standard open economy macro theory, that
recognizes that government intervention, showing up in net official flows, should have some
impact on macro aggregates, and hence the current account. The critical questions revolve around
the nature of the causal mechanism, and whether other effects might offset the impact.
          Table 3 presents the results of augmenting the basic specification with net official flows, a
proxy measure for foreign exchange intervention, expressed as a share of GDP. Once again,
estimates are presented for all four country groups.
          Unsurprisingly, the intervention variable shows up as economically and statistically
significant. Over the entire sample, the estimated coefficient relating net official flows, is about
0.33, meaning that a one percentage point increase in intervention is associated with a one third
percentage point increase in the current account balance. This is a big effect, statistically
significantly different from zero. Augmenting the basic specification (with institutional indicators
to account for overall financial development) leads to a noticeable increase in proportion of
variation explained while the significance levels for the saving glut variables drop especially for



21
   The finding that there is a consistently significant US dummy is consistent, in a mechanical sense, with this
underprediction of the deficit; see also results in Chinn, Eichengreen and Ito (2014).
22
   See for instance Bertaut et al. (2012).


                                                          17
the LDC and EMG groups, signifying the impact of official flows instead of private flows that tend
to be captured by the saving glut variables.
         Obviously, policymakers choose to intervene for a variety of reasons. They do not
exogenously intervene. Hence, in order to obtain a consistent estimate of the impact of intervention
on the current account, one would want to account for the endogeneity of policy. If the reason for
intervening, is for mercantilist reasons ­ low per capita income for instance ­ then appropriate
instruments would be variables that correlate with this condition, while not simultaneously affected
by intervention.
         The corresponding results are reported in Table 4, where we instrument the net official flow
variable with a dummy for emerging market countries, an interaction term with relative income,
the exchange rate stability index (from Aizenman, et al.; 2013), and the share of manufactured
goods in total exports. For the IDC subsample, the lagged (5 year) net official flows variable is
also included.
         We obtain results are broadly supportive of the proposition that foreign exchange
intervention is correlated with current account balances. The estimate on the variable for net
official flows becomes larger in terms of both the magnitude and statistical significance (Table 4),
suggesting policymakers do intervene after endogenously reacting to current accounts. Taken
literally, the point estimates suggest for LDCs (EMGs), each one percentage point increase in
intervention (as a share of GDP) results in a 1.81 (0.96) percentage point increase in the current
account. If this is true, then intervention has had a large impact on current account imbalances.23
         Figure 4 illustrates the contributions of the groups of explanatory variables, including net
official flows, to current account balances using the estimates corresponding to those in Table 4.
         While the sign of the estimate of net official flows is positive for both IDC and EMG,
Figure 4 shows that for the U.S., U.K., and Germany, official capital inflows contribute negatively
to their current account balances. This suggests that these countries are the providers of safe assets.
         Among the EMGs, the contributions of net official flows to current accounts are large.
China runs large surpluses in 2002-06 and 2007-11, and according to our estimates, the large
surpluses are almost solely due to net official flows. Other Asian EMGs also have their large




23
  Gagnon et al. (2017) shows that there is variation in the efficacy of intervention; more financially open economies
exhibit smaller effects on the current account arising from the net official flows variable.


                                                         18
surpluses corresponding with active foreign exchange interventions.24
           Turning directly to the imbalances of today, to the extent that intervention is largely
reversing during this last period (2012-16), the net effect of intervention has been to shrink current
account surpluses overall.


3.5 Re-assessment
The analyses so far show that the main driver for current account imbalances of major countries
differ among them. The foregoing results suggest fiscal policy, while not necessarily central to the
developments of the mid-2000s, can be an important determinant of imbalances, especially to
industrialized countries such as the U.S. and the U.K. Other conventionally recognized
determinants of imbalances, such as demographics, level of economic development, proxy
measures for uncertainty, appear to explain a substantial portion of the variation in medium term
current account imbalances, and their impacts tend to be stable. Hence, the perception that global
imbalances are largely inexplicable is unjustified.
           The importance of global saving glut proxy measures, to the extent they are important, may
have diminished in economic and statistical import over time. In previous analyses, they were
seldom of central importance, but even then, time series variation in those observed factors were
insufficient to explain the dramatic moves in imbalances over time. For European advanced
economies, we see that the variance of current account is more driven by net primary income rather
than net trade. Hence, the impact of variables related to financial development and openness seems
to exist for some, but it can be often masked by the movements of net exports.
           The lack of finance development can mean the lack of safe assets. That means looking at
net official flows can be a supplement to measuring the impact of rather gross financial
development or openness. For emerging Asian economies, net official flows are found to
contribute a lot to the time variance of current account balances. Clearly, one model does not fit
for all.




4. Conclusion


24
 Figure 4 also shows that the saving glut variables now have the opposite effects for emerging market economies.
However, their contributions become smaller once net official flows are included in the estimation.


                                                       19
Large parts of the global economy have reached full employment; yet current account surpluses
in some regions and deficits in others have meant that a re-allocation of aggregate demand could
in principle result in higher global economic activity. Against this backdrop, it makes sense to
ask why these imbalances have to some extent re-appeared.
          This updated analysis, encompassing the most recent years since the financial crisis and
global recession, brings to bear new light on the issue of global imbalances. Those factors, which
might have been central in the mid-2000's experience, appear to be of lesser import in recent
times. More prosaic factors, including fiscal policy, have taken on a heightened prominence. To
the extent that the oil exporters no longer contribute substantially to the surplus side,
developments in commodity prices also to have been determinative in the past ­ but (perhaps) no
longer.
          On the other hand, some aspects that were intractable in previous analyses remain so
now, with additional data. The U.S. current account deficit continues to remain substantially
underpredicted, even as the model is better able to predict Chinese, Japanese and (the newest
bete noire) German current account imbalances. That residual is consistent with the view that the
U.S. with the de facto quasi-monopoly on generating safe assets retains the exorbitant privilege
of easily financing its current account deficit above and beyond what the standard model implies.
          That finding highlights the constraints on what can be done; policymakers are clearly not
going to seek to diminish America's ability to generate safe assets. On the other hand, fiscal
policy can (and has) had a noticeable influence on current account imbalances. Arguments that
balances are immune to such measures can now be readily dispensed with.




                                                  20
                                          References

Abiad, A., Leigh, D. and Mody, A. 2007. "International Finance and Income Convergence: Europe
       is Different," IMF Working Paper No. 64, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
Aizenman, J., and J. Lee. 2007. "International Reserves: Precautionary versus Mercantilist Views,
      Theory and Evidence," Open Economies Review 18(2): 191-214.
Aizenman, J. and N. P. Marion, 2003. "The High Demand for International Reserves in the Far
      East: What's Going On?" Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 17, 370-
      400.
Alfaro, L., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and V. Volosovych. 2008. "Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to
        Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation," Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 347­
        368.
Bayoumi, T., J. Gagnon, and C. Saborowski, 2015, "Official Financial Flows, Capital Mobility,
      and Global Imbalances," Journal of International Money and Finance 52: 146-174.
Bergsten, C.F. and J. Gagnon, 2017, Currency Conflict and Trade Policy: A new Strategy for the
       United States, Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Bernanke, B., 2005. "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account." Remarks at the
      Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, VA, March 10.
Bertaut, Carol, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, Steven Kamin, and Ralph Tryon. 2012. "ABS Inflows
       to the United States and the Global Financial Crisis." Journal of International Economics
       88(2): 219-234.
Berthout, Antoine, Matthieu Bussière, Laurent Ferrara, Sophie Haincourt, Francesco Pappadà and
       Julia Schmidt. 2019. "Global imbalances: build-up, unwinding and financial aspects."
       Bulletin de la Banque de France 220/6 ­ November December 2018.
Blanchard, O. and Giavazzi, F. 2002. "Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area: The End of the
      Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 147-210.
Brainard, Lael. 2017. "Cross-Border Spillovers of Balance Sheet Normalization," speech
       presented at "Normalizing Central Banks' Balance Sheets: What Is the New Normal?"
       Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs and the Federal Reserve
       Bank of New York, New York, New York, July 11.
Bussière, M. and M. Fratzscher, and G. J. Müller. 2010. "Productivity Shocks, Budget Deficits and
       the Current Account," Journal of International Money and Finance, 29, 1562-1579.
Caballero, R., E. Farhi, and P. O. Gourinchas. 2017. "The Safe Assets Shortage Conundrum,"
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(3): 29­46.
Caballero, R., E. Farhi, and P. O. Gourinchas. 2008. "An Equilibrium Model of `Global Imbalances'
       and Low Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 98, 358-393.
Chinn, M. 2012. "The Global Economy: The Prospects for Imbalances, Overheating, and the
       Recovery," in Global Economic Crisis: Impacts, Transmission, and Recovery, edited by M.
       Obstfeld, D. Cho, A. Mason, S.H. Lee (Korean Development Institute and East-West
       Center).



                                               21
Chinn, M., 2005, "Getting Serious about the Twin Deficits," Council Special Report 10. Council
       on Foreign Relations, New York.
Chinn, M. D., B. Eichengreen, and H. Ito. 2014. "A Forensic Analysis on Global Imbalances,"
       Oxford Economic Papers 66(2): 465-490.
Chinn, M.D., H. Ito. 2008. "Global Current Account Imbalances: American Fiscal Policy versus
       East Asian Savings," Review of International Economics 16(3): 479-498
Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito. 2007. "Current Account Balances, Financial Development and
       Institutions: Assaying the World "Savings Glut," Journal of International Money and
       Finance, 26: 546-569.
Chinn, M. and Hiro Ito, 2006. "What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
       Institutions, and Interactions." Journal of Development Economics, 82: 163-192.
Chinn, Menzie, and Jeffrey A. Frankel, 2007, "Will the Euro Eventually Surpass the Dollar as
       Leading International Reserve Currency?." G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability
       and Adjustment. University of Chicago Press, pp. 283-338.
Chinn, Menzie, and Jeffrey Frankel, 2008, "Why the euro will rival the dollar," International
       Finance 11(1): 49-73.
Corsetti, G. and G. J. Müller. 2006. "Twin Deficits: Squaring Theory, Evidence and Common
       Sense," Economic Policy 21: 597­638.
Dooley, M., D. FolkertsLandau, and P. Garber. 2009. "Bretton Woods II Still Defines the
      International Monetary System," Pacific Economic Review 14(3): 297-311.
Dooley, M. P., D. Folkerts-Landau, and P. Garber. 2007. "Direct Investment, Rising Real Wages
      and the Absorption of Excess Labor in the Periphery." G7 Current Account Imbalances:
      Sustainability and Adjustment. University of Chicago Press: 103-132.
Dooley, Michael P., David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. 2003. "An Essay on the Revived
      Bretton Woods System," NBER Working Paper No. 9971.
Eichengreen, B. 2011. Exorbitant Privilege: The rise and fall of the Dollar and the Future of the
      International Monetary System. Oxford University Press.
Erceg, C. J., L. Guerrieri, and C. Gust. 2005. "Expansionary Fiscal Shocks and the U.S. Trade
       Deficit," International Finance, 8: 363-397.
Frankel, J.A. 2006. "Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates: An Equilibrium Model vs. a
       Disequilibrium Reality." BIS Annual Research Conference Brunnen, Switzerland, June 19-
       20, 2006.
Fratzscher, M. et al. 2014. "Increasing Investment in Germany," Extract from the Report prepared
       by the Expert Commission on behalf of the Federal Minister for Economic Affairs and
       Energy, Sigmar Gabriel, 13 April 2014.
Gagnon, J. 2012. "Global Imbalances and Foreign Asset Expansion by Developing Economy
      Central Banks," Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper No. 12-5,
      Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.
Gagnon, J., T. Bayoumi, J.M. Londono, C. Saborowski, and H. Sapriza. 2017. "Direct and
      Spillover Effects of Unconventional Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies." Open


                                               22
       Economies Review 28 (2): 191-232.
Gourinchas, P. O. and H. Rey. 2007. "From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: U.S.
      External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege," In: G7 Current Account Imbalances:
      Sustainability and Adjustment, 11-66, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
      MA.
Gruber, J. W. and S. B. Kamin. 2007. "Explaining the Global Pattern of Current Account
       Imbalances," Journal of International Money and Finance, 26: 500-522.
IMF.2016, 2016 External Sector Report, International Monetary Fund, July 27.
IMF. 2018. 2018 External Sector Report, International Monetary Fund, July 19.
Ito, H. and M.D. Chinn. 2009. "East Asia and Global Imbalances: Saving, Investment, and
       Financial Development". In T. Ito and A. Rose, ed., Financial Sector Development in the
       Pacific Rim, National Bureau of Economic Research-East Asian Seminar on Economics
       18.
Lane, P.R., and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2017. "International Financial Integration in the Aftermath
       of the Global Financial Crisis." IMF Working Paper No. 17/155 (May).
Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. "The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised
       and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970­2004," Journal of
       International Economics 73: 223-250.
Lucas, R. 1990. "Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?" American Economic
       Review 80: 92-96.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2009. "Financial Integration,
     Financial Development, and Global Imbalances," Journal of Political Economy 117(3):
     371-416.
Obstfeld, M. 2017. "Assessing Global Imbalances: The Nuts and Bolts," IMF Blog, June 26, 2017.
Obstfeld, M. 2012. "Does the Current Account Still Matter?" NBER Working Paper No. 17877
       (March).
Obstfeld, M. 2011. "Financial Flows, Financial Crises, and Global Imbalances," Journal of
       International Money and Finance 31: 469-480.
Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J. C. and Taylor, A. M. 2010. "Financial Stability, the Trilemma, and
       International Reserves." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2: 57-94.
Phillips, S., L. Catão, L. Ricci, R. Bems, M. Das, J. Di Giovanni, D. Feliz Unsal, M. Castillo, J.
       Lee, J. Rodriguez and M. Vargas, 2013, "The External Balance Assessment (EBA)
       Methodology," IMF Working Paper No. 13/272 (December).
Prasad, E. 2011. "Rebalancing Growth in Asia" International Finance 14: 27­66.
Setser, B. 2016. "The Return of the East Asian Savings Glut." Discussion Paper (Council for
        Foreign Relations, October).
Truman, E. 2005. "Budget and External Deficits: Not Twins but the Same Family."




                                               23
                                  Appendix1.Data

We provide below a listing of the mnemonics for the variables used in the analysis,
descriptions of these variables and the source(s) from which the primary data for
constructing these variables were taken.
Mnemonic     Source*             Variable description

CAGDP        WDI, WEO            Current account to GDP ratio
GOVBGDP      WDI, IFS, WEO       General government budget balance, ratio to GDP
NFAGDP       LM                  Stock of net foreign assets, ratio to GDP
RELY         PWT                 Relative per capita income, adjusted by PPP exchange
                                 rates, Measured relative to the U.S., range (0 to 1)
RELDEPY      WDI                 Youth dependency ratio (relative to mean across all
                                 countries), Population under 15 / Population between
                                 15 and 65
RELDEPO      WDI                 Old dependency ratio (relative to mean across all
                                 countries), Population over 65 / Population between 15
                                 and 65
YGRAVG       WDI                 Average 5 year real GDP growth
TOT          WDI                 Terms of trade
OPEN         WDI                 Openness indicator: ratio of exports plus imports of
                                 goods and nonfactor services to GDP
PCGDP        WBFS                Ratio of private credit to GDP
KAOPEN       CI                  Capital account openness
BQ           ICRG                Quality of Bureaucracy
LAO          ICRG                Law and order
CORRUPT      ICRG                Corruption index
LEGAL        Authors' calc.      General level of legal development, first principal
                                 component of BQ, LAO, and CORRUPT.
NOF          Gagnon              Net official flows, adjusted for sovereign wealth funds, as
                                 share of GDP.
* These are mnemonics for the sources used to construct the corresponding. CI: Chinn and
Ito (2006); DPI2004: ICRG: International Country Risk Guide; IFS: IMF's International
Financial Statistics; LM: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006); OECD: OECD Economic Outlook
Database; PWT: Penn World Table; WBFS: World Bank Financial Structure Database; WDI:
World Development Indicators; and WEO: World Economic Outlook. Gagnon: personal
communication from Joseph Gagnon, calculated based on IFS data and country data.



                                          24
                                              Table 1: The Basic Model
                                                              FULL                      IDC                   LDC                   EMG
                                                                (1)                      (2)                   (3)                   (4)
         Gov't budget balance                                  0.481                   0.422                  0.499                 0.277
                                                           (0.061)***             (0.089)***             (0.069)***             (0.066)***
           NFA (initial cond.)                                0.027                   0.015                  0.028                 -0.001
                                                           (0.008)***               (0.009)*             (0.009)***               (0.004)
             Relative income                                  0.050                   0.051                   0.045                 0.190
                                                           (0.015)***              (0.021)**              (0.022)**             (0.024)***
      Relative income squared                                -0.005                  -0.015                  -0.004                 0.092
                                                             (0.003)                 (0.032)                (0.004)             (0.031)***
Relative dependency ratio (young)                             -0.017                  -0.037                 -0.022                -0.030
                                                            (0.010)*                (0.020)*               (0.013)*              (0.013)**
 Relative dependency ratio (old)                             -0.002                   0.028                  -0.005                -0.046
                                                             (0.008)                 (0.018)                (0.008)             (0.012)***
           Fin Dev. - PCGDP                                  -0.004                   0.001                  0.003                 0.009
                                                             (0.007)                 (0.009)                (0.011)               (0.010)
              TOT volatility                                  0.075                   -0.143                 0.076                  0.109
                                                            (0.045)*                 (0.143)                (0.048)               (0.075)
       output growth, 5-yr avg                               -0.276                   0.086                  -0.277                0.114
                                                            (0.154)*                 (0.222)               (0.154)*               (0.094)
             Trade Openness                                   -0.015                   0.020                 -0.025                -0.015
                                                           (0.006)***              (0.009)**             (0.008)***              (0.008)**
               Dummy-2005                                     0.014                   -0.007                  0.019                 0.024
                                                             (0.015)                 (0.012)                (0.020)              (0.012)**
               Dummy-2010                                     -0.015                  -0.012                 -0.014                -0.009
                                                             (0.015)                 (0.011)                (0.021)               (0.012)
               Dummy-2015                                     -0.013                   0.014                 -0.017                -0.013
                                                             (0.015)                 (0.012)                (0.021)               (0.011)
        oil exporting countries                                0.037                                          0.037                 0.044
                                                           (0.010)***                                    (0.011)***             (0.015)***
                     N                                        1,107                    201                     906                   321
                   Adj. R2                                     0.39                    0.44                   0.38                  0.47
                                                        * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
Note: Time fixed effects are included in the estimation, but only those for the 2001-05, 2006-10, and 2011-15 periods are reported in the table




                                                                     25
           Table 2: Basic Model Augmented with Saving Glut Variables
                                                               FULL                    IDC                   LDC                    EMG
                                                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)
         Gov't budget balance                                   0.483                 0.339                  0.507                  0.291
                                                           (0.055)***            (0.086)***             (0.064)***             (0.062)***
           NFA (initial cond.)                                 0.035                 0.016                  0.034                  0.033
                                                           (0.004)***               (0.014)             (0.004)***             (0.006)***
             Relative income                                   0.024                 0.030                  0.024                   0.108
                                                             (0.013)*               (0.028)               (0.014)*             (0.025)***
      Relative income squared                                 -0.000                 0.089                  -0.000                 0.039
                                                              (0.002)               (0.071)                (0.003)                (0.026)
Relative dependency ratio (young)                              -0.016                -0.063                 -0.017                 -0.011
                                                             (0.010)*             (0.025)**                (0.012)                (0.012)
 Relative dependency ratio (old)                               0.004                 0.032                  0.003                  -0.026
                                                              (0.006)              (0.018)*                (0.007)              (0.012)**
           Fin Dev. ­ PCGDP                                    0.002                 0.004                  0.028                  -0.004
                                                              (0.007)               (0.011)              (0.014)**                (0.019)
                     Legal                                      0.004                 0.013                  0.009                  0.010
                                                              (0.003)             (0.006)**               (0.005)*                (0.011)
               pcgdp x legal                                   0.001                 -0.018                 0.009                   0.002
                                                              (0.003)               (0.013)              (0.004)**                (0.013)
 Financial Openness (KAOPEN)                                  -0.002                 -0.003                 -0.001                 -0.008
                                                              (0.003)               (0.004)                (0.005)                (0.007)
            KAOPEN x legal                                     0.001                 0.011                  0.000                  0.002
                                                              (0.001)            (0.004)***                (0.002)                (0.002)
           KAOPEN x pcgdp                                      -0.001                 0.014                  0.001                 -0.011
                                                              (0.003)             (0.007)**                (0.004)                (0.007)
              TOT volatility                                   0.078                 -0.086                 0.077                   0.257
                                                             (0.047)*               (0.145)                (0.049)             (0.077)***
       output growth, 5-yr avg                                -0.054                 0.155                 -0.070                  0.032
                                                              (0.090)               (0.199)                (0.095)                (0.088)
             Trade Openness                                    -0.007                 0.012                 -0.020                 -0.008
                                                              (0.005)               (0.009)              (0.009)**                (0.010)
               Dummy-2005                                      0.017                 -0.001                  0.020                  0.034
                                                            (0.008)**               (0.012)              (0.010)**             (0.013)***
               Dummy-2010                                      -0.006                -0.004                 -0.009                 0.006
                                                              (0.008)               (0.010)                (0.010)                (0.012)
               Dummy-2015                                      -0.005                 0.022                 -0.015                  0.004
                                                              (0.008)              (0.013)*                (0.010)                (0.011)
        oil exporting countries                                 0.027                                        0.030                  0.027
                                                            (0.011)**                                   (0.011)***               (0.015)*
                     N                                           912                  193                     719                    316
                   Adj. R2                                      0.49                  0.47                   0.49                   0.53
                                                        * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
Note: Time fixed effects are included in the estimation, but only those for the 2001-05, 2006-10, and 2011-15 periods are reported in the table




                                                                     26
                      Table 3: Basic OLS Model Augmented with Net Official Flows
                                                               FULL                    IDC                   LDC                    EMG
                                                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)
         Gov't budget balance                                   0.415                 0.328                  0.445                  0.282
                                                           (0.059)***            (0.096)***             (0.069)***             (0.068)***
           NFA (initial cond.)                                 0.031                 0.008                  0.029                  0.031
                                                           (0.004)***               (0.015)             (0.003)***             (0.006)***
             Relative income                                   0.039                 0.031                  0.044                   0.088
                                                            (0.016)**               (0.031)              (0.018)**             (0.023)***
      Relative income squared                                 -0.009                 0.003                  -0.010                 0.024
                                                              (0.008)               (0.086)                (0.009)                (0.025)
Relative dependency ratio (young)                              -0.004                -0.061                 -0.001                 -0.016
                                                              (0.011)             (0.028)**                (0.013)                (0.013)
 Relative dependency ratio (old)                               0.004                 0.046                   0.005                 -0.024
                                                              (0.008)             (0.022)**                (0.009)               (0.012)*
            Net official flows                                 0.332                 0.345                  0.336                   0.210
                                                           (0.072)***              (0.193)*             (0.078)***             (0.069)***
           Fin Dev. ­ PCGDP                                   -0.006                 0.004                  0.018                  0.009
                                                              (0.007)               (0.012)                (0.014)                (0.018)
                     Legal                                      0.003                 0.012                  0.010                  0.017
                                                              (0.003)               (0.007)               (0.005)*                (0.011)
               pcgdp x legal                                  -0.000                -0.017                  0.007                  0.015
                                                              (0.003)               (0.014)                (0.004)                (0.012)
 Financial Openness (KAOPEN)                                  -0.001                -0.001                  0.000                  -0.013
                                                              (0.003)               (0.004)                (0.005)              (0.006)**
            KAOPEN x legal                                     0.002                 0.013                  0.002                  0.001
                                                              (0.001)            (0.005)***                (0.002)                (0.002)
           KAOPEN x pcgdp                                      -0.003                 0.020                 -0.001                 -0.016
                                                              (0.004)             (0.009)**                (0.004)              (0.007)**
              TOT volatility                                   0.098                 -0.234                 0.103                   0.253
                                                            (0.048)**               (0.147)              (0.050)**             (0.081)***
       output growth, 5-yr avg                                -0.204                 0.152                  -0.218                 -0.106
                                                           (0.076)***               (0.230)             (0.079)***                (0.095)
             Trade Openness                                    -0.009                 0.014                 -0.024                 -0.007
                                                             (0.005)*               (0.010)             (0.008)***                (0.009)
               Dummy-2005                                      0.029                  0.009                  0.026                  0.035
                                                           (0.008)***               (0.012)             (0.008)***             (0.009)***
               Dummy-2010                                      0.008                  0.004                 -0.001                  0.011
                                                              (0.008)               (0.011)                (0.008)                (0.010)
               Dummy-2015                                      0.008                  0.028                 -0.008                  0.011
                                                              (0.009)              (0.014)*                (0.009)                (0.009)
        oil exporting countries                                 0.015                                        0.016                  0.028
                                                              (0.011)                                      (0.011)               (0.015)*
                     N                                           817                  167                     650                    287
                   Adj. R2                                      0.55                  0.50                   0.57                   0.58
                                                        * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
Note: Time fixed effects are included in the estimation, but only those for the 2001-05, 2006-10, and 2011-15 periods are reported in the table




                                                                     27
                    Table 4: Basic Model Augmented with Net Official Flows, Instrumented
                                                                FULL                     IDC                   LDC                       EMG
                                                                  (1)                     (2)                   (3)                       (4)
         Gov't budget balance                                    0.074                  0.217                  0.015                     0.087
                                                               (0.136)               (0.118)*                (0.151)                   (0.189)
     Lane's NFA (initial cond.)                                 0.017                 -0.013                  0.020                     0.018
                                                              (0.010)*                (0.021)               (0.009)**                  (0.011)
            Relative income                                     0.013                  0.024                  0.008                     0.047
                                                               (0.030)                (0.042)                (0.040)                   (0.050)
      Relative income squared                                  -0.002                 -0.250                  0.005                     0.018
                                                               (0.019)                (0.172)                (0.023)                   (0.048)
Relative dependency ratio (young)                               0.039                  -0.062                 0.045                     -0.021
                                                               (0.031)               (0.034)*                (0.039)                   (0.015)
 Relative dependency ratio (old)                                0.020                  0.066                  0.024                     -0.013
                                                               (0.024)              (0.027)**                (0.031)                   (0.017)
           Net official flows                                   1.623                  1.536                  1.805                     0.962
                                                            (0.422)***              (0.727)**              (0.445)***                 (0.530)*
          Fin Dev. - PCGDP                                     -0.007                  0.010                  0.013                     0.048
                                                               (0.010)                (0.016)                (0.021)                   (0.041)
                     legal                                      0.002                   0.007                  0.007                    0.036
                                                               (0.007)                (0.009)                (0.013)                 (0.018)**
               pcgdp x legal                                   -0.005                 -0.022                  0.007                     0.045
                                                               (0.009)                (0.018)                (0.013)                  (0.025)*
 Financial Openness (KAOPEN)                                    0.004                  0.006                  -0.004                    -0.017
                                                               (0.006)                (0.007)                (0.006)                 (0.007)**
           KAOPEN x legal                                       0.004                  0.015                  0.001                     0.003
                                                             (0.002)**              (0.006)**                (0.002)                   (0.002)
          KAOPEN x pcgdp                                        -0.004                  0.034                 -0.007                    -0.025
                                                               (0.007)              (0.017)**                (0.007)                (0.008)***
              TOT volatility                                    0.135                  -0.603                 0.154                     0.251
                                                             (0.065)**               (0.328)*               (0.073)**               (0.083)***
       output growth, 5-yr avg                                 -0.483                   0.376                 -0.580                    -0.325
                                                            (0.161)***                (0.257)              (0.201)***                  (0.206)
            Trade Openness                                      -0.006                  0.017                 -0.009                    -0.014
                                                               (0.008)                (0.015)                (0.011)                   (0.015)
              Dummy-2006                                        0.004                   0.021                 -0.006                    0.012
                                                               (0.012)                (0.016)                (0.017)                   (0.020)
              Dummy-2011                                        -0.009                  0.012                 -0.016                    -0.002
                                                               (0.011)                (0.014)                (0.016)                   (0.015)
              Dummy-2016                                        -0.005                  0.028                 -0.016                    0.003
                                                               (0.011)                (0.019)                (0.016)                   (0.014)
       oil exporting countries                                 -0.006                                         -0.006                    0.009
                                                               (0.016)                                       (0.018)                   (0.020)
                     N                                            687                   146                     541                       250
                   Adj. R2                                       0.10                   0.31                   -0.02                     0.43
                                                          * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
  Note: Time fixed effects are included in the estimation, but only those for the 2001-05, 2006-10, and 2011-15 periods are reported in the table.




                                                                       28
1
     Figure 1. Global Current Balances for Select Country Aggregates.




   Source: IMF, WEO, October 2018.
Figure 2: Distribution of current account balances, as share of national GDP
Figure 3: Current account balances and decompositions
Figure 3: Current account balances and decompositions, continued




                               4
Figure 3: Current account balances and decompositions, continued




                               5
Figure 3: Current account balances and decompositions, continued




                               6
Figure 3: Current account balances and decompositions, continued




                               7
Figure 4: Current account balances and decompositions, augmented with net official flows
        a) United States                                           c) Germany




         b) United Kingdom                                             d) Japan
Figure 4: Current account balances and decompositions, augmented with net official flows, continued
                e) Korea                                             g) Thailand




              f) Malaysia                                                   h) China
