                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
    TOWARD AN UNDERSTANDING OF CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
             THEORY AND FIELD EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE
                                        Daniel Hedblom
                                       Brent R. Hickman
                                         John A. List
                                      Working Paper 26222
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26222
                            National Bureau of Economic Research
                                 1050Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       September 2019

We thank Stephane Bonhomme, Aaron Bodoh-Creed, Steven Levitt, Emir Kamenica, James
McKinnon, Ivan Canay, Vadim Marmer, and Christopher Cotton for helpful comments. Special
thanks to Joseph Seidel for excellent research assistance. The authors also wish to thank seminar
participants at The U. of Chicago, U. of Wisconsin-Madison, UCL, CREST, Queen's U., the
Economic Science Association North American meeting, Econometric Society North American
Summer Meetings, the U. of Chicago Advances with Field Experiments conference, Penn State,
Carnegie Mellon, and the Olin Business School at Washington U in St. Louis. We also
acknowledge Danielle Hickman, Leah Vanevenhoven, and Bloom Bakeshop for insightful
conversations on the interpretation of our results. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT: As per NBER's submission requirements, we wish to disclose
the following information:
1) This research was executed entirely with internal funding provided by the University if
Chicago and did not use outside sources of monetary support.
2) Neither Hedblom, nor Hickman, nor List received financial support from any interested parties
in the execution of this research.
3) List held a position as Chief Economist at Uber Technologies during the data collection phase
of this research. As explained in Section 2 of the current manuscript, Hedblom, Hickman, and
List incorporated a firm, HHL Solutions, LLC, a non-profit consultancy, as part of the
experimental research design. The two clients served by HHL Solutions, LLC included Uber
Technologies, and the Becker-Friedman Institute for Research in Economics at the University of
Chicago. Specifically, these two entities were the intended recipients of the data products
resulting from test subjects' real-effort work producing data entry services. List did not receive
any financial compensation specific to this research from Uber Technologies.
4) No outside parties had rights to review this manuscript prior to its circulation.
5) This research was conducted under Institutional Review Board Approval IRB15-1094 at the
University of Chicago.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Daniel Hedblom, Brent R. Hickman, and John A. List. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Toward an Understanding of Corporate Social Responsibility: Theory and Field Experimental
Evidence
Daniel Hedblom, Brent R. Hickman, and John A. List
NBER Working Paper No. 26222
September 2019
JEL No. C14,C93,J3,J33,J44,L21,M52

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop theory and a tightly-linked field experiment to explore the supply side implications
of corporate social responsibility (CSR). Our natural field experiment, in which we created our
own firm and hired actual workers, generates a rich data set on worker behavior and responses to
both pecuniary and CSR incentives. Making use of a novel identification framework, we use
these data to estimate a structural principal-agent model. This approach permits us to compare
and contrast treatment and selection effects of both CSR and financial incentives. Using data
from more than 1100 job seekers, we find strong evidence that when a firm advertises work as
socially-oriented, it attracts employees who are more productive, produce higher quality work,
and have more highly valued leisure time. In terms of enhancing the labor pool, for example,
CSR increases the number of applicants by 25 percent, an impact comparable to the effect of a 36
percent increase in wages. We also find an economically important complementarity between
CSR and wage offers, highlighting the import of using both to hire and motivate workers. Beyond
lending insights into the supply side of CSR, our research design serves as a framework for causal
inference on other forms of non-pecuniary incentives and amenities in the workplace, or any
other domain more generally.

Daniel Hedblom                                  John A. List
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
The University of Chicago                       University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th St.                                1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637                               Chicago, IL 60637
hedblomdaniel@gmail.com                         and NBER
                                                jlist@uchicago.edu
Brent R. Hickman
Olin Business School
Washington University in Saint Louis
One Brookings Drive, Campus Box #1133
Saint Louis, MO 63130
USA
hickmanbr@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26222
1     Introduction
Among social scientists, the virtues of corporate social responsibility (CSR) have been
debated at least since Friedman (1970) famously described it as a"fundamentally sub-
versive doctrine," declaring that the only social responsibility of a firm is to maximize
profits while avoiding deception or fraud. Nevertheless, today CSR is ubiquitous as
most large firms have entire branches dedicated to ensuring socially responsible prac-
tices and/or planning and executing charitable activities. Indeed, hundreds of millions
of dollars annually are budgeted on such programs. One economic explanation for the
prevalence of CSR is that making the world a better place is not necessarily at odds
with profit maximization. Proponents have argued that investments in CSR actually
increase profits, but there is no consensus in the empirical literature on whether they
have a positive effect on the firm's bottom line. Some studies report a positive effect
(Waddock and Graves (1997)) and others find mixed, negative, or no effects (Barnett
and Salomon (2012); Godfrey et al. (2009); Servaes and Tamayo (2013)).
    A possible reason for these mixed findings is that most empirical studies of CSR
tend to focus primarily on the demand side of the market (Du et al. (2011); Elfen-
bein et al. (2012); McDonnell and King (2013); Servaes and Tamayo (2013)). The
demand side explanation posits that firms use CSR as a marketing tool to signal
ethical standards to consumers who value them. While plausible, such efforts ignore
the effect of CSR on the supply side of the market, or its impact on employee be-
havior. For example, it is possible that CSR provides non-pecuniary incentives to (i)
advantageously select workers to seek employment at the firm, and (ii) once employed
CSR can induce higher productivity, work quality, and/or job satisfaction among em-
ployees. Some recent studies investigate supply-side effects of CSR, but these tend
to focus on employee retention or wage requirements (see Carnahan et al. (2015);
Burbano (2016)).
    We take this literature in a new direction by using a natural field experiment
that is tightly linked to a structural model to identify how important features of a
firm's production process interact with its CSR activities. The central premise is that
workers potentially respond to variation in CSR, allowing us to estimate important
behavioral parameters of the model. A firm's existing workers are willing to supply
labor and produce high-quality output, in part, due to their social preferences. We
refer to this as the treatment effect of CSR. Yet, heterogeneous preferences for CSR


                                           1
also cause workers to vary by their propensity to select into different jobs. A worker
who prefers to work for a CSR firm will more readily accept a given wage offer from
this firm than from a non-CSR firm offering the same wage. Thus, CSR may shape
the composition of the firm's worker pool, which we refer to as the selection effect.
Our field experiment allows us to separate such treatment and selection effects.
   We begin by presenting a structural model that provides direction into the ex-
ogenous variation necessary to quantify unobservable worker characteristics, such as
productivity, worker quality, and time preferences. Our model and experimental de-
sign draw upon a novel identification framework proposed by D'Haultfoeuille and
F´
 evrier (2015) and Torgovitsky (2015) (henceforth, DFT) who show how discrete in-
struments (exogenous wage offers in our case) can be used to identify idiosyncratic
time preferences. We build upon this framework in two important ways. First, we
allow for transitory labor-supply shocks in settings where workers repeatedly make
labor-leisure decisions across different periods of time. Second, while DFT require ex-
clusion restrictions that imply no self-selection on wage offer, our experimental design
allows us to relax this constraint by expansion of the observable set. Through use of
a two-stage randomization during the hiring process, we are able to allow for selec-
tion on worker unobservables across wage contracts, while using observed variation
in application rates to adjust for this selective entry, ex post. Allowing for selection
on wage contracts allows us to compare pecuniary and non-pecuniary incentives in
worker hiring. This methodological contribution highlights how field experimental
variation can both relax identification assumptions and broaden empirical insights.
   Our field experiment consists of randomized treatments in two stages: (1) a hiring
stage and (2) a real-effort work stage. Both stages generate data on worker behavior
when faced with different wage contracts and non-pecuniary incentives in the form
of information about the firm's investments in CSR. The field experiment is tightly
linked to the theoretical model to ensure that we are able to generate the appro-
priate instruments and variation in observables to permit parameters of interest to
be accurately estimated with minimal a priori assumptions on the data-generating
process.
   In the hiring stage of the experiment, we recruit subjects via online advertise-
ments placed on marketplaces for jobs in 12 cities throughout the US. We randomly
vary the offered wage rate and how much information is revealed about our firm's
involvement in CSR. Our subjects are recruited from an actual marketplace at wage

                                           2
rates common to adult semi-skilled labor ($11/hr to $15/hr) to avoid sample selection
problems when subjects are recruited from a very specific population (Levitt and List
2007). Application rates in each treatment group allow us to investigate and compare
how pecuniary incentives (different wage rates) and non-pecuniary incentives (infor-
mation about CSR) affect the probability that a given individual signals acceptance
of the firm's offer by applying for the job. Beyond that, the hiring stage provides an
instrument for structural identification of labor-supply costs and selection effects.
   In the second stage of the experiment, subjects who are hired engage in real data-
entry work through a custom-designed, web-based task system. In order for employees
to work they must log into our website, which then continuously records data in the
background about labor supply, productivity, and output quality. The website also
provides a means of varying task framing to pin down treatment effects. Importantly,
both those who are recruited for a CSR job and those who are recruited neutrally
receive the same within-worker variation in task framing prompts. This aspect of our
research design allows us to separate the influence of treatment and selection effects
on outcomes of interest.
   Our research design yields several interesting insights. First, we find that both
wages and CSR have important effects on application rates. An increase in the
wage offer from $11/hour to $15/hour increases application rates by about 32%,
while advertising the firm as a CSR firm increases application rates by 24%, or three
quarters as much. What remains unclear is whether we are merely observing increased
response rates by the same set of workers, or whether the reduced-form results signal
composition effects that alter the mixture of worker traits within the firm's labor
pool.
   We therefore use our field experimental data to estimate a structural model of
unobserved worker heterogeneity. We study the relative impacts of worker selection
on both wage offer and non-pecuniary job perks. This is an important feature of our
methodology, as our structural methods use a theoretical model of worker behavior to
quantify unobservable, idiosyncratic characteristics, while controlling for transitory
phenomena such as learning effects and labor-supply shocks. We also disentangle
the impacts of work-stage treatments from hiring-stage selection on idiosyncratic
labor supply, productivity, and work quality. In this manner, our field experiment is
designed to establish an ideal data-generating process for estimating the primitives of
a rich model of worker production and labor supply. As a consequence, our structural

                                           3
econometric model yields results that cannot be derived directly from raw data, and
is particularly useful for conducting counterfactual analysis and for generalizing the
results beyond the experimental setting.
   Several insights emerge from the structural estimates. First, we construct stochas-
tic dominance tests on the distributions of estimated worker characteristics across
different subgroups in our sample. This sheds light on worker selection in terms of
wage offers and CSR advertisement at the recruitment stage. We find evidence of
significant composition shifts on three dimensions of worker heterogeneity: produc-
tivity, work quality, and labor-supply costs. The analysis highlights that using either
high wage offers or CSR (or both) as a recruitment tool induces non-trivial advan-
tageous selection on workers' baseline productivity and accuracy. Consistent with
labor search theory, higher wage offers induce workers with a higher shadow value of
time to apply. Interestingly, a CSR hiring strategy operates similarly: CSR-recruited
workers tend to have higher utility costs of supplying time to the firm.
   Second, we find that a CSR advertisement campaign during the work stage in-
duces a separate advantageous treatment effect on existing workers (i.e., holding their
unobserved characteristics fixed). It induces workers to increase their output per unit
of time, and also to voluntarily reduce the amount of non-productive down-time while
they are on shift (i.e., getting paid by the firm for their time). Since treated work-
ers produce output faster and take fewer breaks, one might worry that these gains
arise at the expense of work quality, but we find no evidence to that effect. These
results imply that an internal CSR advertisement campaign can have unambiguously
advantageous impacts on the firm's bottom line through altering existing workers'
behavior.
   Finally, through a counterfactual simulation based on our structural estimates we
find that selection effects can meaningfully improve the firm's bottom line. For various
levels of quality control on the firm's output, per-unit production costs among $15-
wage recruits is nearly the same as per-unit production costs among $11-wage recruits.
This is because the former group produce more output per hour at a higher quality
level, requiring fewer costly redundancy measures. High-wage recruits also supply
more output to the firm each day through increased labor supply and productivity.
This reduces the number of workers needed to maintain a given output level, which
may further improve the firm's bottom line if there is a non-trivial human resources
cost tied to each worker. These results are of independent interest, though they relate

                                           4
to the CSR question by demonstrating that a profit-motivated firm may wish to adopt
sustainable hiring/compensation practices that directly benefit its workers.
        In addition, CSR selection implies not only that workers produce more output
across various levels of quality control, but their per-unit production costs are roughly
25% lower than their neutral-recruited counterparts as well. We estimate that the
scale of a firm needed to profitably justify a $1,000,000 annual CSR budget at 411
workers or more. Holding this CSR budget fixed, a firm which continuously employs
more than 411 data-entry workers would be able to strictly profit from a $1,000,000
annual CSR investment, through gains on selected worker productivity and work
quality alone. This result could explain why larger firms tend to invest more in
CSR activities: with a larger employee base over which to spread costs and reap
productivity benefits, the per-worker profitability of a dollar invested in CSR may be
higher as well.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews relevant literature and describes
the field experimental design. Section 3 outlines the theoretical model while Section
4 provides a brief overview of identification and estimation, with technical details
relegated to Appendix A. Section 5.1 presents descriptive statistics and preliminary
results on worker application rates from the hiring stage. Sections 5.2­5.4 present
results from the structural model, and Section 6 presents a counterfactual simulation
exercise to explore implications for the firm's cost structure. Section 7 concludes.


2         Literature Review and Experimental Design
To the best of our knowledge, the only previous studies using field experiments to in-
vestigate the impact of CSR on labor market fundamentals are due to Burbano (2015,
2016). Using experiments conducted on mTurk and Elance, Burbano (2016) estimates
reduced-form effects of CSR messages on labor output and salary requirements. Our
study links a structural model with a field experiment to identify and estimate the
interplay between unobservable worker characteristics and CSR activities on the part
of the firm, especially through worker selection at the recruiting stage.1
    1
        Burbano (2015) uses a field experiment to explore the effect of CSR on virtual workers, and
finds that CSR increases virtual worker's willingness to do extra, unrequired work. In related work,
List and Momeni (2017) explore the reduced-form effects of CSR on employing cheating. They find
that CSR induces misbehaviors at work for some employees.



                                                  5
   Our paper also contributes to the broader literature on the effects of CSR on
firm performance (Greening and Turban (2000)). A recent paper by Bertrand et al.
(2018) argues that large firms are able to use corporate philanthropy as a tax-exempt
form of political lobbying by donating to charities connected to elected officials. To
complement this work, our study also explores how CSR affects the bottom line, but
through its impact on the firm's labor force and cost structure.
   We also contribute to the recent strand of literature within economics using experi-
ments to generate data to identify structural models. Previous examples include char-
itable giving (DellaVigna et al. (2012)), voting behavior (DellaVigna et al. (2017)),
gift exchange (DellaVigna et al. (2019)), disappointment aversion (Gill and Prowse
(2012)), and childhood education (Cotton et al. (2019)). We contribute to this liter-
ature by providing an in-depth labor market application with sorting and treatment
effects in the workplace. Finally, we contribute to the literature on equalizing dif-
ferences (Roback (1982); Rosen (1986)). Our structural analysis of selection effects
constitutes a new way of estimating compensating differentials or equalizing differ-
ences across jobs that vary non-pecuniary incentives. Thus, the methodology in this
paper has applicability in areas beyond CSR. One could readily use a similar method
to estimate the effect of virtually any workplace characteristic--e.g., flexible hours or
workplace competition--over which there are heterogeneous worker preferences.

2.1    Experimental Design
We design our natural field experiment (see Harrison and List (2004)) in a manner that
combines market realism and expands on ideas from DFT to identify the distribution
of unobserved worker characteristics while allowing for selection effects from variation
in both wages and CSR. The experiment uses randomized treatments administered
in two stages: (1) a hiring stage and (2) a real-effort work stage. In the first stage,
we recruited and hired subjects while varying wage and non-pecuniary treatment
conditions. The second stage had subjects performing data-entry tasks through a
web-based worker portal that produces detailed measures of outputs and labor inputs
during each day of the sample period. The experiment was designed with several
important conditions in mind. First, exogenous variation is necessary in both stages
for identification, as will become clear in the next section. Second, regardless of how
workers were recruited, all are given the same treatment-control variation during
the work stage. This aspect of our design is crucial for separating selection effects


                                           6
and treatment effects. Third, we need to achieve a work environment as natural as
possible, as the subjects investigate the firm and earn money in a job they chose to
apply for on their own. Fourth, the work task must be uniform across treatments to
allow identification of labor-supply costs, which include an idiosyncratic component
and a common cost function.
       In order to satisfy these conditions, we started an actual consultancy firm, HHL
Solutions, LLC. The firm specializes in data collection and data management services
for various clients, including for-profit firms (e.g., Uber Technologies, Inc.), and non-
profit firms (e.g., The University of Chicago). A website for the firm was also designed
and published online (see Online Appendix B for a screenshot). The website did not
play a direct part in the experiment, but was set up in case potential subjects chose to
search for additional information about the firm. Running our own firm rather than
partnering with an existing firm or using a crowdsourcing market (e.g., mTurk) gave
us the flexibility and control to design the user experience and workload to balance the
needs of producing scientifically viable data and serving client needs.2 Our empirical
analysis requires detailed observations with a work task that is simple enough to
enable a clean data-generating process, but realistic enough to be meaningful as an
economic case study. Creating our own firm also provided control over the size of the
workforce, which would not have been possible in a typical industry partnership.

2.2       Hiring Stage
Employment advertisements were posted on www.Craigslist.com in 12 major cities
throughout the US. The particular cities were chosen based on size, geography, and
the relative activity of the associated Craigslist page. The initial ad was a terse
announcement of a short-term employment opportunity for data-entry workers. It
mentioned that wages were to be set somewhere in the range of $11-$15. Interested
individuals were instructed to request more information by replying to the ad via
email. The set of all individuals who responded to the initial ad comprise our pool of
potential applicants, and they were subsequently randomized into treatment groups.
   2
    Two further reasons dictated that we start our own firm rather than use internet crowdsourcing.
First, subjects recruited via mTurk may tend to pay less attention to experimental materials and
may have a different attitude towards pecuniary and non-pecuniary trade-offs than the general
worker pool in a developed country, which is our population of interest (see Chandler et al. (2014);
Goodman et al. (2013); Paolacci and Chandler (2014)). Second, work-stage variation and output
monitoring require a large degree of flexibility in the design of our online task system.


                                                  7
       The first stage treatments were administered via email. Importantly, all sub-
jects, regardless of treatment, were exposed to the same original job advertisement
on Craigslist. This permits us to randomize subjects to treatments in a controlled
manner. In contrast, if we were to use more than one version of the initial ad, there
would be no way of controlling which ad each subject was exposed to.3 The timing
of the first stage of the experiment is summarized in figure 1. We used two different
treatments in the first stage: for subject i there were (1) two possible wage levels,
Wi  {$11, $15}, and (2) two slightly different texts containing information about
the firm. The CSR information treatment for subject i = 1, 2, ..., I is represented by a
dummy variable X0i equalling 1 if the subject was informed of CSR in the job descrip-
tion letter, and 0 otherwise. The wage and CSR treatments were crossed, resulting
in 4 treatment cells summarized in Table 1.




                                  Figure 1: Hiring Stage Timing



                                               X0i = 0        X0i = 1

                               Wi = $11     11 / Neutral     11 / CSR

                               Wi = $15     15 / Neutral     15 / CSR

                             Table 1: Hiring Stage Treatment Cells


       We chose the wage levels of $11 and $15 in part because we wanted to be able to
attract a reasonably representative set of data-entry workers. According to market
research firm Payscale.com, at the time we ran the experiment $11/hr and $15/hr cor-
responded to the 25th and 75th percentile wages for data entry operators in the United
   3
       This element of the design is similar to Flory et al. (2014) and Leibbrandt and List (2014) to
study gender differences in attitude towards competition and wage negotiation. A similar "two-step"
randomization procedure was used by Ashraf et al. (2010) to separate screening and sunk-cost effects
in a field experiment on healthcare product pricing.



                                                   8
States.4 The pecuniary and non-pecuniary incentive variation in our hiring stage
was contained in the randomized email we sent in response to initial queries. This
email encapsulated the difference between our "Neutral" and "CSR" recruitment-
stage treatments in the following way. In the two treatment cells with X0i = 0, the
letter contained information on the company, the task, the (randomized) offered wage,
and directions for how to formally apply for the job. In the two treatment cells with
X0i = 1 it contained all the same text with an addition to one paragraph that ex-
plained HHL Inc.'s CSR activity of charging low prices to non-profit clients engaged
in good causes (which, to avoid deception, was in fact true, as discussed below).
      Figure 13 in the online supplement contains a side-by-side comparison of the
hiring-stage recruitment letters for a worker who was randomly assigned a high wage
offer. The only difference between a neutral recruitment letter and a CSR recruitment
letter is the addition of the following four sentences in the third paragraph: "Some of
[our clients] work in the nonprofit sector with various charitable causes. For example,
with projects aimed at improving access to education for underpriviledged children.
We believe that these organizations are making the world a better place and we want
to help them doing so. Due to the charitable nature of their activity, we only charge
these clients at cost." The letters also contain our wage variation: the fourth block
of text below the salutation reads "The hourly wage rate is $j ." with j  {11, 15}
      Note that none of our communication with test subjects involved deception, as our
consultancy had at least one of each actual type of for-profit/non-profit clients. For
example, data entry services were performed on behalf of Uber Technologies, Inc. and
the Becker-Friedman Institute at the University of Chicago (for research independent
of this paper) which conducts ongoing studies on childhood human capital investment,
with emphasis on alleviating inequality of educational opportunity.
      After viewing the information letter, subjects' behavior provides us with our first
outcome variable: the application decision. By computing the share of the initial
pool of subjects (the ones that responded to the original Craigslist ad) who apply,
we can estimate how the wage rate (pecuniary incentive) and the information about
CSR (non-pecuniary incentive) affect the probability of applying. The application
decision is an important outcome variable as it constitutes the extensive margin of
our treatments. In the hiring stage, to ensure that we generated a representative
sample of employees across the treatment cells while staying within our budget, we
  4
      http:www.payscale.comresearchUSJob=Data Entry OperatorHourly Rate   accessed 04/14/2017




                                             9
hired a random subset of I applicants. In terms of the model, we obtain a vector
(X 0 , W ) = (X01 , . . . , X0I , W1 , . . . , WI ) with the CSR treatment dummy and wage offer
for each agent.5 Our model of unobserved worker characteristics includes four dimen-
sions of heterogeneity: two separate aspects of worker productivity, work quality, and
preferences for leisure which dictate labor-supply decisions. Our hiring-stage varia-
tion is crucial for pinning down how the firm's CSR activities create selection effects
that shape the distribution of these characteristics within its applicant pool.

2.3        Work Stage
Subjects were informed that they would be working for 10 days, and that they were
free to work any number of hours during each day of the project period. Concerning
our model, one day corresponds to a period t so that t = 1, 2, ..., T = 10 in the
experiment. Each subject worked from home through our custom-designed online
task system. They were each provided with a username and a password for logging
into the system at any time. This allowed us to track the number of hours worked
each day, the quantity of output produced, and the quality of output.
       Upon logging in, subjects saw a dialog box explaining the task system itself and
some information about the client associated with the work for the particular day.
After reading this information, subjects were taken to the main screen. Here, subjects
were faced with a list of tasks that could be completed in any order. A task was
initiated by clicking on the associated link, taking the subject to a data entry screen.
On the data entry screen, the subject is presented with a snapshot from Google
Streetview depicting a street in a major city in the US. The snapshot was sampled
from a large database of over 3,200 images collected prior to the experiment. Below
the snapshot was a web form with a number of text boxes and drop-down menus for
entering data. The subject's task was to visually process the image and correctly
complete the form by entering information for each variable listed.
       There were 6 meta-data variables about the picture itself and 12 variables related
to the street visible in the picture. Some of the variables require the subject to
make an assessment of the quality of the street or the buildings visible in the picture
   5
       In our random hiring procedure, we over-sampled high-wage-offer recruits at 97 vs 73. I.e.,
we randomly sampled 33% more high-wage recruits than low-wage recruits in anticipation of our
selection-correction procedure which requires us to exclude a subset of high-wage workers for part
of the estimator (see discussion in Section 4.2 and Appendices A.3 and A.7). Our sampling of CSR
recruits and neutral recruits was roughly even at 51.8% and 48.2%, respectively.


                                                 10
and assign a rating on a Likert scale. Training materials were distributed to each
worker explaining how to map visual queues into Likert-scale values. Other variables
required the subject to count the number of occurrences of certain objects in the
picture (e.g., potholes and broken windows). Once all the information is recorded,
the subject submits the task by clicking on a button, taking him or her back to
the main screen. The completed tasks were then marked as "completed" in the
middle of the main screen. Time was automatically tracked while the subject was
logged into the system. The subject could view a running total of paid working time
(within the current day) on the main screen at any time. The task was chosen so
both our private and non-profit clients could gain valuable information relevant to
their operations, while avoiding deception of our test-subjects. Online Appendix B
contains screenshots of the main web-page and the task pages where they actually
coded information about the Google Streetview images.

2.3.1     Work Stage Treatments
Work-stage CSR treatment is denoted by X1it = 1 if CSR treatment is present on day
t and X1it = 0 otherwise. For all workers, regardless of recruitment status, within-
person variation in treatments consisted of information about the client associated
with the task of a given day, and HHL's dealings with that client. This information
was presented to subjects when logging into the online work system and in informa-
tion boxes on the main screen after tasks were completed. On days when the CSR
treatment was present, there was a short, color-coded prompt on the screen indi-
cating that today's project was for a non-profit client organization that works with
improving access to education for underprivileged children. Moreover, the prompt
indicated that our firm wants to help these clients to make the world a better place,
so we charge them for our services only at a rate which will cover our production
cost. On neutral days a similar color-coded prompt appeared in the same location on
their screen, indicating that the day's project was for a for-profit client, and thanking
them for their efforts (see Figures 14­17 in Online Appendix B). In order to avoid
confusion, the screen also indicated that the employee's own wage rate is the same,
regardless.
      Each test subject was given the opportunity to work for a set of 10 contiguous
days.6 The variable X1it served as our instrument for CSR during the work stage.
  6
      All employment spells occurred during September and October of 2016 in 6 waves, with each


                                               11
There were two treatment schedules: one where CSR prompts occurred on even-
number days only (i.e., X1it = 1 for t = 2, 4, 6, 8, 10) and one where CSR prompts
occurred on odd-number days only (i.e., X1it = 1 for t = 1, 3, 5, 7, 9). Once employees
were hired, half of all subjects selected from each of the four bins in Table 1 were
assigned to an odd-day treatment schedule and the other half were assigned to an
even-day schedule.

2.4     Observables
The model (described below) is partitioned into two parts: labor supply and output
quantity/quality, conditional on being at work. Subjects are allowed to decide for
themselves how many hours to work each day. Our time tracking system automati-
cally logs a worker out (and halts paid time) if he or she does not touch the mouse
or keyboard for longer than two minutes. This prevents subjects from gaming the
system by logging in and earning money without at least paying nominal attention
to the computer screen. Still, this setup purposefully provided latitude for hetero-
geneity across individuals, as well as within-person behavioral differences in terms of
concentration level (accuracy) and "feet dragging" (productivity).
    Daily labor supply, Hit , is recorded as the total number of hours subject i spent
logged into the system during day t. In order to be paid, the worker must be logged
into the website using her assigned username and password, which allows us to link all
data collected during her web session back to her. After workers log in, our interactive
web portal records and timestamps each page view, and compiles user responses into
a database. Each Google Streetview image also had a unique identifier, so that we can
count the total number of unique images Qi that worker i processed, and compare
responses by different workers on the same image. We are also able to use timestamps
on page views to assign a chronological index qi ordering each unit of worker i's output
from 1 to Qi . Each worker processed a given image exactly once. For each completed
unit of worker i's output, we have two measures of time expenditure: qi is the total
amount of time that worker i spent on the data entry page, and Dqi is the amount of
non-productive down-time (i.e., on the home page of the website) after completion of
the (qi - 1)th unit and before completion of the qi
                                                  th unit of output.

    Since workers are paid by the firm for both types of time (as is the case for most
wave of test subjects having t = 1, . . . , 10 occurring on the same days. Roughly half of all waves
began on a Tuesday, and the rest began on a Thursday.


                                                12
other naturally-occurring work settings), taking these two measures separately allows
us to quantify multiple dimensions of worker productivity: active productivity, or time
inputs required to produce output while a worker is on-task, and passive productivity,
or the amount of a worker's time spent between productive tasks. A possible analog
of passive productivity in traditional work settings would be the amount of paid time
an office worker spends surfing the internet or socializing with co-workers on non-
work-related topics, while active productivity would be the amount of time it takes
the worker to complete a report, conditional on being actively focused on it.
   Measuring work quality, or data entry accuracy rate, denoted Aqi , is a little more
involved. For each image there were 19 variables for workers to code on the image
processing page. Some of these responses were on a Likert scale, exhibiting an el-
ement of subjective judgment, so we distributed to our workers a training handout
containing standardized explanations and graphic examples of what constitutes an
appropriate score (e.g., a "Street Quality" score of 3 as opposed to 4 or 5). For
variables that involved trans-coding of text, correctness was judged on the basis of
spelling but not capitalization. In order to determine correctness for each response we
used an industry-standard consensus criterion. Specifically, each unique image was
coded by multiple workers, and for each variable we specify the correct answer as the
modal response across all workers for the same variable-image pair. A given worker's
response to each variable is assigned a value of 1 if it matches the modal response for
that same image-variable pair, and 0 otherwise.
   This choice reflects common industry practice for data-entry workers in contexts
marked by an element of subjectivity. For example, Pearson, the College Board, and
ACT, Inc. are leaders of a large industry on standardized testing. Currently, Pearson
is contracted by the U.S. State Department to administer and score the foreign service
exam, which includes an essay portion. After training workers on the criteria for
awarding a given integer score from a set scale to an essay response, Pearson assigns
3 independent workers to score the same essay in double-blind fashion. Whenever
2 or more workers agree on a common score (i.e., the mode) it is declared as the
test-taker's official score. Pearson and ACT track their workers' ability to select the
modal response in order to gauge and monitor the quality of their work.
   Since HHL Solutions played the double role of (i) producing usable data entry
output for actual clientele and (ii) producing worker behavior data for the current
study, we designed the production process with a great deal more redundancy than if

                                          13
(i) were the only goal. A minimum of 7 different workers coded data for each unique
image, with the median and mean being 17 and 21.5 workers per image, respectively.
This high degree of redundancy ensured we could compute reliable measures of the
modal responses for each image-variable pair, which was essential for deriving a valid
measure of work quality.
        Table 11 in Online Appendix B displays descriptive statistics on responses and
accuracy rates for each individual variable across a total of 62,138 worker-image ob-
servations. A majority of the variables in the web form--road work visible, graffiti
visible, trees/shrubs visible, for-sale signs visible, broken street signs visible, people
covering faces, shoes hanging from wires, street number, month, year, city, state --had
very high mean accuracy rates across workers and images, ranging between 92% and
99%. The final seven variables--building quality, quality of visible cars, litter, pic-
ture quality, street quality, number of visible potholes, street name --posed more of a
challenge for workers, with average correctness across all worker-image pairs ranging
from 85% to 47%. Broadly, the difference between the two sets of variables appears
tied to the nature and difficulty of the task. For example, 5 of the 7 were Likert-scale
variables where accuracy required careful thought and concentration to digest our
training materials and translate them into judgment calls. Judging what constitutes
a pothole in the pavement also required a higher level of attention. Workers also ap-
peared more adept at trans-coding street numbers than text strings for street names
without mistakes.
                                                                                0 1
        For each worker i and each unit of output qi , the accuracy rate Aqi  { 7 , 7, . . . , 7
                                                                                               7}
was coded as the mean across the variable-specific correctness outcomes for the final
seven variables. Given that our primary research question concerns worker hetero-
geneity, we define our accuracy index to focus on more difficult tasks in order to
illuminate apsects of job performance that most set workers apart in a vertical sense.
Aqi had a mean and standard deviation of 0.586 and 0.226, respectively.7


3         The Model
Our model includes four dimensions of worker heterogeneity: active productivity,
passive productivity, work quality, and leisure preferences (i.e., costs of supplying
    7
        As a robustness check, we re-executed our analysis on an alternative form of the accuracy index
which used all variables except four which had little or no variance. The results were similar.



                                                    14
time to the firm). Productivity indexes the average amount of time it takes a worker
to complete one unit of output. Here we discuss how the sources of variation in
our observables lead to identification of the structural primitives. Our identification
strategy combines a simple principal-agent framework with panel-data methods and
served as a guide for our experimental design.

3.1        The Baseline Model
Workers are recruited to produce outputs that the firm sells on an open market each
period t = 1, 2, . . . The firm produces a single good, but not all units of output,
indexd by qi for worker i, are created equal. In particular, the firm prescribes certain
specifications that outputs should ideally meet, and accurately producing the good
requires cognitive exertion and to some extent is at the worker's discretion. The
firm offers a fixed hourly wage contract, w, for the worker to supply her available
time to the firm.8 Holding work quality fixed, maintaining peak productivity requires
worker exertion, and is also partly under her control. The firm wishes to maximize
the quantity of high-quality outputs produced per unit of paid time. We assume that
perfect monitoring is prohibitively costly so that the firm is faced with an agency
problem.
       Each potential worker is characterized by a privately-known 4-dimensional type,
(pi , di , ai , li ), which indexes their baseline productivity, (pi , di ), "work quality"
(or accuracy rate in our data entry context), ai , and shadow value of leisure time,
li . The firm is characterized by a vector of fixed, commonly-known characteristics,
Z --e.g., quality of work environment, disutility intrinsically tied to its production
process, etc.--but it may choose to incur a fixed cost to engage in CSR activities,
which are potentially valued by workers. Let X0  {0, 1} denote the firm's decision
of whether to include CSR activities in its regular operations, let X1t = 1 if the firm
actively participates in CSR in period t, X1t = 0 otherwise.9 Let (Tp , Td , Ta , Tl ) denote
   8
       Our model assumes that workers have no set schedule, and are allowed to choose their own
hours. This permits our research design to create an instrument to identify heterogeneity in labor
supply (i.e., leisure preferences). However, this aspect of the model is not uncommon in actual labor
markets: short-run hiring frictions often drive employers to request a temporary increase in labor
supply of their fixed-schedule workers in the form of overtime incentives.
   9
     One can alternatively think of the time-varying X1t as the firm engaging in an internal ad-
vertising campaign in period t to remind workers of its CSR-oriented contributions to the greater
good.



                                                 15
the treatment effects on productivity, accuracy, and labor supply, respectively, of
laboring under condition X1t = 1.10 If the worker values the feeling of contributing to
the firm's efforts to make the world a better place, it may partially offset the costs of
cognitive exertion and/or labor supply.
    Upon receiving a job offer (w, X0 , Z ) from the firm, each worker compares it with
her outside options and then decides whether to apply for a job and select herself
into the firm's labor pool. Let Gpdal (pi , di , ai , li ) denote the joint CDF of worker
characteristics present in the firm's selected applicant pool, with marginal distribu-
tions Gp , Gd , Ga , and Gl , respectively. Our experimental framework is designed to
control for the fact that the distribution of worker characteristics Gpdal depends on
workers' self-selection choices as a function of w and X0 .

3.2     Active Productivity
Worker i's production technology governs the amount of time required for each unit
of output. We assume it follows a standard experience curve form with permanent
worker heterogeneity and transitory noise:
                                             X1qi        -
                 (qi ; pi , X1qi ) = pi × Tp        × 1 qi × up
                                                              qi , qi = 1, . . . , Qi .          (1)

Here, 1 is baseline mean time required for the first unit of output,  represents the
learning effect or elasticity of production time with regard to cumulative output, and
up
 qi is an exogenous, positive, unit-specific shock. In a slight shift of notation, X1qi is
                                                th unit of output.
the CSR treatment in place when i produced her qi
    Here, pi is a permanent, idiosyncratic scaling of production time, with smaller
values representing higher productivity workers. As pi or Tp decrease, the worker
becomes more productive. A CSR firm may attract applicants whose unobserved
characteristics are fundamentally different, before they commence employment. In
what follows we refer to the possibility that Gp (pi |X0 = 1) = Gp (pi |X0 = 0) as the
selection effect. The working hypothesis in our empirical application is that profit-
maximizing firms view costly CSR activity as an investment in their bottom line,
and expect the productivity distribution Gp (pi |X0 = 0) to dominate Gp (pi |X0 = 1),
leading
  10
        to advantageous selection.
    Our research design could be applied to general non-pecuniary investments in workplace quality,
since the theory does not specifically require A CSR interpretation. If investment in a non-pecuniary
perk is one time and permanent thereafter, then X0  {0, 1}, and X1t = X0 t.




                                                 16
3.3        Passive Productivity
Our formal model for a worker's passive productivity is very similar to the model for
active productivity, except that we assume workers have no need of learning how to
                                                    th unit of output as
waste time. Specifically, we model downtime on the qi
                                                           X1qi
                             D (qi ; di , X1qi ) = di × Td        × D0 × ud
                                                                          qi .                      (2)

Here, D0 is the baseline average down-time and ud
                                                qi is an exogenous, transitory shock.
As before, di represents a permanent, idiosyncratic scaling of one's propensity to log
unproductive down-time. As di or Td decrease, the worker becomes more productive
by wasting less paid time, holding other factors fixed. Once again, we refer to the
possibility that Gd (di |X0 = 1) = Gd (di |X0 = 0) as the selection effect.

3.4        Work Quality/Accuracy
Work quality is also measured at the worker-unit level. With an eye toward our
data-entry empirical application, we use the terms "work quality" and "accuracy"
interchangeably. We define a continuous, latent accuracy index Aqi  R as



                                       A                    a
                                        qi = ai + X1qi Ta + qi ,                                    (3)
where a
      qi is an exogenous, iid, unit-specific shock that follows a symmetric distribu-
tion (·). The latent accuracy index encapsulates permanent worker characteristics,
treatment effects, and transitory output quality shocks. Conceptually, one's work
quality on a particular task becomes perfect as Aqi   and perfectly flawed as
Aqi  -. However, a limited dependent variable problem is present, and we can-
not observe the latent continuous accuracy index Aqi directly. Instead, we observe a
binary measure11                              
                                              1      if Aqi > 0
                                        Aqi =
                                              0      otherwise.
If  is the standard normal CDF, we get the familiar probit formulation for accuracy,
                   Pr[Aqi = 1|ai ] = Pr[A                 a
                                         qi > 1|ai ] = Pr[qi > -ai - X1qi Ta ]
                                                                                                    (4)
                                                         = (ai + X1qi Ta ).
  11
       Our data actually contain a finer accuracy measure (see Section 2.4). Yet, the estimator is based
on averaging accuracy across multiple units of output to get treatment effects and worker fixed effects.
Since these averages belong to an asymptotically dense set, the method applies whenever Aqi lives
on a finite grid and shocks are uncorrelated across different qi 's. See Appendix A for further details.


                                                    17
       Once again, the working hypothesis in our empirical application is that profit-
maximizing firms expect a return from their CSR activities in the form of an advanta-
geous shift in the type distribution. We wish to test whether a CSR-induced selection
effect causes the accuracy distribution Ga (ai |X0 = 1) to dominate Ga (ai |X0 = 0)
within the pool of workers who are willing to accept the firm's employment.


3.5        Labor Supply
Having accepted the firm's wage rate offer w, the worker now decides in each period
t = 1, 2, . . . how many hours of her leisure time to supply to the firm. This decision
happens in two stages. Conditional on showing up to work on a given day t, the worker
incurs a utility cost (delineated in dollar units) to supply Hit hours of would-be leisure
time to the firm, given by

                           Cit (Hit ; li , X1it ) = li × TlX1it × c(Hit ) × ul
                                                                             it ,                 (5)

where ul                                                       l                         l
       it is an exogenous, iid, log-normal shock with E [log (uit )] = 0 and V ar [log (uit )] =
l2 , and c(·) is a baseline cost function common to all workers in all periods. Worker
type li and treatment Tl govern the shadow value of time by scaling monetized utility
costs. Lower values of either imply a worker's time is less valuable to her, or in other
words, it signals a greater eagerness to supply leisure time to the firm at a given wage.
We assume standard regularity conditions to ensure a well-behaved decision problem:

Assumption 1. c (h) > 0 and c (h) < 0 h  0; c(0) = 0; and c (0) = 1.

       In words, the cost function is strictly increasing, strictly convex, and it is costless
to abstain from working for the firm on a given day if one so chooses. The final
assumption acts as a scale normalization for the distribution of li .12 The cost shock
ul
 it represents day-to-day variation in a worker's time constraint that is outside her
direct control.
       Each day worker i optimizes her objective function maxhR+ {wh - Cit (h; li , Tl )}.
The first-order condition implies the following intensive-margin calculation:

                                          w = li TlX1it c (Hit )ul
                                                                 it .                             (6)
  12
       Note that any cost model C (h) = li c(h) is equivalent to any other cost model C (h) = li c(h),
                                 c(h)
where li = ali and c(h) =         a     for come constant a > 0. Since the units of l have no inherent
meaning, the model can only be identified up to a scale normalization. Thus, we fix the units of
total costs by re-scaling li = li × c (0) and c(h) = c(h)/c (0), with the result being that c (0) = 1.


                                                      18
Since costs are strictly convex, equation (6) implies that labor supply is monotone
decreasing in li , Tl , and ul        l
                             it (for uit small enough), respectively, holding all else fixed.
    Let GH (h) denote the CDF of work times, conditional on H > 0. Since c is
strictly bounded away from zero, and since ul exists on an unbounded support, there
is positive probability that a corner solution of Hit = 0 will result. That is, on
days when cost shocks are very large, workers find it optimal to simply not work.
Accordingly, the worker's extensive-margin decision obeys the following rule:

                                  Hit > 0            w > li c (0)ul
                                                                  it .                         (7)

Note that we have implicitly assumed the worker has observed only the daily shock
ul
 it when she makes her extensive-margin decision. Since she must show up to work in
order to observe treatment status X1it it does not enter her extensive-margin decision.
    Once again, we say there is a selection effect present if the composition of worker
types in a firm's labor force is not invariant to it's choice X0 , or Gl (li |X0 = 1) =
Gl (li |X0 = 0). However, in the labor-supply model the sign of the shift may be
ex-ante ambiguous. If the CSR firm is successful at attracting a more productive set
of workers who produce higher quality work, their outside employment options may
be more valuable, leading to higher li . Alternatively, if the CSR-selected workers
derive utility from contributing to the firm's socially beneficial mission, their costs of
supplying time to the firm may fall.


4      Identification and Estimation Overview
Recall from Section 2.4 that for worker i = 1, . . . , I we have the following observables:
recruitment status, X0i ; wage offer Wi  {w1 , w2 }; total cumulative production Qi ; and
a full panel (of length Qi ) of unit-specific outcomes, including production times, ac-
curacy rates, and treatment values, {qi , Dqi , Aqi , X1qi , }Q
                                                              qi =1 ; and a panel (of length T )
                                                                i


of day-specific total work hours, and treatments, {Hit , X1it }T
                                                               t=1 . In addition, we have
the following aggregate observables from the recruiting stage, {µN,1 , µN,2 , µC,1 , µC,2 },
denoting application rates within each of the 4 potential worker pools recruited under
conditions (X0 = 0, W = w1 ), (X0 = 0, W = w2 ), (X0 = 1, W = w1 ), and (X0 = 1, W = w2 ),
respectively. The complete model consists of the following structural components to
be recovered from the observables: {Gpdal (·, ·, ·, ·), Tp , Td , Ta , Tl , , 1 , l , c(·)}.
    In the interest of brevity, we provide an intuitive overview here of how raw empir-
ical moments derived from the observables are able to uniquely pin down the model

                                                   19
parameters. We also briefly describe our GMM estimator that implements this iden-
tification strategy on our field experiment data. We defer a more complete discussion
of identification and estimation in full technical rigor to Appendix A.

4.1    Productivity and Work Quality
It is straightforward to see that for the productivity and work quality models iden-
tification obtains because they describe processes which produce panel data with
multiple within-worker observations, where the unobserved worker characteristics,
(pi , di , ai ) play the role of a worker fixed effect.
   Estimates are obtained via a simple differencing routine as commonly done in
panel-data settings. For treatment effects Tj , j = p, d, a, we difference mean produc-
tion times/accuracy rates across treatment states (X1qi = 0 vs X1qi = 1), and then
average these differences across individuals. We then average initial production times
across workers to obtain 1 and D0 . To estimate the learning effect  we difference
production times across consecutive units of output within individuals, and then aver-
age these differences both within and across workers. With these common parameters
known, estimating individual fixed effects ji , j = p, d, a, is essentially a within-worker
mean of production times or accuracy rates, conditional on treatment and/or learn-
ing. An important caveat is that for the accuracy model there is a necessary (though
fairly intuitive) bias correction described in Appendix A.4 due to the interaction of
non-linearity in (·) and finite-sampling variation in observed accuracy rates Aqi .

4.2    Labor Supply
Our identification strategy for the labor-supply model is more novel, but also more
involved. As a starting point, we build upon a recent identification framework de-
veloped by Torgovitsky (2015) and D'Haultfoeuille and F´
                                                       evrier (2015) (henceforth
DFT). These authors showed how a version of our model without labor-supply cost
shocks could be identified non-parametrically--i.e., without ex-ante restrictions on
the functional form of the cost function c(·) or type distribution Gl (·)--using exoge-
nous wage contract variation. Identification in DFT hinges on a crucial exclusion
restriction: the underlying distributions of leisure preferences within two groups re-
ceiving different wage contracts must be the same. This allows the researcher to
establish an empirical mapping between a worker's observed labor supply to the firm
and her unobserved value of time l . For completeness, in Appendix A.3.1 we provide


                                            20
a brief synopsis of the DFT framework and identification result as it relates to our
project. We extend this framework in two distinct ways.
      First, our model allows for within-worker variation in day-to-day labor supply
costs, through the shock term ul
                               it . This rationalizes the fact that in the data we see
non-trivial variation in individuals' labor-leisure choices. We therefore use within-
worker variation in work-time choices to identify the distribution of the shock. How-
ever, this process is complicated by an important challenge. If we think of each worker
as having seen a random sample of T labor-supply shocks, then their presence in the
model also creates a sample selection problem: as illustrated in equation (7), for any
finite value of l the worker's choices will have a mass point at zero. I.e., the sample
of labor-supply shocks behind the worker's positive work-hour days is non-random
if the worker abstains from work on at least one day. However, within our model it
turns out that the distribution of the order statistics of supply shocks (i.e., the kth
smallest of {ul             l
              i1 , . . . , uiT }) across workers is a random sample.
                                                                     13 Moreover, by adopt-

ing a parametric assumption on the distribution of ul
                                                    it (log-normality), one can derive
explicit expressions for the expectations of these order statistics in order to correct
for the sample selection problem.
      Second, we extend DFT by relaxing the central exclusion restriction through ex-
pansion of the observables. This extension is perhaps the more important of the two
from an applied perspective, as it allows us to study selection on wage offer. The ad-
ditional observables that we add into the mix are hiring-stage application rates. To
fix ideas, suppose the firm begins with two equivalent groups of potential employees,
and it offers wage w1 to the first and w2 > w1 to the second. Suppose further that
not all workers signal their acceptance by formally applying, but the firm sees a 30%
increase in application rate from the second pool of workers, relative to the first.
      We can infer some things about worker types who would apply under each scenario.
E.g., both sets must have the same lower-bound l1 = l2 = l , since workers with
very low value of time would be happy to accept either offer. Moreover, the upper-
bounds of both sets must satisfy l1 < l2 , since any worker who was willing to accept
the firm's low offer of w1 would also be willing to accept w2 to work at the same firm
doing the same job. Finally, we can infer that the influx of 30% more applicants under
offer w2 have time costs in the upper tail interval (l1 , l2 ]. Since the two groups of
potential employees were equivalent to begin with, the additional applications must
 13
      This result also depends on an independence condition (see Assumption 5 in Appendix A.3).


                                                21
be accounted for by marginal workers who were unwilling to accept hourly wage w1
(because their time was too valuable) but were willing to accept wage w2 .
    Suppose now that the firm hires all applicants. After observing workers' labor-
leisure decisions for a time, the firm can deduce who these marginal applicants were
by compiling a list of the 30% lowest labor-supply employees: these are they whose
high value of time prevents them from working more hours under w2 and would have
also prevented them from accepting w1 . From this it follows that if S1 is the set of all
low-wage workers, and if S2 is the 70% of high-wage workers who log the most hours
over time, then these two sets of workers must have underlying types l that follow
the same distribution. This second selection correction is explained in full detail in
Appendix A.3. Importantly, our identification strategy allows for point identification
of all workers' idiosyncratic supply costs, including the 30% marginal applicants.
Once the subsets S1 and S2 are computed to satisfy the DFT exclusion restriction,
the common cost function c(·) is nonparametrically identified. With this known, all
workers' l can be recovered using the FOCs, including the complement of S2 .
    The labor supply estimator is somewhat involved, but still akin to a basic moment
matching scheme. We begin by computing the empirical work-time CDFs from these
two sets GH |S1 (·) and GH |S2 (·) using raw data. We then specify the common cost func-
tion c(·) as a flexible B-Spline function with light shape restrictions to enforce the reg-
ularity conditions in Assumption 1. Using equations (6) and (7) it is straightforward
(though notationally intensive) to show that one can derive analytic, model-generated
                                                                    ¨ H |S (h|S2 ; l ,  c , Tl , l )
                               ¨ H |S (h|S1 ; l ,  c , Tl , l ) and G
analogs to the work-time CDFs, G     1                                    2

as functions of the log-normal shock CDF (with variance parameter l ), the cost func-
tion c(·) (with B-Spline weights  c ), as well as treatment and fixed-effects. We then
execute a GMM estimator which chooses values of model parameters to match the
means of shock order statistics and to fit the model-generated work-time CDFs as
closely as possible to their empirical analogs. Intuitively, mean within-worker labor
supply pins down the fixed effects, differences across order-statistics of worker shift
length pin down the variance of the shock, and differences across various quantiles of
the work-time CDFs pin down the shape of the cost function.
    One interesting aspect of the estimator is worth mentioning. For each worker in
wage group j , and for a given guess of her fixed effect li , one can use equations (6)
and (7) to infer her counterfactual labor supply under wage j = j . This counterfactual
prediction is part of our GMM estimator as we construct the model-generated work-

                                                22
time CDFs. This approach and our flexible parameterization of the cost function
implicitly builds the seemingly non-constructive DFT identification logic directly into
the estimator. We utilize a block-bootstrap procedure for standard errors which
mimics our experimental sampling and allows for correlation in per-unit production
shocks. The interested reader is directed to Appendix A for further discussion.

4.3    Distributions of Worker Characteristics
A final challenge is that our data structure is an unbalanced panel. Thus,, we are able
to make more precise inferences about the unobserved characteristics of workers who
log more work days and produce more output. For this reason we use inverse variance
weighting in our GMM estimator and in our estimates of the worker characteristics
CDFs Gpdal (·, ·, ·, ·) (see Appendix A). In our results section we display various graphs
of "weighted CDFs", where the label refers to inverse variance weighting. Finally, we
also employ a bootstrapped variant of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov testing procedure for
stochastic dominance in part to address the unbalanced panel problem.


5     Empirical Results
Our discussion of results begins with a survey of reduced-form insights from the hir-
ing stage and subsequent work stage. We then explore structural results including
treatment effects, unobserved characteristics and selection. We conclude with coun-
terfactual model simulations that capture the impacts of recruitment strategies on a
firm's cost structure, through their influence on the pool of worker traits.

5.1    Application Rates and Descriptive Statistics
The field experiment was conducted during the fall of 2016 in Austin, TX; Balti-
more, MD; Boston, MA; Dallas, TX; Houston, TX; Indianapolis, IN; Jacksonville,
FL; Los Angeles, CA; New York City, NY; Philadelphia, PA; Phoenix, AZ; and San
Diego, CA. A total of N=1,103 job description letters (with randomized pecuniary
and non-pecuniary variation) were sent out via email to individuals who had expressed
preliminary interest in the job. These individuals were randomly assigned to the four
treatment cells: (1) $11 wage rate and neutral (n=266), (2) $11 wage rate and CSR
information (n=309), (3) $15 wage rate and nuetral information (n=277), and (4)
$15 wage rate and CSR information (n=251). Table 2 presents application rates in
each treatment cell and differences across cells.


                                           23
                                      APPLICATION RATES
                                      Mean           Estimate               SD        90% CI
        Neutral, w = $11:             µN,11              0.301     --      0.028    [0.245, 0.356]
        Neutral, w = $15:             µN,15              0.408     --      0.030    [0.350, 0.466]
        CSR, w = $11:                  µC,11             0.382     --      0.028    [0.327, 0.436]
        CSR, w = $15:                  µC,15             0.494     --      0.032    [0.432, 0.556]

                               APPLICATION RATE DIFFERENCES
                                      within wage offer group
                                  Mean Difference    Estimate    P-value    SD        90% CI
        CSR-$11 vs. CSR-$15:       µC,15 - µC,11         0.112   < 0.001   0.003    [0.107, 0.117]
        Ntr-$11 vs. Ntr-$15:       µN,15 - µN,11         0.107   < 0.001   0.002    [0.102, 0.112]
        $11 vs. $15:                 µ15 - µ11           0.110   < 0.001   0.002    [0.106, 0.113]
                               within nonpecuniary recruitment group
                                  Mean Difference    Estimate    P-value    SD        90% CI
        CSR-$11 vs Neutral $11:    µC,11 - µN,11         0.081   < 0.001   0.3425   [0.077, 0.086]
        CSR-$15 vs Neutral $15:    µC,15 - µN,15         0.086   < 0.001   0.3425   [0.081, 0.091]
        CSR vs Neutral:              µC - µN             0.084   < 0.001   0.1171   [0.080, 0.087]


                               Table 2: Recruitment Stage Results


   Not surprisingly, the raw data show that an increase in wage offer from $11/hr
to $15/hr induced a substantial increase in application rates of 11 percentage points,
or roughly a 32% increase in total applications. The data also show that including
information about CSR in the job description increases applications by three quarters
as much as a $4 wage offer increase: CSR-recruited workers applied at a rate of 8.4
percentage points higher than neutral recruits, an increase of roughly 24% in total
applications. Both shifts are statistically significant, as are the effects broken down by
the four stage-1 treatment bins. It is worth mentioning that the observed application
rates and wage elasticities are roughly similar to those found in comparable studies
(e.g., Flory et al. (2014); Leibbrandt and List (2014)). Thus we see a greater volume of
workers self-selecting into the labor pool with CSR, but the question remains whether
the composition of characteristics within the worker pool changes as well. This is the
focus of our structural model.
   A total of 170 subjects were hired for the work-task stage of the experiment;
Table 3 presents summary statistics. Each subject was observed during a period
of 10 days, which implies 1700 individual-day observations. Most subjects did not


                                                    24
                            WITHIN-WORKER SUMMARY STATISTICS
Variable                              Median        Mean               SD         Min       Max      #Obs
Days worked                              5          5.118           3.075          1         10       170
Avg. Hours worked per day              0.517        1.359           1.914         0.014    12.336     170
Avg. Hours worked per day |Hit > 0     1.323        1.987           1.992         0.092    13.707     170
Within-person work hour
    standard deviation                 0.796        1.195           1.076         0.042    6.042      170
Avg. Productive Seconds per Output    123.85       139.84           74.70         17.03    445.52     170
Avg. Down-Time Seconds per Output      34.63        41.21           29.31         7.71     242.88     170
Mean Accuracy Rate                     0.596        0.590           0.128         0.290    0.857      170

           WAGE-OFFER GROUP DIFFERENCES: Group Outcome |$15 - Group Outcome |$11
                                      Median        Mean          P-Value for
Outcome                              Difference   Difference   H0 : Equal Means        90% CI         DF
Hours worked per day                  0.1636       0.4579         1.3 ×   10-4     [0.262, 0.654]    1,698
Productive Seconds Per Output         -15.89        -7.97          < 10-6          [-9.20, -6.74]    62,136
Down-Time Seconds Per Output          0.0145       0.3607           0.3222        [-0.239, 0.960]    62,136
Accuracy Rate Per Output              0.0789       0.0715          <   10-6        [0.068, 0.075]    62,136

     NON-PECUNIARY GROUP DIFFERENCES: Group Outcome |CSR - Group Outcome |N tr
                                      Median        Mean          P-Value for
Outcome                              Difference   Difference   H0 : Equal Means        90% CI         DF
Hours worked per day                  0.0697       -0.3612          0.0023        [-0.556, -0.167]   1,698
Productive Seconds Per Output          -9.59       -17.19          < 10-6         [-18.34, -16.03]   62,136
Down-Time Seconds Per Output          -1.119       -1.738          <   10-6       [-2.304, -1.172]   62,136
Accuracy Rate Per Output              0.0263       0.0216          <   10-6        [0.019, 0.025]    62,136


                            Table 3: Summary statistics: Work Stage.


supply a positive amount of hours every day. The mean number of days worked across
all subjects was roughly 5 out of 10. The mean daily shift time was roughly 2 hours,
for average earnings of about $27 per work day. On average, workers would process
54 images on a given shift, implying a per-unit average cost of $0.498.
    The table shows a striking degree of variation across workers. On a given day,
many workers could not find time to work, while others occasionally logged shifts
upwards of 16 hours. There is considerable heterogeneity on productivity and work
quality as well. Mean per-unit production times varied across individuals from 17
seconds to 7.4 minutes. Similarly, mean per-unit paid down-time ranged from 8
seconds to 4 minutes across workers. Slightly less than one quarter of all paid worker


                                                   25
time is down-time, on average. Most workers produced fairly high-quality output but
there was substantial heterogeneity in individuals' mean accuracy, ranging between
30% and 86%.
       As with application rates, we see substantial raw differences by recruitment cells.
High-wage recruits logged more hours per day, though this change confounds several
factors to be disentangled by the structural model. While there is a mechanical
increase in their marginal incentives to supply time, underlying labor-supply costs
may also be different due to selection. The raw shifts also do not account for the role
of within-person, day-to-day variation in time costs. For CSR recruits we see a raw
mean reduction in hours worked which is more suggestive of a shift in unobserved
costs, since monetary incentives are held fixed. We also see increases in productivity
and accuracy among high-wage recruits and CSR recruits, though these numbers do
not account for within-person variation or work-stage treatment effects as will be
done in our fixed-effects estimator.

5.2        Results: General Parameters
Before moving to a discussion of treatments and selection on worker characteristics,
we briefly discuss some basic model parameters and measures of model fit displayed in
Table 4. For active productivity, we find weak evidence of a learning-by-doing effect.
Median production time on the first unit is roughly 3.7 minutes, and the parameter
estimate for  is positive and small. This suggests that workers learn to be more
productive, with most learning happening in the first 30 or so units of production.
However, the 90% confidence interval for  includes zero, which implies that we cannot
reject the null hypothesis of no learning effect. The productivity model produces an
R2 of 0.73, which suggests that transitory productivity shocks play a minor, though
non-trivial, role in accounting for variation in log production times.14
       Figure 20 in online supplement C displays estimated learning curves with confi-
dence bands for the 10th percentile, median, and 90th percentile individuals. After
learning has largely ceased, the mean difference between the 10th and 90th percentile
workers is a difference in production times by a factor of over 2.5. Down-time measures
are smaller than production times, though transitory shocks play a larger role since
  14
       R2 for the passive and active productivity models is measured by plugging model estimates
into log-transformed versions of equations (1) and (2), and taking the ratio of the variance in the
left-hand side to the variance in the predicted component of the right-hand side.



                                                26
                                                                                   Std
                                            Parameter           Estimate       Error         P-value     90% CI
   Learning:                                                    0.1467         0.1347        0.2760      [-0.075, 0.368]
                                                                              (H0 : =0)
   Mean Initial
   Production Time (minutes):               1                   3.7016         2.8851        --          [1.022, 13.411]
   Active Productivity Model Fit:           R2                  0.7314              --       --          --
                                            (N = 62, 138)
   Baseline Mean
   Down-Time (minutes):                     D0                  0.3587         0.0425        --          [0.289, 0.429]
   Passive Productivity Model Fit:          R2                  0.3342              --       --          --
                                            (N = 62, 138)
   Labor Supply Shock
   Standard Deviation:                      l                   0.7658         0.4216        --          [0.5135, 2.0928]


                            Table 4: Basic Model Parameter Estimates


the R2 for passive productivity is 0.33. Still, worker heterogeneity remains significant:
the 10th and 90th percentiles of di differ by a factor of 4.
       For accuracy and labor supply, both models achieve a good fit in the sense that
the accuracy model is able to closely predict mean worker-level accuracy rates and the
labor supply model estimates are able to replicate the empirical distributions of daily
work times quite closely. Figure 21 in online supplement C graphically depicts good-
ness of fit for accuracy and labor supply. We find that mean within-person standard
deviation in accuracy rates is roughly 14.13 percentage points, while the cross-person
standard deviation in baseline accuracy rates is 12.91 percentage points.15 In other
words, within the estimated model, permanent worker heterogeneity is quite impor-
tant, but transitory, within-worker quality shocks also play a substantial role.
       For labor supply, this idea is summarized by l , which implies a standard devia-
tion of 1.1974 in transitory labor-supply cost shocks. Contrast this to the standard
deviation of l , which is 7.0736. Though this may seem a large difference, the two
                                                                                                                 C        N
  15                                                                                                         QCi Ai +QN i Ai
       Within-person standard deviation in accuracy rates is a weighted mean of Ai =                            QCi +QN i    ,
                    Qi           j                                         Qi
      j
                                     2
                                      (X1qi =1(j =C ))
                    qi =1 (Aqi -µAi ) 1                                            Aqi 1(X1qi =1(j =C ))
where Ai =                       Qji -1                  , and µj
                                                                Ai =
                                                                           qi =1
                                                                                        Qji              ,   j = C, N . Note
       j
that   Ai   is excluded whenever Qji < 2. Cross-person standard deviation in baseline accuracy rates
                                                                    2
is the square root of a weighted mean of (ai ) - µAi^  , where µAi^ is a weighted mean of (ai ).
                                         
Weights on individual i are calculated as Qi , and normalized to sum to one.


                                                           27
                                 Parameter   Estimate     P-value       Std Error     90% CI
         Active Productivity:       Tp        0.7577     2.8 × 10- 4     0.0618        [0, 0.840]
                                                        (H0 : Tp = 1)                (one-sided)
         Passive Productivity:      Td        0.5752       0.0021        0.1158        [0, 0.737]
                                                        (H0 : Td = 1)                (one-sided)
      Accuracy/Work Quality:        Ta       -0.0154       0.0017        0.0049     [-0.024, 0.007]
                                                        (H0 : Ta = 0)
         Labor Supply Costs:        Tl        1.0204       0.5166        0.0314     [0.969, 1.072]
                                                        (H0 : Tl = 1)


                     Table 5: Parameter estimates: Treatment Effects


numbers are much closer when expressed as fractions of their means. Consider a
thought experiment where the average worker type E [l ] experiences a mean cost
shock E [U l ] on a given day. If we reduce that shock by one standard deviation, her
supply costs drop by 58.47%. Alternatively, if we maintain her shock at the mean
but reduce her permanent type E [l ] by a standard deviation, her supply cost falls
by 58.58%. I.e., permanent, cross-worker variation plays roughly the same size role
as day-to-day, within-worker variation in aggregate variation of labor supply to the
firm. Figure 11 in Appendix A.10 depicts the estimated cost function c(h;  c ), which
displays substantial curvature.

5.3      Results: Work-Stage Treatment Effects
Table 5 displays estimates for work-stage treatment effects. The interpretation of
these parameters is a measure of how an existing worker's behavior changes (holding
unobserved characteristics fixed) when she is prompted about how her work con-
tributes to the firm's efforts to make the world a better place.
   Our first result is that the firm saw substantial productivity gains from the inter-
nal CSR advertisement. Active production times dropped by 24.2% under treatment,
while non-productive downtime dropped by 42.5%. Both of these shifts are statis-
tically significant. Given the large speed-up in production of output, the expected
sign of the treatment effects for work quality may be less obvious. While CSR treat-
ment may inspire workers to exert themselves in producing accurate output, they are
producing more quickly and taking less rest time in between. This could lead to a
drop in quality through burnout or mental fatigue. In the third row of Table 5 we


                                                28
see a negative point estimate, but it is negligible, being only enough to reduce mean
accuracy for the average worker by about half of a percentage point. This implies
that the work-stage CSR treatment substantially increases productivity and that this
production speed-up is virtually all valuable to the firm. As for labor supply, we
see no significant change in willingness to supply time to the firm, as the confidence
interval for Tl contains 1.

5.4     Results: Unobserved Characteristics and Selection
Here we examine the effect of recruitment-stage variation on the composition of un-
observed characteristics within the firm's labor force. In doing so, we present several
comparisons to explore the role of selection on wage and CSR. We first compute the
empirical CDFs of worker types separately for the subsamples of CSR recruits and
neutral recruits. We then run a bootstrapped testing procedure for stochastic domi-
nance (see Appendices A.8 and A.9.2), repeating the same process for the subsamples
of high-wage recruits and low-wage recruits. We also assess combined effects in two
ways. First, we compare the baseline sample of neutral recruits to the CSR sample,
where the latter are also subject to our estimated work-stage treatment effects. Sec-
ond, we compare the subsample of workers who were neutrally recruited and offered
a low wage to the subsample who were offered a high wage and CSR recruited.
   Tables 9­10 in Appendix A.10 summarize all stochastic dominance tests. For
each one our testing procedure, which follows Marmer et al. (2017), compares the
null hypothesis of distributional equality to multiple alternative hypotheses: first-
order dominance in one direction, first-order dominance in the opposite direction,
and non-equality with no dominance either way. Whenever the null hypothesis of
equality is rejected, we report the mean percent change in the relevant characteristic
both in levels and as a fraction of a standard deviation for the subsamples in the test.
We close this section by exploring correlations between productivity, work quality,
and the value of a worker's time.

5.4.1   Productivity

Figure 2 displays the distributions of estimated active productivity types p . The
step functions are the empirical CDFs used in the stochastic dominance tests, and
the continuous curves are smoothed B-spline representations for display purposes.
The first feature one notices is a substantial cross-worker heterogeneity. Since the


                                          29
        WEIGHTED CDFs
                         1

                        0.8

                        0.6

                        0.4
                                                                                                Neutral Recruited
                        0.2
                                                                                                CSR Recruited
                         0
                                0.5            1            1.5             2          2.5                          3

                                                      ACTIVE PRODUCTIVITY   p
        WEIGHTED CDFs




                         1

                        0.8

                        0.6

                        0.4
                                                                                             Low Wage Recruited
                        0.2
                                                                                             High Wage Recruited
                         0
                                0.5            1            1.5             2          2.5                          3

                                                      ACTIVE PRODUCTIVITY   p


                              Figure 2: Active Productivity: Selection on Wage and CSR
        WEIGHTED CDFs




                         1

                        0.8

                        0.6

                        0.4
                                                                                Neutral Recruited
                        0.2
                                                                                CSR Recruited + CSR Treatment
                         0
                                0.5            1            1.5             2          2.5                          3

                                                      ACTIVE PRODUCTIVITY   p
        WEIGHTED CDFs




                         1

                        0.8

                        0.6

                        0.4
                                                                                   Low-Wage, Neutral Recruited
                        0.2
                                                                                   High-Wage, CSR Recruited
                         0
                                0.5            1            1.5             2          2.5                          3

                                                      ACTIVE PRODUCTIVITY   p


                                      Figure 3: Active Productivity: Combined Effects


unconditional median fixed effect is roughly one, it follows that the 10th percentile
worker averages production times at roughly half of the median worker, while the 90th
averages production times at roughly twice those of the median worker.
   Figure 2 also shows how selection occurs on both pecuniary and non-pecuniary
variation in job offers. In the top panel, the Neutral recruited subsample has a dis-
tribution of productivity types that dominate those of the CSR recruited workers.
Table 9 contains the results of our stochastic dominance tests and shows that model
estimates indeed reject the null hypothesis of distributional equality in favor of advan-
tageous worker selection. We estimate that CSR-recruited workers have productivity
types (i.e., mean production times) that are 15.14% lower, on average, which amounts
to a reduction of 0.261 standard deviations. As for productivity selection on wage

                                                              30
offers, the results (lower panel of Figure 2) are similar though less decisive: there is a
crossing of the two empirical CDFs at about the 80th percentile. The null of equality is
still strongly rejected, though weakly in favor of the alternative of inequality, rather
than a specific dominance ordering. On average, the mean change in productivity
under wage selection is positive, though smaller.
   The top panel of Figure 3 shows the combined effects of CSR selection and CSR
work-stage treatment. Given the large treatment effects discussed in the previous
section, the difference between these two distributions is even more striking. The
lower panel of the figure shows the combined selection effect of high-wage-CSR recruits
versus low-wage-neutral recruits. Interestingly, the joint selection effect is stronger
than the sum of the two individual selection margins: together they account for a
0.548 standard deviation improvement. This suggests socially conscious CSR and
money are actually complementary recruitment tools.
   Figures 9 and 10 depicting estimated CDFs of passive productivity characteristics
are relegated to Appendix A.10 since selection effects for d are small and far less
conclusive. The estimated CDFs have multiple crossing points and no clear ordering
arises. However, cross-worker heterogeneity remains substantial, especially in the
upper tail. Most workers' types reside on a relatively narrow band, while workers
within the top quintile tend to waste large amounts of off-task time at work.

5.4.2   Accuracy/Work Quality
        WEIGHTED CDFs




                         1
                               Neutral Recruited
                        0.8
                               CSR Recruited
                        0.6

                        0.4

                        0.2

                         0
                         0.3       0.35            0.4   0.45      0.5    0.55    0.6        0.65    0.7   0.75   0.8

                                                                BASELINE ACCURACY RATE   (   a
                                                                                                 )
        WEIGHTED CDFs




                         1
                               Low Wage Recruited
                        0.8
                               High Wage Recruited
                        0.6

                        0.4

                        0.2

                         0
                         0.3       0.35            0.4   0.45      0.5    0.55    0.6        0.65    0.7   0.75   0.8

                                                                BASELINE ACCURACY RATE   (   a
                                                                                                 )


                                   Figure 4: Accuracy Rates: Selection on Wage and CSR

   Figure 4 and the left panel of Table 10 display results on individual work quality

                                                                          31
        WEIGHTED CDFs
                         1
                               Neutral Recruited
                        0.8
                               CSR Recruited + CSR Treatment
                        0.6

                        0.4

                        0.2

                         0
                         0.3       0.35        0.4           0.45      0.5    0.55    0.6        0.65    0.7   0.75   0.8

                                                                    BASELINE ACCURACY RATE   (   a
                                                                                                     )
        WEIGHTED CDFs




                         1
                               Low Wage, Neutral Recruited
                        0.8
                               High Wage, CSR Recruited
                        0.6

                        0.4

                        0.2

                         0
                         0.3       0.35        0.4           0.45      0.5    0.55    0.6        0.65    0.7   0.75   0.8

                                                                    BASELINE ACCURACY RATE   (   a
                                                                                                     )


                                            Figure 5: Accuracy Rates: Combined Effects


fixed effects. The figure presents distributions of (a ), which represent a worker's
baseline average accuracy rate in the absence of a treatment effect. The step func-
tions represent the empirical CDFs used in our stochastic dominance tests, and the
continuous functions are smoothed B-spline CDFs for display purposes. Once again,
the estimates point to a substantial degree of heterogeneity. Figure 4 indicates that
recruiting with either high wage offers or CSR advertisement leads to a first-order
dominance shift toward workers who produce superior output (both significant at the
1% level). For CSR, the gains come largely from the second and fourth quintiles of
worker quality and result in roughly a 4% (0.165 standard deviations) increase in
mean accuracy. For high wage, the change is larger at about 13% (0.518 standard
deviations) higher mean accuracy. Though these numbers seem somewhat small, we
will see through our model simulations that they can have a big impact on the firm's
bottom line through quality-control costs.
   In Figure 5 (lower panel) we see once again evidence that CSR and money can
be complementary tools for producing advantageous worker selection. The first-order
stochastic dominance shift for high-wage-CSR recruits, relative to low-wage-neutral
recruits, is highly significant and larger than the sum of the two individual selection
effects. The mean accuracy rate improvement is 21% (or 0.785 standard deviations).

5.4.3   Worker Labor Supply Costs

Figure 6 and the right panel of Table 10 summarize results on type distributions
of l , the shadow value that workers place on their time when making labor-leisure


                                                                              32
decisions. Once again, we see a striking level of cross-worker heterogeneity. Relative
to the median worker, the 10th percentile worker's cost of supplying time to the firm
is 60% lower, and the 90th percentile worker's supply cost is 80% greater than the
median. This would account for the long upper tail of observed positive work times
where the 90th percentile (6.46 hours) is 4 times larger than the median (1.61 hours).
        WEIGHTED CDFs




                         1
                               Neutral Recruited
                        0.8
                               CSR Recruited
                        0.6

                        0.4

                        0.2

                         0
                                          5          10               15             20                     25

                                                          SHADOW VALUE OF TIME   l
        WEIGHTED CDFs




                         1
                               Low Wage Recruited
                        0.8
                               High Wage Recruited
                        0.6

                        0.4

                        0.2

                         0
                                          5          10               15             20                     25

                                                          SHADOW VALUE OF TIME   l


                              Figure 6: Shadow Value of Time: Selection on Wage and CSR
        WEIGHTED CDFs




                         1

                        0.8

                        0.6

                        0.4
                                                                                          Neutral Recruited
                        0.2
                                                                                          CSR Recruited + CSR Treated
                         0
                                          5          10               15             20                     25

                                                          SHADOW VALUE OF TIME   l
        WEIGHTED CDFs




                         1

                        0.8

                        0.6

                        0.4
                                                                                           Low Wage, Neutral Recruited
                        0.2
                                                                                           High Wage, CSR Recruited
                         0
                                          5          10               15             20                     25

                                                          SHADOW VALUE OF TIME   l


                                      Figure 7: Shadow Value of Time: Combined Effects

   Figure 6 depicts selective entry into the worker pool based on wage and CSR.
As we noted earlier, selection on CSR recruitment operates similarly as selection on
high-wage recruitment: in both cases the null hypothesis of distributional equality
is rejected in favor of a shift that is generally consistent with first-order dominance
relative to the neutral and low-wage baselines. The main difference is that CSR

                                                                 33
selection is concentrated among the firm's lowest-cost workers (i.e., those who work
the most hours), with an overall 3% (0.042 standard deviations) increase in shadow
value of time, while wage selection is concentrated among the firm's highest-cost
workers (those who work the least) with an overall increase of 18% (0.334 standard
deviations) in the shadow value of their time.
    Figure 7 displays compound labor supply effects. Once again, we see evidence of a
complementary relationship between CSR status and high wage offer in driving worker
selection. The lower pane of the figure shows an impact on workforce composition that
is stronger than the sum of the two individual selection effects. The combined result
is that high-wage-CSR recruits on average have time that is 29% (0.470 standard
deviations) more valuable than the low-wage-neutral baseline.
    One might have expected that CSR recruitment would gather a set of workers to
the firm who are more eager to supply their time, but here we see that the opposite
is true. When a prospective worker is faced with a firm's offer (w, X0 , Z ), an increase
to some w > w, causes an influx of new workers with more valuable time who are
willing to accept the offer under w but not w. In similar fashion, holding w fixed, if
CSR recruitment status is increased from X0 = 0 to X0 = 1 we once again see entry
by an additional set of workers with more valuable time that are willing to accept a
fixed wage under X0 = 1, but not under X0 = 0. In that sense, CSR advertisement
seems to play a role similar to money in attracting workers to the firm.
    Overall, it may not be surprising that CSR-selected and high-wage-selected work-
ers have more valuable time, given our results that they are also more productive
and produce higher quality output. One might expect, therefore, that their time is
more valuable due to better outside options in the labor market, given these desirable
characteristics. This interpretation is supported by results in Online Appendix C.2.1
where we compute various measures of correlations among our estimates of unob-
served worker traits. There we find that variation in p , d , and a explains 34% of
variation in l . It is worth emphasizing that residual variation in l is partly sampling
variability, so 34% is an estimated lower bound on the strength of the relationship
between actual time value l and worker productivity and quality (p , d , a ).

6     Bottom-Line Model Simulations
To attach meaning to our estimates, we present model simulations that capture the
impacts of advantageous worker selection on a firm's cost structure. For each worker

                                           34
in our sample recruited under wage offer w, we have an estimate of their individual
labor-supply cost curve. This allows us to compute counterfactual outcomes under
alternative wage raises w > w which are assessed after the hiring stage.16 In order to
assess the final impact of selection on wage offer and CSR on the firm's profitability,
we simulated 400 blocks of 10 workdays for each worker in our sample as follows:

   1. We assume the worker is inexperienced before their first day, with alternating
         neutral/CSR task framing on odd/even days. For each worker, we simulate 10
         iid draws from the (parametric) distribution of labor-supply shocks ul to obtain
         total work time within each day.

   2. We iteratively simulate iid draws from the empirical joint distribution of shocks
         (up , ud ) to obtain production times, until the simulated work-time for that day
         is exhausted.17 , 18 This determines daily supply of output and per-unit costs.

   3. Finally, for each unit of output we simulate from the parametric distribution
         of accuracy shocks ua and record the implied accuracy level for the worker in
         question, on a single field of the web-form, on each unit of output.

       Using this information we measured for subsample j how selection effects mold dis-
tributions of total daily output Fout,j (q ), per-unit costs, Fcost,j (c), and output quality,
Facc,j (a), in absence of redundancy--that is, where one unit of output is considered to
be one worker-image pair. In many contexts, work quality is not a separate dimension
of the production process, but rather, it feeds into production costs through creat-
ing a need for costly monitoring and evaluation, or through work redundancy--i.e.,
having multiple workers redo the same task and aggregating their results to ensure
final output quality--as in our data-entry context. Therefore, we executed a second
simulation to produce a mapping between single-worker accuracy and the need for
different levels of redundancy to ensure a given level of final output quality.
  16
       We only consider wage raises because labor laws constrain firms from reducing wages after hiring
a worker with contract w. Moreover, an ex-post wage decrease would likely induce attrition.
  17
     We assume a worker will not exceed her planned work-time from step 1. At shift end, if she finds
that she has a few minutes left, but not enough to accomplish another unit of output, she spends
the remaining minutes in downtime. Dropping final minutes instead made little difference.
  18
     We found that prolonged learning effects led to unusually low simulated production times for
the highest output workers, toward the end of the 10 days. Thus, after the 200th unit of output we
hold the learning term fixed at q - = 200- for subsequent output. This learning cutoff produced
a close match between the simulated CDF of per-unit production times and its analog in the data.


                                                   35
       Specifically, we begin by assuming for simplicity that the objectively correct re-
sponse for a field-image pair is 3 out of 5 on the Likert scale. For a hypothetical set of
K workers from subsample j , we simulate 4 × 106 sets of k = 1, . . . , K random draws,
{a1 , . . . , aK }, from the single-worker accuracy distribution Facc,j (a). For each set of
K , we then simulate K uniform random numbers  acc and code worker k 's response
              acc  a . Otherwise, we randomly select a response from among the
as correct if k     k

remaining options according to the empirical distribution of incorrect responses in
our raw data.19 We then recorded a binary variable for whether the simulated modal
response was the correct one, and averaged across all 4 × 106 observations to get a
K -worker modal response accuracy rate. Since different subsamples of workers (e.g.,
CSR recruits vs neutral recruits) have different distributions of single-worker accuracy
rates, this exercise results in differing levels of redundancy (i.e., K ) needed to achieve
a given level of accuracy in the modal response. We present results below.

6.1        Production Costs and Daily Supply W/o Redundancy
Our model of labor supply focuses on an individual's decision to supply her time to
the firm, but the measure most relevant to an employer is not employee time per
se, but rather, supply of units of output to the firm each day. For various reasons,
cross-group comparisons on daily output supply may be ambiguous: some workers
are more productive than others, but they also tend to have higher value of time
and therefore supply less of it to the firm. Moreover, a worker's wage rate is also
correlated with her productivity and labor supply since it induces selection effects.
       Suppose a firm wished to solve a cost minimization problem, subject to producing
a fixed quantity of outputs. On one hand, the firm could recruit a set of more produc-
tive workers with high initial wage offers. On the other hand, it could recruit a set of
less productive workers with low initial wage offers, and adopt the strategy of offering
ex-post wage-raise incentives to increase output capacity. How would this choice af-
fect per-worker daily supply of output, and per-unit production costs? Moreover, how
does the recruitment-stage CSR advertisement affect this cost-minimization calculus
compared to a neutral recruitment strategy?
       To answer these questions, for each group comparison in our study--i.e., $11 re-
  19
       Empirically, when the correct response is 3 out of 5, conditional on responding incorrectly,
workers tended to select 1 or 5 roughly one third of the time, and 2 or 4 roughly two thirds of the
time. This empirical distribution was relatively stable across different Likert-scale fields.



                                                  36
      Recruitment Group:           $15            $11              CSR         NTR            CSR15               NTR11
      DAILY OUTPUT:                52.71          38.10            44.83       48.15           56.17              45.45
          % Differences:        %($15,$11)       +38.4%      %(CSR,N T R)     -6.9%       %(CSR15,N T R11)        +23.6%
     PER-PAGE COST:               $0.555         $0.436           $0.473      $0.553           $0.500             $0.446
          % Differences:        %($15,$11)       +27.5%      %(CSR,N T R)     -14.4%      %(CSR15,N T R11)        +12.0%
OUTPUT-EQUIV. RAISE:              ---           R = $2.87        R = $0.63    ---              ---              R = $1.89
  CF PER-PAGE COST:               ---            $0.538           $0.495      ---              ---                $0.519
                                                                                                             
      CF % Differences:       %($15,$11+R )      +3.1%      %(CSR+R ,N T R)   -10.6%    %(CSR15,N T R11+R )       -3.7%


        Table 6: Cost and Volume Simulations: Baseline and Counterfactual (no redundancy)


      cruits versus $15 recruits; neutral recruits (NTR) versus CSR recruits; and $11-neutral
      (NTR11) recruits versus $15-CSR recruits (CSR15)--we compute the counterfactual
      output-equivalent raise, denoted R , needed for the lower-output group to match mean
      per-worker daily supply in the other group under baseline wages. We then compare
      per-unit costs (for a single page processed by one worker) between the two groups at
      baseline and under the counterfactual wage raise scenario. Table 6 reports relevant
      means, and Figures 22 ­ 24 in the online suplemental appendix display simulated
      CDFs of daily output, per-unit costs, and per-unit accuracy rates.20 In Table 6, per-
      cent changes %(k, j )  100 × (outcomek - outcomej )/outcomej are reported, with the
      convention that group j (the second argument) is used as the baseline group.
              For $15 recruits relative to $11 recruits, the former are getting paid more per hour
      and are on average more productive. These two effects dominate the fact that they
      have higher opportunity costs of time, so that $15 recruits average about 53 processed
      pages per day, or one third more than their $11 recruit counterparts. However, per-
      unit costs at baseline are roughly 56 cents, or 27% higher for $15 recruits. An ex-post
      wage-raise of R = $2.87 per hour assessed to the $11 recruits would be enough to
      equalize mean daily output supply in absence of redundancy. Since these individuals
      have (on average) lower value of time, this counterfactual raise is strictly less than the
      $4 gap between their initial wage offers. However, R would nearly equalize per-page
      costs to the firm, relative to $15 recruits, due to cross-group productivity differences.
              The comparison between CSR recruits and NTR recruits is somewhat different.
         20
              Note that all daily output means reported are unconditional: each worker has positive probability
      of logging zero units of output on a given day, and these zeros are included as part of the worker's
      estimated supply curve under a given wage contract (see Figure 22 in the online supplement).


                                                            37
CSR recruits are more productive, but also have more valuable time. The latter
fact dominates so that they produce about 45 units per day on average, or 7% less
than their NTR counterparts. An hourly wage increase of R = $0.63 per hour for
CSR recruits would be sufficient to close this output gap. The productivity difference
results in a more favorable per-page cost among CSR recruits under both the baseline
and counterfactual scenarios. The relevant comparisons for the CSR15 group versus
the NTR11 group are naturally between the other two in absence of redundancy.
       The per-page cost savings among CSR recruits provide an incomplete picture
though, since they don't factor in the cost of the firm's CSR operations. Knowing
this extra piece of information would allow for a more natural comparison to the $11
versus $15 case where the cost of inducing advantageous selection is explicit. The
numbers in the middle section of Table 6 imply that a firm could profitably execute
a CSR program, based solely on advantageous worker selection, given a budget at
or below $3.58 per worker, per day, under the baseline wage contracts. Therefore, a
constant-returns-to-scale firm like ours could profitably sustain an annual CSR budget
of $1,000,000, if it had enough business volume to continuously occupy the labor of
766 workers or more under the status quo contract, which we refer to as minimum
effective scale.21 This result provides a possible explanation for why larger firms tend
to invest more resources in CSR activities: with a larger employee base over which to
spread CSR costs and reap productivity benefits, the profitability of a dollar invested
in CSR activity may be higher as well.

6.2        Production Costs and Daily Supply with Quality Control
Thus far we have assumed that one unit of output is a single worker-task pair. This
idea is appropriate in many contexts (e.g., retail sales), but in other applications
(e.g., janitorial work, data entry, various service professions) the quality of an indi-
vidual worker's output may directly impact cost structure. For example, if a janitorial
worker fails to adequately clean a room, the firm may need to dispatch a second em-
ployee to redo the job. Likewise, if an exam evaluator does not maintain adequate
concentration while scoring an essay, the firm may need to increase the number of her
co-workers who re-score the same essay in order to produce a reliable score. In our
  21                                                                      $1,000,000
       This simple calculation is as follows: minimum eff ective scale    $3.58×365    = 766. We
refer to this measure as "minimum effective scale" rather than the more common "minimum efficient
scale" since it ignores the role of human resources costs.



                                                 38
data-entry application this is the case: our Likert-scale variables require cognitive ef-
fort to process training materials and thoughtfully evaluate each field for each Google
Street View image. Following industry practice, we have adopted the modal response
across K independent evaluations as our criterion for determining final output.
   Table 7 summarizes the results of our redundancy simulations. We define mode
accuracy rate, denoted Amode,K , as the probability that the modal response among K
independent evaluations corresponds to the true value (being 3 in our simulations).
We then assumed the firm wishes to maintain accuracy rates at various levels in the
set A  { 3
         2 4 9
           , 5 , 10 } and then computed required redundancy as the minimum number
K  of independent evaluations which result in Amode,K   A . Given a value of K  , we
then compute adjusted daily output by dividing the output measure from the previous
section by K  , and adjusted per-unit cost by multiplying the per-unit cost from the
previous section by K  . Finally, we repeat our counterfactual exercise by computing
adjusted output-equivalent raises and percent differences for subgroup comparisons.
   Table 7 shows that the accuracy differences across subgroups are enough to induce
non-trivial differences in redundancy requirements. For $11 recruits, the firm needs
between 1 and 3 extra independent evaluations to ensure a fixed mode accuracy,
relative to $15 recruits. For NTR recruits, the requirement is 1 or 2 extra evaluations
relative to CSR recruits. This comparison is even more striking for the combined
selection effect: among NTR11 recruits, the firm requires between 2 and 8 extra
independent evaluations to maintain the same mode accuracy as CSR15 recruits.
   These extra redundancy requirements shift the cost structure in favor of high-
wage and CSR recruits. Under the status quo contract, per-unit costs across the two
wage groups are nearly equalized, while $15 recruits produce 66%­73% more output
per day. Since one employee hired at a $15 wage offer can accomplish what 1.66
employees (or more) hired at an $11 wage offer can, if fixed human resources costs
(e.g., hiring, payroll, management, etc.) are important then attracting workers by
offering to pay them more per hour may actually be better for the firm's bottom line,
all things considered. We also note that from the baseline wage contract of $11/hour,
the adjusted output-equivalent counterfactual raises for these recruits actually require
pay rates at or above the hourly rate for their $15-recruited counterparts, with the
latter producing counterfactual per-unit cost savings of 25%-29%. The broad lesson is
that if work quality has a direct influence on the firm's cost structure it may actually
be better to recruit a high-productivity, high-quality workforce with high wage offers.

                                           39
                             Recruitment Group:       $15            $11               CSR              NTR             CSR15            NTR11

                              REDUNDANCY:            K = 5          K = 6              K = 5           K = 6            K = 5             K = 7
                         ADJ. DAILY OUTPUT:           10.54          6.35               8.97            8.03             11.23             6.49
2
3
Mode Accuracy Rate =




                                 % Differences:    %($15,$11)       +66.0%          %(CSR,N T R)       +11.7%      %(CSR15,N T R11)       +73.0%
                        ADJ. PER-UNIT COST:          $2.776         $2.614             $2.366          $3.318           $2.5008           $3.124
                                 % Differences:    %($15,$11)       +6.2%           %(CSR,N T R)       -28.7%      %(CSR15,N T R11)       -20.0%
                       OUTPUT-EQUIV. RAISE:          ---           R = $5.03           ---            R = $0.93         ---              R = $6.52
                          CF PER-UNIT COST:          ---            $3.702             ---             $3.521           ---               $4.891
                                                                                                                                      
                             CF % Differences:    %($15,$11+R )    -25.01%      %(CSR,N T R+R )        -32.8%     %(CSR15,N T R11+R )     -48.9%

                              REDUNDANCY:            K = 8          K  = 10            K = 8           K = 9            K = 9             K  = 13
                         ADJ. DAILY OUTPUT:           6.59           3.81               5.60            5.35             6.24              3.50
4
5
Mode Accuracy Rate =




                                 % Differences:    %($15,$11)       +72.9%          %(CSR,N T R)       +4.8%       %(CSR15,N T R11)       +78.5%
                        ADJ. PER-UNIT COST:          $4.442         $4.356             $3.785          $4.977           $4.500            $5.801
                                 % Differences:    %($15,$11)       +2.0%           %(CSR,N T R)       -23.9%      %(CSR15,N T R11)       -22.4%
                       OUTPUT-EQUIV. RAISE:          ---           R = $5.33           ---            R = $0.14         ---              R = $6.89
                          CF PER-UNIT COST:          ---            $6.277             ---             $5.014           ---               $9.279
                             CF % Differences:    %($15,$11+R )     -29.2%      %(CSR,N T R+R )        -24.5%     %(CSR15,N T R11+R )     -51.5%

                              REDUNDANCY:            K  = 13        K  = 16           K  = 13          K  = 15          K  = 14           K  = 22
10




                         ADJ. DAILY OUTPUT:           4.06           2.38               3.45            3.21             4.01              2.07
 9
Mode Accuracy Rate =




                                 % Differences:    %($15,$11)       +70.3%          %(CSR,N T R)       +7.4%       %(CSR15,N T R11)       +94.2%
                        ADJ. PER-UNIT COST:          $7.218         $6.970             $6.151          $8.295           $6.999            $9.817
                                 % Differences:    %($15,$11)       +3.6%           %(CSR,N T R)       -25.8%      %(CSR15,N T R11)       -28.7%
                       OUTPUT-EQUIV. RAISE:          ---           R = $5.23           ---            R = $0.62         ---              R = $8.47
                          CF PER-UNIT COST:          ---            $9.996             ---             $8.613           ---               $17.044
                                                                                                                                      
                             CF % Differences:    %($15,$11+R )     -27.8%      %(CSR,N T R+R )        -28.6%     %(CSR15,N T R11+R )     -58.9%


                                                         Table 7: Redundancy Simulations


                                As for the individual impact of selection on CSR, the redundancy requirement is
                            enough to reverse the output ordering between the CSR and NTR groups, with the
                            former now being 5%­12% ahead in terms of adjusted daily output. This change then
                            further magnifies the cost difference, with CSR workers' output now being 24%­29%
                            less expensive under the status quo wage contracts. Redundancy expands the scope
                            for CSR profitability: under the status quo contracts (counterfactual wage raises) a
                            firm can operate a CSR program on a budget of between $6.67­$8.54 ($6.88­$10.36)
                            per worker, per day. This brings minimum effective scale down considerably (see
                            Table 8), with a conservative estimate being 411 workers or more.


                                                                               40
 Group Comparison            CSR vs NTR     CSR vs NTR      CSR15 vs NTR11   CSR15 vs NTR11
                             (status quo)   (output-equiv     (status quo)    (output-equiv
 Case                                        raise CF)                          raise CF)

 NO REDUNDANCY:                  766             973                              2,541
                      2
 MODE ACCURACY=       3
                        :        321             265              392              103
                      4
 MODE ACCURACY=       5
                        :        411             399              338              92
                       9
 MODE ACCURACY=       10
                         :       371             323              243              69


Table 8: Minimum Effective Scale (# workers) for Annual CSR Budget of $1,000,000


7     Concluding Remarks
The"business of business is business" has been a mantra associated with Milton Fried-
man for nearly half a century. Having articulated his view in a 1970 New York Times
article that the only responsibility of business was to increase its profits, he described
contrarians as "puppets of the intellectual forces that...undermine the basis of a free
society." Today, over 90% of major businesses have specific programs dedicated to
corporate social responsibility, and many CEOs and business school deans trumpet
their organizations' commitment to social engagement. While a narrow interpretation
of Friedman certainly has proven incorrect--the business world has evolved in a much
more social manner than he likely anticipated--but this does not mean that CSR is
necessarily at odds with profit seeking.
    This study takes a systematic approach to exploring the supply-side effects of
CSR. Much previous scholarship has focused on the demand side with mixed results.
This has led to hotly-contested debates in corporate law, business ethics, economics,
and the social sciences more broadly. Our study combines theory with a natural field
experiment to explore how a firm can use CSR to impact the process through which
its workers produce output. Our study is unique in that we begin with a well-specified
model of CSR and estimate its behavioral parameters using a field experiment.
    Our results are generally positive for CSR, in that practical, market-based ap-
proaches can be used to affect the supply side of business. Advertising the firm's
CSR endeavors during recruiting increases application rates by almost as much as an
increase of hourly wages from $11 to $15. In addition, CSR selection works to improve
productivity, quality-adjusted supply of output to the firm, and per-unit production
costs. A work-stage internal CSR advertisement campaign also increases productivity


                                               41
of all workers by speeding up production outside of break time, and reducing workers'
propensity to take elective breaks between productive tasks.
   We conclude that CSR should not be viewed as a necessary distraction from a
profit motive, but rather as an important part of profit maximization similar to other
non-pecuniary incentives offered to the firm's labor force. Our results highlight that
the real challenge for CEOs is not whether CSR should be used, but what are the best
social innovations to put in place. We view our work as only a start on how to leverage
economic theory and field experiments to lend insights into CSR and non-pecuniary
worker compensation generally. Future work will refine our approach and utilize
different forms and incentives of CSR to provide a more complete understanding of
both the demand and supply sides of the market.
   Finally, of independent interest is our finding that, taking quality control and
productivity into account, a firm's cost structure may actually improve with higher
wage offers during the recruitment process. The resulting set of employees may com-
pensate the firm for their more expensive time by consistently producing more and
better output. Of course, this is also not entirely unrelated to the CSR theme: a
core finding of this study is that more sustainable and/or socially conscious business
practices may not be at odds with profit maximization after all. Moreover, sprinkled
throughout our results is the notion that important complementarities exist between
CSR and wage offers, both in selection and motivation of workers.

References
Ashraf, N., Berry, J., and Shapiro, J. M. (2010). Can higher prices stimulate product
  use? evidence from a field experiment in zambia. American Economic Review,
  100:2383­2413.
Barnett, M. L. and Salomon, R. M. (2012). Does it pay to be really good? addressing
  the shape of the relationship between social and financial performance. Strategic
  Management Journal, 33(11):1304­1320.
Barrett, G. F. and Donald, S. G. (2003). Consistent tests for stochastic dominance.
  Econometrica, 71(1):71­104.
Bertrand, M., Bombardini, M., Fisman, R., and Trebbi, F. (2018). Tax-exempt
  lobbying: Corporate philanthropy as a tool for political in uence. mimeo, University
  of British Columbia Economics Dept.


                                          42
Burbano, V. C. (2015). Getting virtual workers to do more by doing good: Field
  experimental evidence. Technical report, Working paper.
Burbano, V. C. (2016). Social responsibility messages and worker wage requirements:
  Field experimental evidence from online labor marketplaces. Organization Science,
  27:1010­1028.
Carnahan, S., Kryscynski, D., and Olson, D. (2015). How corporate social respon-
  sibility reduces employee turnover: evidence from attorneys before and after 9.
  Technical report, Working paper.
Chandler, J., Mueller, P., and Paolacci, G. (2014). Nonnaivite among amazon me-
  chanical turk workers: Consequences and solutions or behavioral researchers. Be-
  havior research methods, 46(1):112­130.
Chen, X. (2007). Large sample sieve estimation of semi-nonparametric models. Hand-
  book of Econometrics, 6(76):5549­5632.
Cotton, C., Hickman, B., List, J., and Price, J. (2019). Productivity versus motiva-
  tion: Combining field experiments with structural econometrics to study adolescent
  human capital production. Working paper, University of Chicago Economics De-
  partment.
Davidson, R. and Duclos, J.-Y. (2000). Statistical inference for stochastic dominance
  and for the measurement of poverty and inequality. Econometrica, 68(6):1435­1464.
de Boor, C. (2001). A Practical Guide to Splines Revised Edition. New York: Springer-
  Verlag.
DellaVigna, S., List, J. A., and Malmendier, U. (2012). Testing for altruism and social
  pressure in charitable giving. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127:1­56.
DellaVigna, S., List, J. A., Malmendier, U., and Rao, G. (2017). Voting to tell others.
  The Review of Economic Studies, 84:143­181.
DellaVigna, S., List, J. A., Malmendier, U., and Rao, G. (2019). Estimating social
  preferences and gift exchange at work, nber 22043.
D'Haultfoeuille, X. and F´
                         evrier, P. (2011). The provision of wage incentives: A
  structural estimation using contracts variation. mimeo, CREST, 2011-29.
D'Haultfoeuille, X. and F´
                         evrier, P. (2015). Identification of nonseparable triangular
  models with discrete instruments. Econometrica, 83(3):1199­1210.
Doob, J. L. (1949). Heuristic approach to the kolmogorov-smirnov theorems. Annals
  of Mathematical Statistics, 20:393­403.
Du, S., Bhattacharya, C., and Sen, S. (2011).         Corporate social responsibility

                                          43
  and competitive advantage: Overcoming the trust barrier. Management Science,
  57(9):1528­1545.
Elfenbein, D. W., Fisman, R., and McManus, B. (2012). Charity as a substitute
  for reputation: Evidence from an online marketplace. The Review of Economic
  Studies, 79(4):1441­1468.
Flory, J. A., Leibbrandt, A., and List, J. A. (2014). Do competitive workplaces deter
  female workers? A large-scale natural field experiment on job-entry decisions. The
  Review of Economic Studies, 82(4).
Friedman, M. (1970). The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits.
  The New York Times Magazine, pages 32­33.
Gill, D. and Prowse, V. (2012). A structural analysis of disappointment aversion in
  a real effort competition. American Economic Review, 102(1):469­503.
Godfrey, P. C., Merrill, C. B., and Hansen, J. M. (2009). The relationship between
  corporate social responsibility and shareholder value: An empirical test of the risk
  management hypothesis. Strategic Management Journal, 30(4):425­445.
Goodman, J. K., Cryder, C. E., and Cheema, A. (2013). Data collection in a flat
  world: The strengths and weaknesses of mechanical turk samples. Journal of Be-
  havioral Decision Making, 26(3):213­224.
Greening, D. W. and Turban, D. B. (2000). Corporate social performance as a com-
  petitive advantage in attracting a quality workforce. Business & Society, 39(3):254­
  280.
Harrison, G. W. and List, J. A. (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic
  Literature, 42(4):1009­1055.
Heathcote, A., Brown, S., Wagenmakers, E. J., and Eidels, A. (2010). Distribution-
  free tests of stochastic dominance for small samples. Journal of Mathematical
  Psychology, 54:454­463.
Hickman, B. R., Hubbard, T. P., and Paarsch, H. J. (2017). Identification and
  estimation of a bidding model for electronic auctions. Quantitative Economics,
  8(2):505­551.
Huang, J. Z. (2003). Local asymptotics for polynomial spline regression. Annals of
  Statistics, 31(5):1600­1635.
Kolmogorov, A. (1933). Sulla determinazione empirica di une legge di distribuzione.
  Giornale dell'Istituto Italiano degli Attuari, 4:83­91.
Leibbrandt, A. and List, J. A. (2014). Do Women Avoid Salary Negotiations? A

                                          44
  Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment. Management Science, 61(9).
Levitt, S. D. and List, J. A. (2007). What do laboratory experiments measuring social
  preferences reveal about the real world?    The journal of economic perspectives,
  21(2):153­174.
Linton, O., Song, K., and Whang, Y.-J. (2010). An improved bootstrap test of
  stochastic dominance. Journal of Econometrics, 154:186­202.
List, J. A. and Momeni, F. (2017). When corporate social responsibility backfires:
  Theory and evidence from a natural field experiment. NBER 24169.
Ljungqvist, L. and Sargent, T. J. (2004). Recursive Macroeconomic Theory. MIT
  Press.
Marmer, V., Shneyerov, A., and Kaplan, U. (2017). Identifying collusion in english
  auctions. mimeo, University of British Columbia Economics Dept.
McDonnell, M.-H. and King, B. (2013). Keeping up appearances reputational threat
  and impression management after social movement boycotts. Administrative Sci-
  ence Quarterly, 58(3):387­419.
Paolacci, G. and Chandler, J. (2014). Inside the turk: Understanding mechanical turk
  as a participant pool. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23(3):184­188.
Roback, J. (1982). Wages, rents, and the quality of life. The Journal of Political
  Economy, pages 1257­1278.
Rosen, S. (1986). The theory of equalizing differences. Handbook of labor economics,
  1:641­692.
Servaes, H. and Tamayo, A. (2013). The impact of corporate social responsibility on
  firm value: The role of customer awareness. Management Science, 59(5):1045­1061.
                             ´
Smirnov, N. (1939). Sur les Ecarts  de la courbe de distribution empirique. Matemat-
  iceskii Sbornik NS, 6:3­26.
Torgovitsky, A. (2015). Identification of nonseparable models using instruments with
  small support. Econometrica, 83(3):1185­1197.
Waddock, S. A. and Graves, S. B. (1997). The corporate social performance-financial
  performance link. Strategic management journal, pages 303­319.
Wooldridge, J. (2001). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cam-
  brige: MIT Press.




                                         45
A       Appendix: Identification & Estimation Details
Here we present a full discussion of structural identification in order to make clear
how the empirical moments in our data pin down various model parameters during
the estimation phase. By way of notation, let (·, µ,  ) denote the normal distribution
with mean µ and standard deviation  , and let (·, µ,  ) denote its density.

Assumption 2. a    a                   l        l      l
              qi  (qi , 0, 1) qi , and it  log(uit )  (it , 0, l ) i, t.

    Recall that for worker i = 1, . . . , I we have the following observables: recruiting
status, X0i ; wage offer Wi  {w1 , w2 }; total cumulative production Qi ; unit-specific
production times, accuracy ratings, and treatment values, {qi , Dqi , Aqi , X1qi , }Q
                                                                                    qi =1 ; and
                                                                                      i


day-specific total work hours, and treatments, {Hit , X1it }T
                                                            t=1 . In addition, we have
the following aggregate observables from the recruiting stage, {µN,1 , µN,2 , µC,1 , µC,2 },
denoting application rates within each of the 4 potential worker pools recruited under
conditions (X0 = 0, W = w1 ), (X0 = 0, W = w2 ), (X0 = 1, W = w1 ), and (X0 = 1, W =
w2 ), respectively. The complete model consists of the following structural components
to be recovered from the observables: {Gpdal (·, ·, ·, ·), Tp , Td , Ta , Tl , , 1 , l , c(·)}.

A.1      IDENTIFICATION: Productivity
Given that our passive productivity model is essentially identical to our active pro-
ductivity model with the restriction that  = 0 in the former, it will suffice to discuss
identification under the latter, for which we require a standard exogeneity condition
on the log-error terms. Letting p       p        d       d
                                qi  ln(uqi ) and qi  ln(uqi ), we require

Assumption 3. E [p                   p            p                       p
                 qi ln(pi )] = 0, E [qi ] = 0, E [qi ln(qi )] = 0, and E [qi X1qi ] = 0,
E [d                       d           d
   qi ln(pi )] = 0, and E [qi ] = 0 E [qi X1qi ] = 0.

In other words, the unit-specific shocks to production times are uncorrelated with
unobserved worker types, treatments, or cumulative output. This condition follows
from our randomization scheme described above.
    Now, taking the natural logarithm of equation (1) gives us

    ln(qi ) = ln(1 ) -  ln(qi )1(qi > 1) + ln(pi ) + ln(Tp )X1qi + p
                                                                   qi . qi = 1, 2, . . . , Qi     (8)

Provided Qi  2 for all i, and Qi > 2 for at least one i, Assumption 3 and equation (8)
establish that the active productivity model is a standard linear regression with fixed
effects, whose parameters are identified from the within-person panel structure of the
data. Identification obtains in the passive productivity model for similar reasoning.
                                                   1
A.2         IDENTIFICATION: Accuracy
For the accuracy model, we require the following:

Assumption 4.               E [l
                               it ai ] = 0,      E [a
                                                    qi ] = 0,    E [a
                                                                    qi qi ] = 0,   E [ a
                                                                                       qi X1qi ] = 0.


With the mean and scale normalization of the error term a
                                                        qi from Assumption 2,
identification of ai and Ta follows a standard panel-data Probit argument: Aqi is a
Bernoulli random variable22 whose conditional probability mass function is

       Pr[Aqi = j |ai , X1qi ] = (ai + X1qi Ta )j [1 - (ai + X1qi Ta )]1-j , j  {0, 1}.                      (9)

Therefore, the within-person panel structure of the observables are sufficient to iden-
tify treatment effects and worker fixed effects. Of course, during estimation a bias
correction will be necessary due to the non-linearity in the normal CDF , but this
can be accomplished without difficulty (see Appendix A.4 for further discussion).

A.3         IDENTIFICATION: Labor Supply
Our strategy for labor supply builds upon and extends recent identification results
proven by D'Haultfoeuille and F´
                               evrier (2015, Theorem 2) and Torgovitsky (2015, The-
orem 2) (henceforth DFT). We begin by imposing some key identifying assumptions
on the log of the error term in the labor cost equation:

Assumption 5. l
              it  ln(li ),                    E [ l
                                                  it ] = 0,   E [l
                                                                 it X1it ] = 0.


The independence assumption is related to a sample selection problem that we will
address in Section A.3.2 below. Three further assumptions are necessary:
  22
       In reality, our data contain a finer (but still discrete) accuracy measure as explained in Sec-
tion 2.4. One could alternatively specify a more elaborate model where for each coded variable, say
                                                                                
v1 , . . . , v7 , there is a variable-specific, iid, normal shock a                                     a    a
                                                                  vk , so that Avk ,qi = ai + X1qi Ta + vk + qi ,
                                           7
Avk ,qi = 1 Avk ,qi > 0 , and Aqi =        k=1   Avk ,qi /7. One could potentially identify the relative vari-
ances of the   a
               vk 's   (variable-specific shocks) after imposing a scale normalization--say, V ar a
                                                                                                  qi = 1
for example--which is always a necessary identifying assumption with limited dependent variables
models. Yet, knowing the relative variances of the variable-specific shocks is not central to the main
theme of this paper, so we opt for a simpler approach. The identification argument and estimator are
based on averaging accuracy measures within worker and across multiple units of output to estimate
treatment effects and worker fixed effects. Since these averages belong to an asymptotically dense
set, the method applies to any scenario where the values of Aqi are limited to a finite grid and shocks
are uncorrelated across different qi 's. Therefore, for the purpose of exposition we concentrate on the
simpler case where Aqi is binary.


                                                         2
Assumption 6. There exist known subsets S1 contained in the set of all workers
offered wage w1 and S2 contained in the set of all workers offered wage w2 such that
Gl|S1 (l |S1 ) = Gl|S2 (l |S2 ) = Gl (l )


Assumption 7. Letting cj (·) denote the cost function which applies to workers from
wage group wj , j = 1, 2, we assume c1 (h) = c2 (h) = c(h), h  R+ .

Assumption 8. Gl (l ) has full support, with gl (l )  a > 0,    l , l  R++ .

    In words, Assumptions 6 and 7 provide crucial exclusion restrictions on which
DFT's seminal identification strategy is based. In words, the econometrician must
be able to observe two type-equivalent subsets of workers across contract groups
(i.e., no selective entry conditional on (S1 , S2 )) and the cost functions must be the
same. Under these conditions, the variation in wage offers can essentially serve as an
instrument to disentangle the common component of costs c(·) from the idiosyncratic
component li . In what follows it will be useful to let GH |S1 (h|S1 ) and GH |S2 (h|S2 )
denote the distributions of non-zero work times logged, conditional on events S1 and
S2 , respectively. Our recruitment-stage procedure induces self-selection on wage offer
which might seem to threaten Assumption 6, but in the following sections we explain
how our research design is crafted to solve this problem. Assumption 8 is a technical
condition to avoid problems of partial identification, which will become clear below.
A.3.1     Case I: Noiseless Labor Supply
To develop intuition for how different sources of variation in the data pin down model
parameters, we first simplify the discussion along several dimensions. For now we will
assume no selective entry so that S1 and S2 each constitute the full sets of workers
offered wages w1 and w2 , respectively. Under this scenario, we have Gl|S1 (l |S1 ) =
Gl|S2 (l |S2 ) = Gl (l ) = Gl (l ). Also, let  = 0 with Gl (0) = 0--so that work time
distributions have unbounded support but individuals choose finite optimal h--and
for convenience we assume GH |w1 (0) = 0, whereas GH |w2 (h) = 0 at some h > 0. Finally,
we assume for now degenerate labor-supply shocks where E [ul                   l
                                                           it ] = 1 and V ar [uit ] = 0
with X1it = 0 in every period t. Before proceeding, it will also be convenient to define
hj () as the optimal choice profile consistent with first-order condition (6) (under
degenerate supply shocks), given contract wj , j = 1, 2, and denote its inverse by
j (h).



                                            3
       The mathematics behind the fully general frameworks of DFT are fairly compli-
cated, but in the current setting with noiseless labor supply and no selective entry,
a simple geometric argument, proposed by D'Haultfoeuille and F´
                                                              evrier (2011, hence-
forth, DF11), illustrates the intuition behind why the the model and the observables
together uniquely pin down the structural primitives. First, note that Assumption
6 combined with the fact that hj (·) is strictly decreasing (by strict convexity of c(·))
implies that a fixed quantile of labor supply in either wage group (e.g., median hours
worked under w1 or w2 ) corresponds to the unobserved type at that same quantile in
the type distribution (i.e., median l ):

                     Gl (l ) = 1 - GH |S1 (h1 (l )|S1 ) = 1 - GH |S2 (h2 (l )|S2 )
                                                                                                  (10)
                   h1 (l ) = G- 1
                              H |S1 GH |S2 [h2 (l )|S2 ] S1 .


DF11 referred to this relationship as the horizontal transform operator: given knowl-
edge of the labor supply distributions and some (l , h2 (l )) pair under wage contract
w2 , one can infer the counterfactual labor supply choice for the same worker type
under contract w1 . Assumption 7 produces an inverse to this operation which DF11
                                                                         wj
refer to as the vertical transform. If we recall that j (h) =           c (h)   from the FOCs, then
dividing these equations across the two contracts we obtain the following relationship:
                                                   w2
                                         1 (h) =      2 (h).                                      (11)
                                                   w1

Given knowledge of some (h, 2 (h)) pair under contract w2 , one can infer the unob-
servable type 1 (h) that would optimally choose the same h under contract w1 .
       Finally, since c (0) = 1 we can infer that 1 (0) = w1 lay on the inverse choice
profile under contract w1 .23 From this known (l , h) = (w1 , 0) pair that lay on the
supply curve under contract 1, we can perform a sequence of horizontal and vertical
transform operations to infer other points that lay on both inverse choice profiles. This
process is graphically depicted in Figure 8. Since the limiting behavior of the two
CDFs is identical, it follows that both inverse choice mappings are non-parametrically
identified since there is one and only one l value that could rationalize each observed
(h, wj ) pair under the model. This is because there is a (potentially infinite) sequence
  23
    From this the reader can see that the scale normalization in Assumption 1 gives rise to an
interpretation of c(·) as being the labor supply cost profile for the baseline type l = w
                                                                                        1 (0)
                                                                                          1
                                                                                              , and an
interpretation of idiosyncratic types as scaling costs up or down relative to the baseline cost profile.


                                                   4
                          1

                         0.8




              CDFs
                         0.6
                                                                                      GH|w (h)
                         0.4                                                              1

                         0.2
                                                                                      GH|w (h)
                                                                                          2
                          0
                               0   1    2    3     4       5   6   7              8       9      10

                                                 H (work hours)
                         12

                         10                                             1
                                                                            (h)
            (h), j=1,2




                                                                        2
                                                                            (h)
                          8
                                                                       IDENTIFIED POINTS
                          6                                            START VALUE

                          4
                  j




                          2

                          0
                               0   1    2    3     4       5   6   7              8       9      10

                                                 H (work hours)

                                   Figure 8: Geometry of Identification


of transform operations that can be constructed to connect any known point (h, j (h))
on some choice function, to any other point (h , j (h )) on another choice function.
Torgovitsky (2015, Theorem 2) and D'Haultfoeuille and F´
                                                       evrier (2015, Theorem 2)
formalize and generalize this geometric intuition.
   Once either of the functions j (h) are known, the econometrician can also use the
                                                                                                      wj
FOCs to recover the cost function from the differential equation c (h) =                              j (h) ,   c(0) = 0.
Perhaps a more intuitive way to view the basic identification argument is that there is
a unique form of the common cost function c(·) (or equivalently, of Gl (l )) that could
rationalize each observed GH |S1 (h|S1 ), GH |S2 (h|S2 ) pair under the model. Although
quite elegant, at first glance this identification logic may seem non-constructive as it
does not immediately seem to suggest an estimation strategy. However, our estimator
in Section A.7 below implicitly builds in the vertical transform concept--by flexibly
parameterizing c(·)--and the horizontal transform concept--by using counterfactual
predictions of worker behavior to match the empirical work-time CDFs.
A.3.2    CASE II: Noisy Labor Supply
Now we return to the full model where within-person variation in work times across
different days arises from transitory shocks to each worker's labor-supply costs. For

                                                       5
the time being we will assume that S1 and S2 are known (though they may now be
strict subsets) and we defer discussion on how to derive them to the next section.
The first complication that arises is one of sample selection: on a day when a worker
receives a cost shock large enough to trigger a corner solution Hit = 0, it is not possible
to make inference about the precise magnitude of her shock that day. Assumption 2
l         l
it = log(uit )  (; 0, l ) helps to correct for this selection problem.
   Note that each worker receives two iid samples of labor supply shocks: there are
T /2 shocks that occur on days when X1it = 1 and T /2 additional shocks occur on days
when X1it = 0. To simplify notation, let T = 10. We denote the order statistics of log-
shocks on CSR-treated days and Neutral days by {l          l          l          l
                                                Ci (1:5) < Ci (2:5) < Ci (3:5) < Ci (4:
5) < l               l           l           l           l           l
     Ci (5:5)}, and {N i (1:5) < N i (2:5) < N i (3:5) < N i (4:5) < N i (5:5)}, respectively.
Since work times are monotone in shocks, we denote the corresponding order statistics
of work times for CSR and Neutral workdays {HCi (1 : 5)  . . .  HCi (5 : 5)} and
{HN i (1 : 5)  . . .  HN i (5 : 5)}, respectively. Note in this case that the indexing is
reversed because higher cost shocks lead to lower optimal work-time choices.
   We first show that if l and c(·) are known, then all other labor supply parameters
can be treated as known. Recall that Assumption 2 implies the log-shock order
statistics have the following densities:

          l         l                                        4
          Ci (1:5), N i (1:5)  (1:5) (x; l ) = 5[1 - (x; l )] (x; l ),

          l         l                                                3
          Ci (2:5), N i (2:5)  (2:5) (x; l ) = 20(x; l )[1 - (x; l )] (x; l ),

          l         l                                   2             2
          Ci (3:5), N i (3:5)  (3:5) (x; l ) = 30(x; l ) [1 - (x; l )] (x; l ),                            (12)
          l         l                                   3
          Ci (4:5), N i (4:5)  (4:5) (x; l ) = 20(x; l ) [1 - (x; l )](x; l ), and

          l         l                                  4
          Ci (5:5), N i (5:5)  (5:5) (x; l ) = 5(x; l ) (x; l ).

                                                                          
From these we can define E(j :5) (l )  E [l
                                          ki (j :5); l ] =                - x(j :5) (x; l )dx       as the ex-
pectation of the   j th   log-shock order statistic, for j = 1, . . . , 5. Moreover, equation (6)
allows us to construct a model-generated analog to the supply shock for any of worker
                                                                           Wi
i's positive observed work times, being ECi (j :5)  ln                 c [HCi (j :5)]   - ln (li ) - ln (Tl ), if
                                          Wi
HCi (j:5) > 0, and EN i (j:5)  ln     c [HN i (j :5)]    - ln (li ), if HN i (j:5) > 0. For convenience,
we simply define Eki (j:5) = 0 whenever Hki (j:5) = 0, for k = C, N .
   Moreover, equation (7) implies that whether or not HCi (j :5) > 0 or HN i (j :5) > 0
                                                  Wi
is true depends solely on whether ln             c (0)      - ln (li ) < l
                                                                         ki (j :5) for k = C, N , respec-
tively. Since l            l
              Ci (j:5) and N i (j:5) are independent of li (Assumption 5), this implies



                                                        6
purely random data loss for the order statistics of log-shocks across individuals. In
other words, although the within-person samples of supply shocks are systematically
selected, the samples of order statistics for supply shocks across people are random.
Therefore, the treatment effects Tl and individual fixed effects li are uniquely pinned
down by the following set of up to 2 × 5 moment conditions for each i:
                           Wi
E(j :5) (l ) - E ln                   - ln (li ) - ln (Tl ) = 0, j = 1, . . . , 5 s.t. HCi (j:5) > 0,
                       c [HCi (j:5)]
                           Wi
E(j :5) (l ) - E ln                   - ln (li ) = 0, j = 1, . . . , 5 s.t. HN i (j:5) > 0.
                       c [HN i (j:5)]
                                                                                                                 (13)
Thus, l and Tl are known if l and c(·) are known, since fixing the latter two implies
a unique solution to the system of moment conditions (13).
    In order to close the identification argument, we show that l and c(·) uniquely
determine a set of work-hour CDFs. To see why this is true, first recall that for a
continuous random variable U with CDF GU (U ), if we construct a second random
variable H = f (U ) using a monotone decreasing function f , then the CDF of H can
be derived from the CDF of U by GH (h) = 1 - GU f -1 (h) . This fact is useful since
equation (6) indicates that optimal hours supplied Hit are monotone decreasing in
cost shocks ul
             it since c(·) is strictly convex. On any day when labor supply is positive,
                                                                       Wi
we can express the cost shock on that day as ul
                                              it =                    X1it              , or alternatively, we
                                                               li Tl       c   (Hit )
can express labor supply as a function of the shock by inverting this equation to get
Hit = (c )-1        Wi
                         X1it   . We also know that worker i will choose positive labor supply
                ul
                 it li Tl
                                                                                              Wi
only on days when her cost shock does not exceed the cutoff ul
                                                             i =                           c (0)li .     Moreover,
                                                            l , )
                                                       ln(Uit
the conditional shock CDF, given ul    l
                                  it  ui , is           ln(ul
                                                                l
                                                                     , where ln(·, l ) is the CDF of
                                                            i ,l )
the log-normal distribution.
    These facts characterize the conditional CDF of positive work times implied by a
                                                    ¨ H (h; l , c) to differentiate them
(l , c) pair. We denote these model-implied CDFs by G
from their known empirical analogs GH (h), while noting that under the true (l , c)
they are the same. On CSR and Neutral days, for each individual i laboring under
wage Wi = w1 the conditional CDFs of positive work time are given by
                                                                                    w1
                                                                       ln        li Tl c [hi ] ; l
      l
 Hi (Uit )|Wi =w1 ,X1 =1   ¨ H |S ,X (hi |S1 , X1 = 1; l , c) = 1 -
                           G                                                                             , and
                              i 1   1
                                                                               ln(ul   i , l )
                                                                                                                 (14)
                                                                               w1
                                                                       ln    li c [hi ] ; l
      l
 Hi (Uit                  ¨ H |S ,X (hi |S1 , X1 = 0; l , c) = 1 -
         )|Wi =w1 ,X1 =0  G                                                                          ,
                             i 1   1
                                                                           ln(ul i , l )

                                                   7
respectively. The right-hand sides above truncate the support of the distribution at
                     Wi
the cutoff u =    c (0)li    where the corner solution of Hit = 0 obtains. Similarly, we can
also characterize i's counterfactual conditional work-time distributions, had she been
offered wage Wi = w2 instead, as
                                                                                   w2
                                                                       ln       li Tl c [hi ] ; l
      l
 Hi (Uit )|Wi =w2 ,X1 =1   ¨ H |S ,X (hi |S2 , X1 = 1; l , c) = 1 -
                           G                                                                            , and
                              i 2   1
                                                                              ln ul   i ; l
                                                                                                                (15)
                                                                                 w2
                                                                       ln      li c [hi ] ; l
      l
 Hi (Uit                  ¨ H |S ,X (hi |S2 , X1 = 0; l , c) = 1 -
         )|Wi =w2 ,X1 =0  G                                                                         ,
                             i 2   1
                                                                             ln ul i ; l

for CSR and neutral workdays, respectively. Therefore, i's actual and counterfactual
conditional work-time CDFs can both be expressed as functions of l and c(·):

                         G¨ H |S ,X (hi |S1 , X1 = 1; l , c) + G
                                                               ¨ H |S ,X (hi |S1 , X1 = 0; l , c)
¨ H |S (hi |S1 ; l , c) =
G                            i 1   1                              i 1   1
                                                                                                   and
   i 1
                                                             2
                         G¨          (h |S , X = 1; l , c) + G ¨ H |S ,X (hi |S2 , X1 = 0; l , c)
¨ H |S (hi |S2 ; l , c) = Hi |S2 ,X1 i 2 1
G                                                                 i 2   1
                                                                                                  .
   i 2
                                                             2
                                                                                                                (16)

Finally, the aggregate conditional work-time CDFs under the model are similarly
expressable as functions of l and c(·):
                                               I   ¨
                     ¨ H |S (h|Sj ; l , c) =   i=1 GHi |Sj (h|Sj ; l , c)                                       (17)
                     G     j
                                                                            ; j = 1, 2.
                                                         I
   Recalling that the empirical distributions of positive work times GH |Sj , j = 1, 2
are known, Torgovitsky (2015, Theorem 2) and D'Haultfoeuille and F´
                                                                  evrier (2015,
Theorem 2) imply that there is a unique (l , c(·)) pair which make equation (17)
consistent with them while satisfying moment conditions (13).
A.3.3     Controlling for Sample Selection on Wage Offer

Recall from Section A.3 that we need an exclusion restriction, that known subsets
S1 and S2 exist of wage groups w1 and w2 , respectively, such that Gl|S1 (li |S1 ) =
Gl|S2 (li |S2 ) = Gl (li ), in order to identify the labor-supply model. However, since
workers are allowed to respond to their randomly assigned offer Wi  {w1 , w2 } by
applying for the position or not, it is likely that worker selection on wage offer is
present in the data-generating process. Table 2 confirms this: holding recruitment
status fixed, a shift from wage offer w1 = $11 to w2 = $15 increased the number of
applications by roughly 32%. Therefore, if we define Sj = {Hit |Hit > 0 & Wi =

                                                   8
wj }, j = 1, 2 as the set of strictly positive work times logged under wage wj , then
the distribution of cost types l that gave rise to S1 will not be the same that gave
rise to S2 . This is because the latter set is influenced by an additional margin of
workers who were unwilling to supply labor to the firm at a price of w1 but who were
willing at a price of w2 . However, since we randomly assign wage offers, and since
application rates by recruitment cells are known, a correction can be made to restore
the exclusion restriction.
      Consider a broader model of labor search where our wage offer represents one
draw from an offer distribution from which each worker may take several draws over
time by waiting longer, rather than accepting a given offer at one point in time.
Suppose each worker uses a cutoff rule, say  (li ) that is strictly increasing in the
worker's type li , such that the worker accepts a job with wage offer w if and only if
w   (li ).24 A cutoff rule implies simplistic composition effects: shifts in w induce
different truncation in the tails of the distribution of workers who accept.
      More concretely, monotonicity in the cutoff rule implies that if 1 (X0 ) is the
maximal cost type who applies under wage w1 then, holding all else fixed (including
CSR/neutral recruitment status), the maximum cost type under w2 > w1 satisfies
2 (X0 ) > 1 (X0 ). Moreover, the additional applicants entering the pool under w2 all
have cost types above 1 (X0 ), with the conditional distribution of applicants, given
  1 (X0 ) being the same as it was under w1 . Within the worker choice model,
conditional on being hired, mean within-person labor supply, E[Hit ] is also monotone
decreasing in li . Combining these two ideas implies a simple sample trimming rule.
      We first define S1 = {Hit |Hit > 0        &    Wi = w1 } as the set of all positive
work times by hired workers assigned to the low-wage group. Next, let µkj , k =
C, N, j = 1, 2, denote the fraction of all potential applicants who accepted wage offer
(Z, X0 = 1(k = C ), wj ), and let GH kj (h) denote the CDF of within-worker mean work
times across all T periods. Note that these are both known objects since they can be
 24
      Such phenomena are common in labor search models (see Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004)).




                                                9
derived from observables. With that, we can define

SN 2  Hit > 0 : i  n : Wn = w2 , X0n = 0, E [Hnt |X0n = 0, Wn = w2 ] > G-1
                                                                         N 2 (eN )                 ,
                                                                                     H

                    µN 2 - µN 1
         s.t. eN                ,    and
                       µN 1

SC 2  Hit > 0 : i  n : Wn = $15, X0n = 1, E [Hnt |X0n = 1, Wn = w2 ] > G-1
                                                                         C 2 (eC )                  ,
                                                                                      H

                    µ C 2 - µC 1
         s.t. eC                 .
                         µC 1
                                                                                                (18)
Note that these two sets exclude the additional influx of marginal, high-cost applicants
who enter the worker pool when the wage changes from w1 to w2 . This is because, for
                                           µN 2 -µN 1
the neutrally recruited group, eN =          µN 1       represents the additional fraction of high-
cost types who entered the worker pool under the high wage offer (w2 = $15), relative
to the lower wage offer (w1 = $11). Thus, we find the cutoff at the eth
                                                                     N percentile of
                          N2
the distribution of H          and trim high-wage, neutral recruits with mean labor supply
below that cutoff. We then do a similar operation for high-wage CSR recruits.
       With that completed, if we define S2 = SC 2  SN 2 , then S1 and S2 qualify as subsets
of workers which satisfy the exclusion restriction in Assumption 6. Moreover, with
that the common cost function c and shock variance l can be identified using the
arguments from Section A.3.2. Further, once the common cost function c is known,
idiosyncratic types l for all test subjects can be identified, including those who were
excluded by the trimming rule, through the system of moment conditions in (13).

A.4        GMM Estimation
Here we present the full technical details of our structural model estimator. In doing
so we lay out an extended methodology which allows for estimation of treatment
effects that are heterogeneous by worker observables. This is to demonstrate the level
of generality our framework can accommodate for researchers studying non-pecuniary
job traits in broad settings where heterogeneous treatments are more central than in
our empirical application. To fix ideas, suppose workers differ by a binary observable
characteristic, such as gender.25 We chose gender as an illustrative example partly
because it was one of few demographic variables that were easily verifiable, and partly
  25
       The interested reader is directed to Supplemental Online Appendix C where we present model
treatment effects allowing for heterogeneity by gender. There our overall results are similar, but we


                                                  10
because several existing studies on valuations for non-pecuniary job characteristics
focus on schedule flexibility, for which it is reasonable to assume that preferences may
vary by gender (e.g., single mothers may place a relatively high value on flexibility).
However, there is nothing particularly crucial about gender in a methodological sense:
a similar approach could be applied to any categorical worker observables.
      Let Fi denote a dummy variable equalling 1 if worker i is female, and 0 otherwise.
For active productivity, passive productivity, and leisure preference--the components
of the model where treatment effects enter multiplicatively--we re-define gender-
                                        Fi
dependent treatment effects as Tji  j × jf , j = p, d, l. Under this setup, for each
j = p, d, l, j represents the baseline treatment effect on males for whom Fi = 0.
For females, the treatment effect is j × jf , where the latter term in the product
is a female treatment differential. For accuracy, we analogously re-define gender-
dependent treatment effects as Tai = a + Fi af . Similarly as above, a represents the
baseline treatment effect on males, while for females it is a + af , with the latter
term being interpreted as a female treatment differential.

A.5       Productivity Estimator
If we consider two subsequent units of output qi  2 and qi - 1, we can use equation
(8) to form the log difference in time required to produce each of them:

         qi                   qi                                                             p
 ln             = - ln                   + (ln(p ) + ln(pf )Fi ) (X1qi - X1(qi -1) ) + (p
                                                                                        qi - qi -1 ). (19)
       qi -1               qi - 1

Recall that treatment status is held constant within each period t, so for the majority
of outputs produced by worker i we will have X1qi = X1(qi -1) and the second term
on the right-hand side will drop out. With that in mind, equation (19) leads to a
straightforward estimator for  :
                     I     Qi            q i
                     i=1   qi =1    ln   qi -1      ln qiqi
                                                         -1     1 X1qi = X1(qi -1) & qi  3
              ^= -
                                                                                               .     (20)
                                     I       Qi
                                     i=1     qi =1 1 X1qi =   X1(qi -1) & qi  3

find that the productivity gains (in both the active and passive senses) from work-stage treatments
are higher for male workers, who are on average less productive than their female counterparts at
baseline. One possible explanation for this is that male workers operate further from their production
possibility frontier at baseline. Productivity treatment effects are positive and statistically signif-
icant for both genders, but under treatment the gender productivity gap is no longer statistically
significant.



                                                       11
       For treatment effects, our approach is also intuitive, though notationally intense:
with our estimate ^ in hand, if we take an average of the quantity ln(q ) + ^ ln(qi )
                                                                       i

within CSR-treated days and neutral days separately for each i, then equation (8) and
Assumption 3 imply that the difference between the control mean and the treatment
mean will reflect the treatment effect. To implement this idea, we first define QCi 
  Qi                                            Qi
  qi =1 1(X1qi    = 1) and QN i                 qi =1 1(X1qi          = 0) as the number of units of output
produced on CSR-treated days and Neutral days, respectively. We also define mean
shocks to production time as
                Qi    p
                                                                                        Qi    p
                qi =1 qi 1(X1qi =1)                                                     qi =1 qi 1(X1qi =0)
                                      if QCi > 0                                                                  if QN i > 0
                                                                                
  p
  Ci 
                      QCi
                                                             and p
                                                                 Ni 
                                                                                              QN i
           0                          otherwise,                                0                                 otherwise.
                                                                                

                                                                                                                   p       p
       Whenever QN i > 0 and QCi > 0 for the same individual i, we have Y Ci - Y N i =
ln(p ) + ln(pf )Fi + p        p
                     Ci - N i , where
                    Q
                       i           ^
                    qi =1 [ln(qi )+ ln(qi )]1[X1qi =1(j =C )]
                   
                                                                               if Qji > 0
              p                       Qji
            Y ji                                                                                     j = C, N
                   0                                                           otherwise,
                   

represents mean log production times (net of learning) for i under treatment condition
j = C, N . This sets up a straightforward least squares estimator for treatment effects:
           ^p                                      I
                                                       p        p        p                                    2
              = exp          arg min                   i Y Ci - Y N i - ln(p ) - ln(pf )Fi                             ,   (21)
          ^pf
                         [ln(p ),ln(pf )]       i=1

where we use the standard inverse variance sampling weights given by26
                                      
                                                   1
                                               p       p
                                                                    if QCi > 0 & QN i > 0
                             p           var(Y Ci -Y N i )
                             i   
                                      0                          otherwise.

       Next we estimate the baseline initial production time 1 and fixed effects {pi }I
                                                                                      i=1 .
           p            ^                          ^ + ln ^pf Fi , then since E [p
If we let Zqi  ln(qi )+  ln(qi )1(qi  2) - X1qi ln p                             qi ] =

0 we have :
                                                                I       Qi     p
                                                                i=1     qi =1 Zqi
                                          ^1 = exp                    I
                                                                                                                           (22)
                                                                      i=1 Qi
and
                                                Qi      p
                                                qi =1 (Zqi   - ln(^
                                                                  1 ))
                            ^ pi = exp
                                                                               , i = 1, . . . , I.                         (23)
                                                           Qi
  26                                                                                p         p
       We use the usual pooled variance formula to calculate V ar Y Ci - Y N i in the sampling weights.


                                                             12
A.6             Accuracy Estimator
As in the case of productivity, we will construct a differencing estimator for accuracy.
In this case, however, we need to make some adjustments to cope with non-linearity
in parameters introduced by the CDF (·). We begin with a difference equation for
the treatment effects a and af . We then back out individual fixed effects ai , given
known values for treatments.
       Note that for all of i's units produced under the same task framing, the treatment
effect is constant. Let i's within-treatment empirical accuracy rate be defined as
                       Qi
                       qi =1   1[Aqi =1 & X1qi =1(j =C )]                         Qi
                                                                     if
                   
                                                                                  qi =1 1[X1qi    = 1(j = C )] > 0
                   
           a                           Qji
       Y   ji                                                                                                        j = C, N,
                   0                                                 otherwise.
                   

Whenever both QN i > 0 and QCi > 0 for the same individual i we have -1 (Pr[Aqi = 1|X1qi = 1]) =
ai + a + af Fi and -1 (Pr[Aqi = 1|X1qi = 0]) = ai . If we substitute the empirical
analogs of the left-hand sides of these equations and difference them we obtain
                                          a                                   a
                        E -1 Y Ci + BCCi - -1 Y N i - BCN i = a + af Fi ,

where the expectation is taken across individuals i and the BCji , j = C, N are known
bias correction terms (discussed below) to adjust for finite-sample variability of the
                                                a
empirical accuracy scores Y ji . Thus, accuracy treatment effects are estimable via a
simple least squares routine:
                                      I
                                                             a                                    a                              2
 [^a , ^af ] = arg min                        a
                                              i -1 Y Ci + BCCi - -1 Y N i - BCN i - a - af Fi
                      [a ,af ]       i=1

                                                                                                 ×1 (QCi > 0) & (QN i > 0)           ,

                                                                                                                             (24)
          a 's are inverse variance sampling weights given by27
where the i
                                     
                                                         1
                                                     a                a
                                                                                    if QCi > 0 & QN i > 0
                           a
                           i              var[-1 (Y Ci )--1 (Y N i )]
                                     0                                              otherwise.

  27                                                                                                           a             a
       Here we use the standard pooled variance formula to calculate V ar -1 Y Ci - -1 Y N i
                                                                                                       a
in the sampling weights. Moreover, we calculate the variance of -1 Y ji using the delta method,
the inverse function theorem, and standard properties of the sample mean for Bernoulli random
                                                                 a        a
                                 a                           Y ji (1-Y ji )
samples: V ar -1 Y ji                            1
                                                  a 2             7Qji             , j = C, N .
                                               (Y ji )


                                                                      13
                                                                ak
   As for fixed effects and selections, let rji denote the empirical mean accuracy
score for a person of gender k = f, m, hiring treatment group r = C, N , on days where
task framing treatment j = C, N is in effect. Specifically, this is defined as
         
             Qi
             qi =1   1 (Aqi =1) & (Fi =1[k=f ]) & (X0i =1[r=C ]) & (X1qi =1[j =C ])
                                                                                      if Qk
         
ak                                                                                        rji >0
rji                                           Qk
                                               rji                                                    k=f,m; r=C,N ; j =C,N ,
         0                                                                            otherwise


                        Qi
where Qk
       rji              qi =1 1   (Fi = 1[k = f ]) & (X0i = 1[r = C ]) & (X1qi = 1[j = C ]) is
the total number of units produced by person i, given his/her gender k and hiring
treatment r, under task framing treatment j . By similar logic as above, it follows
that we can estimate individual fixed effects ai for individual i with gender k and
hiring treatment r using a simple weighted average for each i = 1, . . . , I :

                                Qk            ak
                ^ ai =
                                  rCi
                                           -1 rCi + BCrCi
                                                      k
                                                          -^a - ^af 1[k = f ]
                             Qk
                              rCi + Q k
                                      rN i
                                                                                                                 (25)
                                                 Qk           ak
                                             + k rN i k    -1 rN i + BCrN
                                                                       k
                                                                          i                       .
                                              QrCi + QrN i

A.6.1       Bias Correction
A problem that remains for the above estimator is the fact that the empirical ac-
curacy rates (the Y 's and 's) above are subject to finite-sample variability, and
E -1 (Z ) = -1 (E[Z ]) for any random variable Z , due to the non-linearity in .
However, one can use the known functional form of  and the statistical properties of
sample means to correct for the bias. The empirical accuracy rates are sample means
from Bernoulli random variables, so the central limit theorem provides us with a
sampling distribution theory. Specifically, if {an }N
                                                    n=1 is a random sample of Bernoulli
                                                 N
observations with mean , then the sample mean A =n=1 an /N is (approximately)
                                                
normal with mean  and standard deviation (1 - )/ N . Using this information,
one can compute the expectation
                                                 1
                                                                           (1 - )
                          E -1 (A) =                 -1 (t; 0, 1) t; ,                 dt.
                                             0                               N

This expression allows for the researcher to implement a finite-sample bias correction
through substitutions such as -1 A + BC  E -1 A                                 in equations (24) and (25)
above.

                                                           14
A.7         A Two-Stage Labor Supply Estimator
As a dimension-reduction measure, we begin by adopting flexible but finite-dimensional
parametric forms for several objects in the model. We specify the functional form
of the cost function c(·) and the conditional work time distributions GH |S1 , GH |S2 as
B-spline functions. B-splines are convenient tools for parametric curve fitting that
combine the most attractive properties of both orthogonal polynomials and piecewise
splines. Like polynomials they are computationally convenient, being linear combina-
tions of globally defined basis functions which can be constructed to fit any continuous
curve to arbitrary precision. Similar to piecewise splines, they are much better be-
haved than global polynomials, being locally low-dimensional and facilitating shape
restrictions easily through parsimonious linear constraints on their parameters (see
Hickman et al. (2017) a brief primer on B-splines and their application to empirical
microeconomics).
       In order to define a set of B-spline basis functions, one must first specify a fixed par-
tition of the relevant (compact) empirical domain [h, h] = [mini,t (hit ), maxi,t (hit )]. The
set of points which establish cutoffs for the subintervals in the partition is referred to as
a knot vector. For the cost function, we choose a knot vector to partition the support
of work times into Kc subintervals, denoted kc = {kc1 = h < kc2 < · · · < kc,Kc +1 = h}
and for the conditional work time CDFs we choose a partition of Kh subintervals,
denoted kh = {kh1 = h < kh2 < · · · < kh,Kh +1 = h}. These in combination with
the Cox-de Boor recursion formula (see de Boor (2001)) uniquely pin down a set of
globally-defined basis functions Bjk : [h, h]  R, k = 1, . . . , Kj + 3, j = c, h, which are
twice continuously differentiable and are mathematically equivalent to cubic piece-
wise splines with continuity and differentiability conditions imposed at the knots.28
The parameterized B-spline functions themselves exist as linear combinations of their
                                            Kh +3 h h                                Kh +3 h h
respective bases: GH |S1 (h;  h
                              1)            k=1 1k B1k (h);    GH |S2 (h;  h
                                                                           2)        k=1 2k B2k (h);
                Kc +3 c c
c(h;  c )       k=1 k Bk (h).
       In order for the first two to constitute valid CDFs we need to impose a num-
ber of requisite shape restrictions such as monotonicity, boundary conditions, and
stochastic dominance, and for the last one to be a valid cost function we need to
  28
       Each cubic basis function is nonzero on at most 4 subintervals of the partition, though some
basis functions are nonzero on fewer than four. Conversely, for each subinterval in the partition there
are exactly 4 out of Kj + 3 basis functions that are nonzero and therefore wield a direct influence
over functional fit on that subinterval.


                                                  15
impose monotonicity, convexity, and a boundary condition. One of the virtues of
B-splines as a parametric form is the ease with which such information can be read-
ily incorporated into a remarkably flexible functional form. By construction, a B-
spline function is monotone if and only if its parameters are ordered monotonically.
Thus, the monotonicity conditions are equivalent to imposing the following linear
                               h  h
constraints on the parameters: jk                       k = 1, 2, ..., Kh + 2,       j = 1, 2 and
                                  j (k+1) ,
c
k      c
       (          k = 1, 2, ..., Kc + 2. Similarly, for B-spline functions with a common
         k+1) ,
knot vector (and therefore common basis functions as well), ordering of the functions
themselves is equivalent to a simple ordering of their parameters; that is, stochastic
                           h  h ,
dominance is equivalent to 2                k = 1, 2, ..., Kh + 3. Boundary conditions are
                            k 1k
also a simple matter, involving equality constraints on the first and last parameter
        h =  h = 0,  h
values: 11                    h                c
            21      1,Kh +3 = 2,Kh +3 = 1, and 1 = 0. The remaining boundary
derivative and convexity conditions are also imposed on the functional form via an
additional set of parsimonious linear constraints.
    With that, our estimator follows a two-stage process which closely tracks the
logic of the identification argument. In the first stage, we smooth the empirical
conditional work time CDFs with our B-spline forms. In the second stage, we choose
the parameters of the cost function and shock variance to minimize the distance
between our empirical CDFs with their model-generated analogs, and match the
moments of the shock order statistics.
A.7.1      Stage I Estimation
we begin Stage I by collecting all positive work time observations for contract w1
and w2 into subsamples S1 = {Hit : Hit > 0, Wi = w1 } and, shifting notation from the
previous subsection somewhat, re-define S2 = S N 2  S C 2 , where

                                                          N2             ^N 2 - µ
                                                                         µ       ^N 1
 SN2        Hit : Hit > 0, i    n : Wn = w2 , X0n = 0, H n > G-1
                                                               N2
                                                                   H        µ^N 1
                                                                                              (26)
                                                           C2            ^C 2 - µ
                                                                         µ       ^C 1
 S C2       Hit : Hit > 0, i    n : Wn = w2 , X0n =   1, H n    > G-1
                                                                    C2                    ,
                                                                   H         µ
                                                                             ^C 1

are the empirical selection-corrected samples of positive work times under wage w2 .
In the above expression, for subjects assigned to recruitment group j = C, N, and
wage offer group k = 1, 2 (henceforth, "group jk", µ
                                                   ^jk is the empirical fraction of all
                                                                                jk      T
potential applicants who chose to formally apply for the position, H i                  t=1 Hit /T
is the within-person sample mean of work times for hired workers from group jk ( for

                                             16
completeness, Hijk  0 if i was not assigned to group jk), and
                                                                jk
                                       I                    1 Hi  x
                        GH jk (x) =            I
                                      i=1      i=1 1 (X0i   = 1(j = C ) & Wi = wk )

is the empirical CDF of mean work times for group jk. For notational simplicity,
let S1 and S2 denote the sample sizes of the sets S1 = {h11 , h12 , . . . , h1S1 } and S2 =
{h21 , h22 , . . . , h2S2 }, respectively.
       Intuitively, from the perspective of stage one estimation, we view each positive
work time as if it were an independent observation of a single workday for a distinct
individual with type js = li TlX1it ul
                                     it for some i, t and contract j . We then choose the
B-spline parameters to provide a constrained, least squares, best fit to the empirical
                                             Sj
CDFs of S1 and S2 , GSj (x) =                s=1 1 (hjs    x) /Sj .29 This idea implies the following
estimator for the B-spline CDF parameters:

                                                                                                                    
 ^h
  1
                                                                 2                                                  2
          arg min              GH |S1 (h1s ;  h
                                              1 ) - GS1 (h1s )       +            GH |S2 (h2s ;  h
                                                                                                 2 ) - GS2 (h2s )
 ^h
  2
                    
                      h1s S1                                             h2s S2
                                                                                                                    

                   subject to :
                   h   h
                   jk  j (k+1) ,        k = 1, 2, ..., Kh + 2, j = 1, 2 (monotonicity )
                   h   h
                   2k  1k ,         k = 1, 2, ..., Kh + 3 (f irst - order dominance)
                   h    h
                   11 = 21 = 0, (initial conditions)                 and
                   h         h
                   1,Kh +3 = 2,Kh +3 = 1 (terminal conditions).

                                                                                                            (27)
A.7.2       Stage II Estimation
With the work time CDF parameters in hand, the second stage estimator uses this in-
formation to recover the cost function parameters  c , the labor-supply shock variance
l , the treatment parameters  l = [l , f l ] , and the worker-specific supply cost types
l = [l1 , . . . , lI ] . To do so, we construct what we refer to as a "counterfactual
estimator" which derives directly from equations (12) ­ (17) above.
       To begin, let l = [l1 , . . . , lI -q ] denote the subset of test subjects whose work-
time data survived the trimming rule in equation (26), and assume without loss of
  29
       In stage 2 of estimation, it will be necessary to evaluate the CDF of positive work times at
arbitrary domain points, which is why we smooth them using the B-splines.


                                                      17
generality that the final n test subjects in the full list did not. We denote the model-
                                                     ¨ H |S (h; l ,  c ,  l , l ), j = 1, 2,
generated analogs to the empirical work time CDFs by G     j

and we construct them through the following process:
   For each individual i = 1, . . . , I - n we can characterize the distribution of her
positive work times under wage j = 1, 2 implied by a (l ,  c ,  l , li ) quadruple on
CSR days and Neutral days as
                                                                             wj
                                                                ln     li Tl c (hi ; c ) ; l
       ¨ H |S ,X (hi |Sj , X1 = 1; l ,  ,  l , li ) = 1 -
       G                                     c
                                                                                                   , and
          i j   1
                                                                             w1
                                                                     ln      li ; l
                                                                                                           (28)
                                                                            wj
                                                                ln     li c (hi ; c ) ; l
       ¨ H |S ,X (hi |Sj , X1 = 0; l ,  c ,  l , li ) = 1 -
       G                                                                                       ,
          i j   1
                                                                            w1
                                                                     ln     li ; l


respectively. As before, ln(·; l ) denotes the CDF of the lognormal distribution of
labor-supply shocks (with location parameter µ = 0), and note that the right-hand
sides of the equations above characterize the distribution of shocks after truncating
                                wj
the support at the cutoff       li   above which the corner solution of Hit = 0 obtains. Note
also that the above expressions imply four equations for each worker i: two which
were in effect under the actual wage Wi = wk she was offered, and two counterfactual
equations which would apply if she had been offered wj = wk instead. However, since
the difference in her work times depends only on the prevailing wage, both her actual
work distribution and the counterfactual distribution can be characterized.
   Because of the fact that half of her work days are under treatment condition
X1it = 1 and the other half are under X1it = 0 (by design), we can further characterize
i's model-generated work time CDFs conditioning only on wage j = 1, 2 by

                                          ¨ H |S ,X (hi |Sj , X1 = 1; l ,  c ,  l , li )
                                          G
  ¨ H |S (hi |Sj ; l ,  c ,  l , li ) =
  G                                          i j   1
     i j
                                                                 2                                        (29)
                                             ¨
                                             GHi |Sj ,X1 (hi |Sj , X1 = 0; l ,  c ,  l , li )
                                          +                                                   , j = 1, 2.
                                                                    2
Once again, note here that we get two equations for each i; one to cover her actual
wage treatment, and another to cover the counterfactual scenario where she was
offered the other wage instead. Finally, for a given guess of the parameter values
(l ,  c ) we can compute from these equations for each Hit > 0 the aggregate model-




                                                       18
generated work time distributions:
                                                         I -q
                                                     ¨ H |S (h|S1 ; l ,  c ,  l , li )
                                                     G   i=1
                   ¨ H |S (h|S1 ; l ,  c ,  l , l ) =
                   G                                     i 1
                         1
                                                                 I                       (30)
                                                I -q ¨                      c,  ,  )
                                                     G H  |S (h |S 2 ; l
                                                                         ,     l  li
            G¨ H |S (h|S2 ; l ,  c ,  l , l ) = i=1      i 2
                                                                                       .
                   2
                                                                 I
   With that definition, the last thing we must do is define a grid of L domain points,
{hc1 , hc2 , . . . , hcL }, spanning the work time support, at which convexity of the cost
function will be enforced. This sets up the second-stage empirical objective function
where we select the relevant parameter values to satisfy the empirical analogs of the
moment conditions in equation (13) and to optimize fit between the empirical and
model-generated work-time CDFs:

       
   l
 
c                                                                                                  2
   arg min                              GH |S1 (hs |S1 ; ^h     ¨                    c
                                                          1 ) - GH |S1 (hs |S1 ; l ,  ,  l , l )
 
  l  (l ,c ,l ,l )
            3+L+Kc +3       hs S1 S2
           R++
 l
                                                                                     2
          +               GH |S2 (hs |S2 ; ^h     ¨                    c
                                            2 ) - GH |S2 (hs |S2 ; l ,  ,  l , l )
              hs S1 S2
               I     5                                                                      2
                                                   Wi
          +               E(j :5) (l ) - ln                         + ln (li ) + ln (Tl )       1 (HCi (j:5) > 0)
                                              c (HCi (j:5);  c )
              i=1 j =1
               I     5                                                           2
                                                    Wi
          +               E(j :5) (l ) - ln                         + ln (li )       1 (HN i (j:5) > 0)
                                              c (HN i (j:5);  c )
              i=1 j =1

          subject to :
          c  c
          k  (k+1) ,          k = 1, 2, ..., Kc + 2, (monotonicity )
          c (hj ;  c ) > 0,     j = 1, 2, ..., J (convexity )
          c (0;  c ) = 1 (boundary condition)
          li > 0, i = 1, . . . , I ; l > 0; lf > 0; l > 0 (positivity ).
                                                                                                           (31)
In the objective function, note that only workers who survived the trimming rule
(26) enter into the CDF fitting criterion (first two lines), whereas all workers' data
contribute to the moment conditions of shock order statistics (third and fourth lines).
   Note that implementing the estimator in equation (31) is computationally difficult,
as it requires a solver to search through a (3 + L + Kc + 3)-dimensional space for the

                                                        19
optimal parameter values. However, a mathematically equivalent approach would
involve sequentially choosing values for the shock variance l and cost function  c , and
then solving for the treatment parameters  l and fixed effects l using equations (13)
in an inner loop. This sequential approach involves a small increase in computing time
per iteration, but comes at the benefit of greater numerical stability, fewer iterations,
and less tendency to become stuck at local optima.
A.7.3    Practical Concerns
In order to complete the definition of the labor supply estimator, some discussion of
knot choice is in order. There are three B-spline functions to be estimated: the work
hour distributions GH |S1 (h;  h                h                                 c
                               1 ), GH |S2 (h;  2 ), and the cost function, c (h;  ). The
former two depend on B-spline basis functions defined by a common knot vector kh
and the latter depends on another knot vector kc . Choice of number and locations of
knots is crucial for the statistical performance of the estimator.
   We chose to locate the knots uniformly in quantile rank space, so as to evenly
spread the influence of the data across all parameters to be estimated. That is, if
the number of sub-intervals of the domain spanned by the knot vector is K , then we
                                    th
spaced the knots at the 100 × Kj
                               +1        empirical quantiles, for each j = 0, 1, 2, . . . , K + 1.
For the distributions of work hours, there are long upper tails, so we modify this basic
rule by inserting an additional knot at the midpoint between the upper two knots
chosen by the above rule.
   Once this convention is established, the only remaining choice is how many knots.
For the work time CDFs, we chose Kh = 5--i.e., knots at the empirical quartiles with
an extra knot at the midpoint of the upper quartile--and for the cost function we
chose Kc = 7 (with locations chosen similarly). This resulted in six free parameters
each in the vectors  h      h
                     1 and  2 (eight parameters total, with two boundary conditions),
and nine free parameters in the vector  c (ten parameters total, with one boundary
condition). We settled on these numbers for our empirical implementation because
adding further knots did not make any appreciable difference in the model estimates.

A.8     Type Distributions
To obtain estimates of the distributions of worker characteristics Gp , Gd , Ga , Gl the
main difficulty is that the data {pi , di , ai , li }I
                                                     i=1 are estimates derived from an
unbalanced panel, so some fixed-effect estimates are more informative than others.
                                                                 I   j
Thus, we construct weighted empirical CDFs Gj (x) =              i=1 i 1(ji    x), j = p, d, a, l

                                              20
using sample weights
                                                                T
           p   d   a        QCi + QN i                l         t=1 1(Hi t > 0)
           i = i = i        I
                                                , and i    I       T
                                                                                       .   (32)
                            j =1 QCj   + QN j              j =1    t=1 1(Hj t >   0)

   Before moving on, one caveat of the type distribution estimators is worth men-
tioning. Because they are based on a sample of stochastic observations--that is, the
available data for estimating the type distributions are estimates of worker charac-
teristics, rather than the actual values of the workers' characteristics--we effectively
have a measurement error problem that will induce attenuation bias in some esti-
mates above. The sample weights used above help to mitigate the problem by relying
most on the more precisely estimated datapoints, but it cannot solve the problem
entirely. In particular, the estimated CDFs will tend toward over-estimating vari-
ance, and mean differences (across subsamples), covariances, and correlations will be
biased toward zero in finite samples. Thus, the point estimates we derive on mean
differences and correlations from the above method can be thought of as conservative
lower bounds.

A.9      Asymptotic Theory and Inference
Our estimator falls within the class of GMM estimators, since each parameter is cho-
sen to match empirical moments from the data. For the productivity and accuracy
models, standard econometric theory establishes asymptotic normality of un-balanced
panel data estimators (see Wooldridge 2001). For the labor-supply model, two alter-
native views are possible. One can consider the B-spline CDFs and cost function
to be fixed parametric forms that will not be altered--i.e., the knot vectors and ba-
sis functions to be held fixed--as the sample size grows. Under this view, standard
asymptotic theory once again applies. Alternatively, one could think of them as
sieve estimators, meaning that as the sample size grows, the researcher will gradu-
ally add additional knots until in the limit the knot vectors will become a dense set
on the relevant domains and the B-spline functions will therefore become arbitrarily
flexible. This view complicates matters, but a recent econometric literature has es-
tablished some results on point-wise asymptotic normality of sieve functionals (e.g.,
Chen (2007) and Huang (2003)), though this requires regularity conditions that are
difficult to verify.
   The main caveat to recognize, given the unbalanced panel structure of the data, is
which dimension governs the asymptotics of a given parameter estimate. Parameter

                                                21
estimates that are common to all subjects--treatment effects,  , 1 , and c(·)--will be
                                        I             
consistent at a rate of either          i=1 Qi   or      I × T , being the length times the width
of the panel. Thus, the researcher may obtain higher precision in the corresponding
estimates simply by increasing the number of test subjects I , while holding fixed other
aspects of the research design. On the other hand, worker fixed-effect estimates--e.g.,
                                                                           
pi , ai , and li --are consistent at a rate of either              Qi or      T.
A.9.1     Bootstrap Inference
Due to the computational complexity of our estimator, we chose to compute stan-
dard errors and confidence bounds by the bootstrap method. We executed a double
bootstrap routine (due to the panel structure of our data) that mimicked our experi-
mental sampling scheme and allowed for the possibility of accuracy and productivity
shocks being correlated. Specifically, to construct each bootstrap sample, we first
partitioned test subjects into recruitment-stage treatment bins. We then re-sampled
subject identities from each bin, with replacement, to obtain a sub-sample of workers
the same size as the original bin. Then, for each sampled individual, we re-sampled
five times, with replacement, from that individual's work-time sample on CSR days;
and again five times, with replacement, from that individual's work time distribution
on neutral days to construct a panel of labor supply data. Then, for each sam-
pled i we re-sampled, with replacement, Qi times from i's empirical distribution of
(p    d
 qi , qi , Aqi )-triples to construct a sample of output data.

    We executed this re-sampling scheme for S = 100, 000 iterations, and for the sth
                                                                                            S
                                                             
bootstrap sample all model parameters G                                             
                                       pdal,s (·, ·, ·), T s , s , 1s , D0s , ls , cs (·)         were
                                                                                            s=1
estimated. We then computed standard errors and bias-corrected confidence intervals
and p-values in the usual way using our bootstrapped estimates.
A.9.2     Inference on Stochastic Dominance of Worker Characteristics
There are several papers that propose tests for stochastic dominance relationships
between two distributions. The earliest work in this vein is Kolmogorov 1933 and
Smirnov 1939, but more recent work has developed various alternatives or improve-
ments (e.g., Davidson and Duclos 2000, Barrett and Donald 2003, and Linton et al.
2010; see Heathcote et al. 2010 for a survey). For some breif intuition on how these
methods work, suppose there are two random variables X  Fx and Y  Fy defined
on a common support [z, z ], and two corresponding random samples, {xn }N
                                                                        n=1 and
                                                                          x

     Ny
{yn }n=1 . When testing for first-order stochastic dominance one must account for the

                                                  22
fact that if the null hypothesis of distributional equality Fx = Fy is rejected, then there
are three alternative possibilities: (i) Fx < Fy , (ii) Fx > Fy , and (iii)  {z, z }  (z, z )
such that Fx (z ) < Fy (z ) and Fx (z ) > Fy (z ). Thus, the KS test for dominance proceeds
by estimating the standard empirical CDFs Fx (x) and Fy (y ), and then by simultane-
ously constructing two symmetrically defined test statistics based on the vertical dif-
ferences T (i) =   Nx Ny
                   Nx +Ny
                            supz [z,z ] [Fx (z )-Fy (z )] and T (ii) =       Nx Ny
                                                                             Nx +Ny
                                                                                      supz [z,z ] [Fy (z )-Fx (z )].
These are then evaluated at their limiting distribution (due to Doob 1949) to get
p-values [p(i) , p(ii) ] = exp -2(T (i) , T (ii) )2 . Finally, for some fixed significance level
  (0, 1), if min(p(i) , p(ii) ) >  then we fail to reject equality; if max(p(i) , p(ii) ) < 
we reject equality in favor of alternative (iii); and if p(j ) <  is true for exactly one
j  {i, ii}, then we reject equality in favor of alternative (j ). Different versions of the
stochastic dominance test generally follow a similar procedure but vary by how the
test statistics and p-values are computed.
   A drawback to these methods in our context is that they all assume non-stochastic
                                                       Ny
observations; i.e., that the samples {xn }N
                                          n=1 and {yn }n=1 are direct observations from
                                            x


Fx and Fy , respectively. In our case the data are not direct observations from the
distributions of worker characteristics (p , d , a , l )  Gpdal (·, ·, ·, ·), but rather, they
are estimates of worker characteristics: {pi , di , ai , li }I
                                                             i=1 . Thus, the testing pro-
cedures above produce test statistics and p-values that would under-reject the null
hypothesis of equality. Intuitively, this is because the finite-sample variability in
worker type estimates creates a measurement error problem that attenuates differ-
ences between the estimated distributions. With that in mind, we use a bootstrapped
adaptation of the KS test for stochastic dominance that closely follows Marmer et al.
(2017).
   For the CSR vs neutral comparison, we define a grid of points in quantile rank
space by r = {r1 , r2 , . . . , rK } = {0.010, 0.011, . . . , 0.990} and j = {j 1 , . . . , jK } =
G- 1                                                                    
 j (r ), j = p, a, l. We then evaluate the bootstrapped empirical CDFs Gjs (jk |X0 = 0)
and Gjs (jk |X0 = 1) j = p, d, a, l, k = 1, . . . , K (conditional on recruitment status)
at each of the points in these grids. Similarly as in previous methods, for each
j = p, d, a, l we specify a null hypothesis of equality H0 : Gj (·|X0 = 0) = Gj (·|X0 = 1)
with three alternatives H1 : Gj (·|X0 = 0) > Gj (·|X0 = 1); H2 : Gj (·|X0 = 0) < Gj (·|X0 = 1);
and H3 : Gj (·|X0 = 0) <> Gj (·|X0 = 1). Finally, we compute a p-value for H1 by
                             S
                                   1[G                
                                      js (jk |X0 =0)-Gjs (jk |X0 =1)>0]
p1j = 1 - maxk=1,...,K
                             s=1
                                                  S                     ,   and symmetrically for H2 by



                                                       23
                                               S
                                                     1[G                
                                                        js (jk |X0 =1)-Gjs (jk |X0 =0)>0] 30
p2j = 1 - maxk=1,...,K
                                               s=1
                                                                    S                    .                  In words, the p-value for a
given alternative is one minus the maximal point-specific frequency with which the
null hypothesis is violated in favor of that alternative. For a fixed significance level
  (0, 0.5) we draw conclusions from the test by the following process:

   1. If min(p      
              1j , p2j ) >  we fail to reject H0


   2. Else, if p        
                1j < , p2j >  we reject H0 in favor of H1


   3. Else, if p        
                1j > , p2j <  we reject H0 in favor of H2


   4. Else, if max(p      
                    1j , p2j ) <  we reject H0 in favor of H3 .


A.10         Additional Tables and Figures
Figures 9 and 10 display results for estimated CDFs of passive productivity fixed
effects d . Figure 11 displays the common cost function and marginal cost function,
scaled by the median of time preference types l . Tables 9 and 10 report the results
of stochastic dominance tests. In cases where the null of equality is rejected, they
also report estimated magnitudes of the mean change in levels and as a fraction of
a standard deviation relative to the populations involved in the test. The interested
reader is directed to Supplemental Online Appendix C for a more complete picture,
where Tables 14 ­ 21 display point-specific p-values over a fine grid of quantiles.

                                          1
                         WEIGHTED CDFs




                                         0.8

                                         0.6

                                         0.4
                                                                                                            Neutral Recruited
                                         0.2
                                                                                                            CSR Recruited
                                          0
                                               0.5       1      1.5          2         2.5       3         3.5                  4

                                                                      PASSIVE PRODUCTIVITY   d

                                          1
                         WEIGHTED CDFs




                                         0.8

                                         0.6

                                         0.4
                                                                                                         Low Wage Recruited
                                         0.2
                                                                                                         High Wage Recruited
                                          0
                                               0.5       1      1.5          2         2.5       3         3.5                  4

                                                                      PASSIVE PRODUCTIVITY   d


                  Figure 9: Passive Productivity: Selection on Wage and CSR
  30
       We also bias correct our bootstrap testing procedure for each  by re-centering the boost-
                                                                                                     S
rapped sample of differences                         G                 
                                                      js ( |X0 = 1) - Gjs ( |X0 = 0)                             at the point estimate difference
                                                                                                     s=1
 Gj (|X0 = 1) - Gj (|X0 = 0) in the usual way for each   supp(j ).




                                                                                 24
         TEST              HYPOTHESIS              P-VALUE       RESULT         TEST              HYPOTHESIS               P-VALUE      RESULT

                        H0 : Gp|CSR = Gp|N tr      --         reject                           H0 : Ga|CSR = Ga|N tr      --         reject
      p Selection       H1 : Gp|CSR > Gp|N tr < 1 × 10-5     adopt           d Selection       H1 : Gd|CSR > Gd|N tr  < 1 × 10-5     reject
       on CSR           H2 : Gp|CSR < Gp|N tr   0.1561        reject          on CSR           H2 : Gd|CSR < Gd|N tr    0.0577       reject
        FOSD            H3 : Gp|CSR = Gp|N tr      --         reject           FOSD            H3 : Gd|CSR = Gd|N tr      --        adopt
                      Mean Prod. Time Change: -15.1% (26.1% St. Dev.)                         Mean Prod. Time Change: +4.0% (6.4% St. Dev.)

                        H0 : Gp|$15   = Gp|$11        --         reject                        H0 : Gd|$15   = Gd|$11         --         reject
      p Selection       H1 : Gp|$15   > Gp|$11    < 1 × 10-5     reject      d Selection       H1 : Gd|$15   > Gd|$11     < 1 × 10-5     reject
      on WAGE           H2 : Gp|$15   < Gp|$11      0.1003       reject      on WAGE           H2 : Gd|$15   < Gd|$11       0.0068       reject
        FOSD            H3 : Gp|$15   = Gp|$11        --         adopt         FOSD            H3 : Gd|$15   = Gd|$11         --        adopt
                       Mean Prod.     Time Change: -3.6% (8.7% St. Dev.)                      Mean Prod.     Time Change: +5.7% (8.5% St. Dev.)

                                                                 COMBINED EFFECTS




25
                       H0 : Gp Tp |CSR = Gp|N tr        --         reject                     H0 : Gd Td |CSR = Gd|N tr        --        reject
     p CSR Select.     H1 : Gp Tp |CSR > Gp|N tr    < 1 × 10-5    adopt     d CSR Select.     H1 : Gd Td |CSR < Gd|N tr    < 1 × 10-5    adopt
     + CSR Trtmt       H2 : Gp Tp |CSR < Gp|N tr      0.7927       reject   + CSR Trtmt       H2 : Gd Td |CSR > Gd|N tr      0.9376      reject
         FOSD          H3 : Gp Tp |CSR = Gp|N tr        --         reject       FOSD          H3 : Gd Td |CSR = Gd|N tr        --        reject
                      Mean Prod. Time Change: -38.5% (66.4% St. Dev.)                        Mean Prod. Time Change: -48.1% (76.0% St. Dev.)

                      H0 : Gp|CSR,$15 = Gp|N tr,$11     --     reject                        H0 : Gd|CSR,$15 = Gd|N tr,$11     --     reject
     p CSR Select.    H1 : Gp|CSR,$15 > Gp|N tr,$11 < 1 × 10-5 reject       d CSR Select.    H1 : Gd|CSR,$15 < Gd|N tr,$11 < 1 × 10-5 reject
     + Wage Select.   H2 : Gp|CSR,$15 < Gp|N tr,$11   0.0376   reject       + Wage Select.   H2 : Gd|CSR,$15 > Gd|N tr,$11   0.0068   reject
        FOSD          H3 : Gp|CSR,$15 = Gp|N tr,$11     --     adopt           FOSD          H3 : Gd|CSR,$15 = Gd|N tr,$11     --     adopt
                      Mean Prod. Time Change: -15.3% (54.8% St. Dev.)                        Mean Prod. Time Change: +13.3% (21.3% St. Dev.)




                              Table 9: Stochastic Dominance Tests: Passive and Active Productivity
         TEST              HYPOTHESIS            P-VALUE     RESULT         TEST             HYPOTHESIS            P-VALUE     RESULT

                       H0 : Ga|CSR = Ga|N tr       --         reject                       H0 : Gl|CSR = Gl|N tr     --          reject
      a Selection      H1 : Ga|CSR > Ga|N tr     0.0087       adopt       l Selection      H1 : Gl|CSR > Gl|N tr < 1 × 10-5      reject
       on CSR          H2 : Ga|CSR < Ga|N tr     0.1870       reject       on CSR          H2 : Gl|CSR < Gl|N tr   0.0365        reject
        FOSD           H3 : Ga|CSR = Ga|N tr       --         reject        FOSD           H3 : Gl|CSR = Gl|N tr     --         adopt
                       Mean Accuracy Change: +3.8% (16.5% St. Dev.)                       Mean Time Value Change: +2.7% (4.2% St. Dev.)

                        H0 : Ga|$15 = Ga|$11      --          reject                       H0 : Gl|$15 = Gl|$11      --         reject
      a Selection       H1 : Ga|$15 > Ga|$11    0.0035       adopt        l Selection      H1 : Gl|$15 > Gl|$11  < 1 × 10-5     adopt
      on WAGE           H2 : Ga|$15 < Ga|$11    0.2790        reject      on WAGE          H2 : Gl|$15 < Gl|$11    0.3458       reject
        FOSD            H3 : Ga|$15 = Ga|$11      --          reject        FOSD           H3 : Gl|$15 = Gl|$11      --         reject
                       Mean Accuracy Change: +13.2% (51.8% St. Dev.)                     Mean Time Value Change: +18.1% (33.8% St. Dev.)

                                                            COMBINED EFFECTS




26
                      H0 : Ga +Ta |CSR = Ga|N tr   --         reject                      H0 : Gl Tl |CSR = Gl|N tr     --       reject
     a CSR Select.    H1 : Ga +Ta |CSR > Ga|N tr 0.0087       adopt     l CSR Select.     H1 : Gl Tl |CSR < Gl|N tr < 1 × 10-5   reject
     + CSR Trtmt      H2 : Ga +Ta |CSR < Ga|N tr 0.1481       reject    + CSR Trtmt       H2 : Gl Tl |CSR > Gl|N tr   0.0677     reject
        FOSD          H3 : Ga +Ta |CSR = Ga|N tr   --         reject       FOSD           H3 : Gl Tl |CSR = Gl|N tr     --      adopt
                       Mean Accuracy Change: +2.8% (12.2% St. Dev.)                       Mean Time Value Change: +4.6% (7.2% St. Dev.)

                      H0 : Ga|CSR,$15 = Ga|N tr,$11     --     reject                    H0 : Gl|CSR,$15 = Gl|N tr,$11     --     reject
     a CSR Select.    H1 : Ga|CSR,$15 > Ga|N tr,$11 < 1 × 10-5 adopt    l CSR Select.    H1 : Gl|CSR,$15 < Gl|N tr,$11 < 1 × 10-5 adopt
     + Wage Select.   H2 : Ga|CSR,$15 < Ga|N tr,$11   0.3911   reject   + Wage Select.   H2 : Gl|CSR,$15 > Gl|N tr,$11   0.5111   reject
        FOSD          H3 : Ga|CSR,$15 = Ga|N tr,$11     --     reject      FOSD          H3 : Gl|CSR,$15 = Gl|N tr,$11     --     reject
                       Mean Accuracy Change: +20.6% (78.5% St. Dev.)                     Mean Time Value Change: +29.0% (47.0% St. Dev.)



                                Table 10: Stochastic Dominance Tests: Accuracy and Time Value
                                          1




                         WEIGHTED CDFs
                                         0.8

                                         0.6

                                         0.4
                                                                                                          Neutral Recruited
                                         0.2
                                                                                                          CSR Recruited + CSR Treatment
                                          0
                                                  0.5   1   1.5              2         2.5            3                  3.5               4

                                                                      PASSIVE PRODUCTIVITY   d

                                          1




                         WEIGHTED CDFs
                                         0.8

                                         0.6

                                         0.4
                                                                                                             Low Wage, Neutral Recruited
                                         0.2
                                                                                                             High Wage, CSR Recruited
                                          0
                                                  0.5   1   1.5              2         2.5            3                  3.5               4

                                                                      PASSIVE PRODUCTIVITY   d


             Figure 10: Passive Productivity: Combined Effects


                                          1                                                                                                    600
             WORK TIME CDFs




                                                                                                                                               500
              (for median l)




                                                                                                                                                     (for median l)
                                   0.8




                                                                                                                                                     TOTAL COSTS
                                                                                                                                               400
                                   0.6
                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                       (0.5)c(h)               300
                                   0.4                                                                           GH|w [h| l(0.5)]              200
                                                                                                                     1
                                   0.2                                                                           GH|w [h| l(0.5)]              100
                                                                                                                     2
                                          0                                                                                                  0
                                              0                   5                              10                                        15
                                                                  DAILY WORK TIMES (hours)

                                          1                                                                                                    200




                                                                                                                                                     MARGINAL COSTS
             WORK TIME CDFs
              (for median l)




                                                                                                                                                      (for median l)
                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                               150

                                   0.6

                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                     (0.5)c'(h)                100
                                   0.4                                                                           GH|w [h| l(0.5)]
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                               50
                                   0.2                                                                           GH|w [h| l(0.5)]
                                                                                                                     2
                                          0                                                                                                  0
                                              0                   5                              10                                        15
                                                                  DAILY WORK TIMES (hours)


Figure 11: Labor Supply Costs and Marginal Costs (w/90% confidence bounds)




                                                                                 27
