                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MACRO RECRUITING INTENSITY FROM MICRO DATA

                                         Simon Mongey
                                       Giovanni L. Violante

                                       Working Paper 26231
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26231


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2019, Revised January 2020




We thank Jaroslav Borovi ka, Steve Davis, David Wiczer, and many seminar participants for
useful comments. We are especially grateful to the staff of the Bureau of Labor Statistics for their
assistance throughout the project, and to Hyejin Park for outstanding research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
Bureau of Labor Statistics nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26231.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Simon Mongey and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Macro Recruiting Intensity from Micro Data
Simon Mongey and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 26231
September 2019, Revised January 2020
JEL No. E24,E32

                                          ABSTRACT

We merge QCEW and JOLTS microdata to study the recruiting intensity of firms in the cross-
section and over time. We show that vast establishment-level heterogeneity in vacancy filling
rates is entirely explained by differences in gross hiring rates. We provide theory that supports
these empirical facts and, through the lens of this theory, aggregate firm-level decisions and data
into an empirical measure of aggregate recruiting intensity (ARI).We find that procyclicality of
ARI is primarily due to cutting recruiting effort in slack labor markets. This leads us to formulate
an ARI index easily computable from publicly available macroeconomic time series. Declining
ARI in the Great Recession accounted for much of the increase in unemployment, but little of its
persistence.


Simon Mongey
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
mongey@uchicago.edu

Giovanni L. Violante
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
glv2@princeton.edu
1     Introduction

Aggregate match efficiency is a useful concept in macroeconomics. Its fluctuations expand
and contract the hiring possibility frontier of the economy in an analogous manner to the way
changes in total factor productivity shift its production possibility frontier. As such, movements
in match efficiency are crucial to understanding the volatility of the job finding rate, the chief
determinant of unemployment (Shimer, 2012).
    The Great Recession offers a striking example. At the onset of the recession, the job finding
rate fell sharply, leading to sustained unemployment. However, its decline was much more
severe than what would usually be implied by the decrease in labor market tightness--the ratio
of available jobs (vacancies) to idle workers (the unemployed)--alone. The reason is precisely
that measured productivity, or efficiency, of the matching process broke down significantly over
this period (Elsby, Michaels, and Ratner, 2015).
    A deterioration in aggregate match efficiency may in principle derive from a number of
sources. There may be a reduction in search intensity among the pool of job seekers, or a com-
positional shift in this pool toward workers with lower job finding rates. In addition, there
may be a surge in misallocation across labor markets between the job requirements of open
positions and the characteristics of job seekers. The respective role of workers' search effort
and mismatch as shifters of the aggregate matching function have been well understood and
investigated for almost three decades, as thoroughly discussed in the survey by Petrongolo and
Pissarides (2001).1
    Instead, and somewhat surprisingly, macroeconomists have not focused as much on the role
played by firms' recruiting intensity (the counterpart of workers' search effort) in labor market
fluctuations. The empirical analysis of Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2013) (henceforth
DFH) has been a game changer in this literature. DFH exploited establishment-level JOLTS
data to document a great deal of heterogeneity in recruiting intensity across firms and, in par-
ticular, a strong positive relationship between the vacancy yield (the success rate of a vacancy)

    1 Clearly,
             the Great Recession has revived both literatures. In the context of the U.S., Hornstein, Kudlyak, and
Lange (2016), Hall and Schulhofer-Wohl (2018), and Mukoyama, Patterson, and S    ¸ ahin (2018) have investigated the
jobseekers' search intensity channel. Barlevy (2011), S
                                                      ¸ ahin, Song, Topa, and Violante (2014), Herz and Van Rens
(2019), and Kothari, Saporta-Eksten, and Yu (2013) have explored the role of the mismatch hypothesis.

                                                         1
and the hiring rate in the cross section.2 Their work has spurred new interest on the topic, in
terms of both measurement from microdata (see working papers by Mueller, Kettemann, and
Zweimuller, 2018; Carrillo-Tudela, Kaas, and Gartner, 2018; Lochner, Merkl, Stuber, and Gurtz-
gen, 2019) and theoretical equilibrium modelling (Kaas and Kircher, 2015; Gavazza, Mongey,
and Violante, 2018; Leduc and Liu, 2019). Our paper contributes to this line of research.
    We use U.S. microdata on hires, employment, and vacancies, combined with minimal struc-
ture from a dynamic model of firm hiring in a frictional environment, in order to answer a
number of questions. What economic forces drive differences in observed recruiting outcomes
at the firm level? What explains the dynamics of aggregate recruiting intensity (ARI) over the
cycle? And what lessons can we draw from these regarding aggregate labor market dynamics?
    To answer these questions our paper systematically addresses heterogeneity in hiring be-
havior across firms. To take a broad view of this heterogeneity we create a new dataset that
links firm-level observations in two existing sources of firm-level microdata: the Job Openings
and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) and the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW)
microdata at the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We can therefore, for the first time, in-
corporate heterogeneity in establishment age and per-worker earnings into the analysis, along
with size and industry which are available in JOLTS. As a companion to this paper, we are plac-
ing online a repository of cross-tabulations from our new linked JOLTS-QCEW microdata that
will benefit other researchers interested in firm dynamics, job flows, and worker flows.
    Using this new data we answer our questions in four steps. First, to link micro to macro
we derive an expression for aggregate recruiting intensity from first principles, using relation-
ships in the microdata to motivate our theory. We theoretically decompose this measure of
ARI into three factors: slackness, growth, composition. The first factor summarizes the general
equilibrium response to labor market conditions that are common across firms, the second cap-
tures the economy-wide hiring rate, the third reflects heterogeneity within and across groups
of firms. Second, we show how to build each of these components from the ground up using

   2 In particular, this key empirical finding represents a rejection of the classical theoretical result in chapter 5
of Pissarides (2000) stating that if the recruiting cost per vacancy is isoelastic in effort (and independent of the
vacancy rate), then the optimal search intensity is a constant and we are back to the model without effort choice.
This `neutrality' result was taken as a benchmark reference for a long time and was, perhaps, one of the reasons
why macroeconomists appeared uninterested in studying recruiting intensity.

                                                          2
our QCEW-JOLTS microdata. These data enter the measures directly as inputs, and indirectly
through parameters that we estimate in a first stage. Third, having constructed these measures
we empirically decompose the time-series variance of ARI into its three theoretical components.
Finally, we use our decomposition results to motivate a simple empirical index that can be en-
tirely computed using publicly available data, and conduct counterfactual exercises.
   Our analysis contains three main findings. First, at the micro level, the bulk of cross-
sectional variation in the speed at which firms fill vacancies can be entirely explained by het-
erogeneity in firm-level hiring rates, even after controlling for firm age, establishment wage,
size and industry information, which are available from our merged QCEW-JOLTS data. This
stark regularity significantly extends--through the addition of controls--the initial observation
of DFH that in the cross-section of establishment gross hiring rates, firms with higher gross hiring
rates tend to have higher vacancy yields.3 We conclude that at the firm level the hiring rate
is, quantitatively, a `sufficient statistic' for the vacancy filling rate. This empirical regularity is
important. We show in Proposition 1 that, joint with firm optimality, it puts tight restrictions on
functional forms in a theory in which firms choose cost-minimizing combinations of recruiting
inputs.
   Second, at the macro level, we combine our microdata and theory to aggregate our micro-
founded recruiting intensity decisions up to the macro level. Decomposing our aggregate mea-
sure of recruiting intensity reveals that its procyclicality is chiefly due to firms optimally cutting
back on recruiting effort when labor markets are slack and plenty of job seekers are available.
This dominant general equilibrium feedback motivates the construction of a proxy-index that
explains the bulk of time-series variation in ARI and is easily computable from publicly avail-
able data. Proposition 2 shows that a representative firm choosing aggregate vacancies and re-
cruiting effort will in equilibrium yield a measure of recruiting intensity identical to our index.
We show that this index is conceptually different from that proposed by DFH: their approach
imputes an estimated cross-sectional elasticity to a macro elasticity and so abstracts from gen-
eral equilibrium.
   Third, in order to guide future research on the dynamics of unemployment around the Great


   3 See   their Figure IX, which our Figure 1 extends from their 2001-2006 sample to 2001-2018.

                                                          3
Recession, we conduct a simple counterfactual experiment. We illustrate that the sharp fall in
our empirical measure of the recruiting intensity of hiring firms can account for much of the
decline in the job finding rate in the aftermath of the Great Recession, but little of its slow
recovery. In other words, the high duration of unemployment which lingered well after the
end of the recession appears to have other culprits.


Outline.       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical framework for our
empirics. Section 3 describes JOLTS and QCEW microdata and our empirical approach. Section
4 presents our main empirical results. Section 5 returns to the model to interpret our results
through an index of ARI and conduct counterfactuals. Section 6 concludes. An online appendix
contains additional figures and tables (Appendix A), mathematical derivations (Appendix B),
and additional details on data construction and treatment (Appendix C).



2     Theory

We derive our empirical model of recruiting intensity from a dynamic decision problem of a
firm hiring in a frictional labor market. We first specify the partial equilibrium microeconomic
environment, and then close this in order to study the aggregate labor market.


2.1     Microeconomic environment

Consider a firm i in period t that has nit employees at its disposal, productivity zit and fixed
idiosyncratic match efficiency i . Flow profits of the firm it consist of its value added net of
operating costs f (zit , nit ) minus wage payments wit , and the costs associated with recruiting.
    A firm recruits workers by spending resources on two inputs: vacancies vit and recruiting
intensity eit . In order to be consistent with microdata, our notion of a vacancy in this paper hues
to the tight definition of a vacancy used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). In the JOLTS
a vacancy is an "open position ready to be staffed in 30 days, for which the establishment is actively
recruiting externally".4 We allow costs per vacancy to depend on employment nit , the number

    4 See   Bureau of Labor Statistics, Handbook of Methods, Chapter 18 - Job Openings and Labor Turnover Sur-

                                                        4
of open positions vit , and on recruiting intensity eit : Ci (eit , vit , nit ). Recruiting intensity includes
expenditures on all other variable inputs such as advertising, screening, recruiting events, etc.5
More recruiting intensity increases the effectiveness of a vacancy, such that firm hires are a
                                            =  e v and the aggregate meeting rate of effective
product of the firm's effective vacancies vit i it it

vacancies Q                                  6
           t , which the firm takes as given. For now we defer closing the model which will

require specifying Qt as a function of individual firm decisions and the composition of workers

searching for jobs, in a way that is consistent with the firm level hiring technology.
    The firm's problem is as follows. Let st be the history of firm-level and aggregate shocks
until date t, Mi st the subjective discount rate associated with history st , and it st the rate
of exogenous job destruction. The firm solves the following dynamic problem:

                                                                             

                          {eit
                                        max
                                 ( s t ),v        (st )}
                                                                               Mit              st it st   ,   subject to   (1)
                                             it             t, s t | s   0   t =0   st |s   0

           it (st ) = f zit st , nit (st ) - wit st nit (st ) - Ci eit (st ), vit (st ), nit (st ) vit (st )

      nit+1 (st+1 ) =       1 - it+1 (st+1 ) nit (st ) + hit (st )

            hit (st ) = Q     t           t         t
                         t ( s ) i eit ( s ) vit ( s ).



The first equality is the definition of profits, the second is the law of motion for employment,
and the third is the firm-level hiring technology.


Separability.      Naturally, the problem separates into two stages: (1) controlling the dynamics
of employment through hiring, which delivers the state-contingent policy {hit (st )}t,st , (2) mini-
mizing at every st the recruiting costs associated with hit (st ). Intuitively, since (i) the recruiting
inputs are variable and (ii) costs are sunk after hiring a worker, the choice of inputs is irrele-
vant for future hiring decisions. Therefore, given a path for hires hit (st ), the firm solves a static
recruiting cost-minimization problem at each node st .

vey, for detailed definition of responses. A copy of the short form filled in by hiring managers is available at
https://www.bls.gov/jlt/jltc1.pdf
    5 The survey data collected in O'Leonard, Krider, and Erickson (2015) show that these expenditures are sizable

and vary by type of firm.
    6 Note that this implies that the hiring technology is constant returns to scale in vacancies. We provide evidence

of this later.

                                                                                            5
                                                 A. Vacancy rate (v/n)                                                             B. Vacancy yield (h/v)
                                4                                                                                  4
                                        Whole sample: 2002-2018 .28377628                                                  Whole sample: 2002-2018 .70212775
                                        Great recession: 2008-2009 .25119843                                               Great recession: 2008-2009 .73967962




                                                                                         Log vacancy yield (h/v)
       Log vacancy rate (v/n)




                                3                                                                                  3



                                2                                                                                  2



                                1                                                                                  1



                                0                                                                                  0
                                    0           1              2      3          4                                     0           1          2          3        4
                                               Log gross hires rate (h/n)                                                         Log gross hires rate (h/n)

                   Figure 1: Vacancy rate and vacancy yield by gross hiring rate - JOLTS 2002-2018
Notes Establishment-month observations in JOLTS microdata 2002-2018 (blue circles), or 2008-2009 (red crosses)
are pooled in bins, where bins are determined by net monthly growth rate, and have a width of 1 percent. Growth
rates computed as in DFH. Within bins b, total hires hb , total vacancies vb , total employment nb are computed.
From these, the gross hiring rate hb /nb , vacancy yield hb /vb and vacancy rate vb /(vb + nb ) are computed. Bins
with positive gross hiring rates are kept. Points plotted are logs of these variables, differenced about the bin
representing a one percent net growth rate.


Recruiting problem. Since the aggregate state and history only enters the recruiting problem
through Q     t             t                         
         t ( s ) and hit ( s ), it is redundant once Qt and hit are taken as given by the firm at the

recruiting stage. The problem of a firm with employment nit and target hires hit is therefore


                                                    min Ci eit , vit , nit vit           s.t.                               hit = Qt i eit vit .                      (2)
                                                    eit ,vit


In specifying the cost function we ensure that the model is consistent with the empirical obser-
vation that, in the microdata, the vacancy yield of firms (hit /vit ) is approximately log-linear in
the gross hiring rate of the firm (hit /nit ). First documented by DFH in JOLTS microdata from
2002 to 2006, we update this relationship and show it to be robust through and after the Great
Recession in Figure 1. Our first theoretical contribution is to show that this relationship places
tight and precise restrictions on Ci .




                                                                                     6
Proposition 1.       If and only if (i) the per-vacancy cost function Ci is of the following form:

                                                                                  vit
                             Ci (eit , vit , nit ) = xi Gc       Ge (eit ) + Gv         ,                      (3)
                                                                                  nit

where the functions Gc , Ge and Gv are all isoelastic (constant elasticity), then (ii) firm optimality implies
that the firm's job-filling rate f it = (hit /vit ) and vacancy rate (vit /nit ) are log-linear in the hiring rate
(hit /nit ).

Proof. See Appendix B.

    The if component of Proposition 1 could be viewed as an exercise in structural reverse engi-
neering: it reassuringly demonstrates that there exists a cost function that delivers the empirical
relationship we observe in the data. The more substantive contribution of Proposition 1 is the
only if component, which requires a more involved proof stating that the empirics places a
very strong restriction on the theory. The only if part provides a family of functions for future
work.7
    We make three points regarding cost functions implied by Proposition 1. First, individual
level firm heterogeneity is restricted to entering through the multiplicative shifter xi . Second,
the requirement that the cost function depends on the vacancy rate tells us that in the data, firms
find it more costly to add a given number of positions v in a small firm than in a larger firm (e.g.,
in terms of reorganization of production). Third, hiring inputs are complements in production:
raising recruiting intensity makes each vacancy more productive. Through the cost function
the data also reveals to us that they complements in costs. That is, any further microfoundation
of behavior will require models in which increasing vacancies must increases the marginal cost
of allocating more resources to recruiting intensity.
    In order to adhere to the data, in what follows we consider only the class of functions Ci that
satisfy this property. We let the three constant elasticities of the functions Gc (·), Ge (·) and Gv (·)
be given by c , e and v , respectively.

    7 Inthe only two existing equilibrium macroeconomic models of recruiting intensity, Gavazza, Mongey, and
Violante (2018) assume a cost function that is a special case of this class and Leduc and Liu (2019) assume a
functional form for recruiting costs that is not included in this class. Proposition 1 should provide some guidance
to future literature that models firms' hiring effort decisions.

                                                             7
Optimal recruiting intensity.        In Appendix B we show that minimization under (3) subject
to the hiring constraint yields the following optimal policy for recruiting intensity which we
express in logs

                                   v              v             v                  hit
            log eit = Const. -         log Qt -       log i +       log                    .       (4)
                                 e + v          e + v         e + v                nit

The constant includes the elasticity c and other parameters.
   To interpret the optimal policy it is useful to think of the firm's hiring technology in (2)
as a production function that produces a hiring rate (hit /nit ), with inputs of the vacancy rate
(vit /nit ) and recruiting intensity (eit ) and productivity term ( Qt i ). The firm's recruiting in-

tensity depends positively on its hiring rate: more output requires more inputs. These inputs
are more productive when the rate at which effective vacancies produce hires due to market-
wide productivity in matching ( Qt ) or idiosyncratic productivity in matching ( i ), are high,

requiring less inputs. In equilibrium Qt encodes the mass of idle workers Ut , the intensity of

worker search which below we denote At , the vacancies of competitors Vt and their recruiting
intensity decisions. Hence firms' recruiting decisions depend, in general equilibrium, on the re-
cruiting decisions of their competitors. Below we show that these recruiting choices are strategic
complements.
   How is the shape of the policy function determined by the elasticities v and e ? When v
is large relative to e increasing marginal costs of vacancies set in quickly. This leads the firm
to adjust more on the recruiting intensity margin in response to an increase in the demand for
inputs due to an increase in output ( hit /nit ). Similarly, when productivity falls ( Qt i ), the

firm raises the recruiting intensity margin more the larger is v relative to e . The functional
form for the hiring technology implies that optimal recruiting intensity respond symmetrically
to either shift, which is reflected in equal but oppositely signed coefficients in (4).


Vacancy yield. Using the firm's hiring technology we can use (4) to determine the optimal
vacancy yield which, unlike eit , is observable in JOLTS microdata:

                  hit                  e              e             v                hit
          log           = Const. +         log Qt +       log i +       log                    .   (5)
                  vit                e + v          e + v         e + v              nit

                                                  8
              (a) Optimal recruiting choice                      (b) Observable outcomes

                             Figure 2: Micro of recruiting intensity decisions
Notes: Panels (a) and (b) describe the unobserved recruiting choice and observed recruiting outcomes of
a firm. Panel (a) plots isoquants of the hiring production technology in logs (blue), and the isocosts also
in logs (red). Keeping Q     t i fixed, an increase in production  ( hit / nit ) requires an increase in the level of
inputs: eit and vit /nit . The parameter  captures the elasticity of substitution in the average vacancy cost
function C and so determines the slope of the expansion path in logs. Panel (b) shows the observable
implications for the relationship between vacancy yield and hiring rate. On the x-axis, the hiring rate,
which is our comparative static variable, is increasing. On the y-axis, the log vacancy yield--which is
equal to log eit + log Q   t + log i --increases linearly (with slope 1) as log eit increases linearly.



    Figure 2(a)-(b) provide a graphical characterization of the cost-minimizing recruiting choice
in terms of unobserved intensity and observed vacancy yield, and how these respond to
changes in the firm's desired hiring rate. Figure 3(a) shows how an increase in the hiring rate
is equivalent to shifting out isoquants of the hiring technology in log vacancy-rate / recruiting
intensity space. The firm then chooses the combination of hiring inputs that place it on its low-
est isocost curve subject to the technology, where the composite parameter  = v /(e + v )
determines the gradient of the isocost curves. Under a cost function that satisfies Proposition
1, an increase in hit /nit leads to a log-linear expansion path of the vacancy-rate and recruiting
intensity, with the slope of this path determined by . Figure 2(b) shows how this maps into
the log-linear relationship between the hiring rate and vacancy yield that we observe in the
microdata in Figure 1.




                                                         9
2.2   Macroeconomic environment

We construct our empirical measure of ARI in two steps. First, we aggregate establishment
level recruiting decisions into our measure of ARI. Second, since establishment level recruiting
decisions depend on the meeting rate Qt which itself depends on aggregate recruiting intensity

we solve a general equilibrium fixed point, showing that this remains tractable.
   In order to aggregate establishment level recruiting decisions we specify an aggregate
matching function that is consistent with the firm level hiring constraint (hit = Qt i eit vit ) :

                                                        ^                                    K
                   Ht =         1- 
                          Vt  St      ,    Vt       =        i eit vit di       ,    
                                                                                    St =     akt Skt ,       (6)
                                                                                            k =1

                                                ´
This delivers consistency in that Ht =              hit di = Q                            
                                                              t Vt . In this expression Vt is the mass of
                                                                  is determined by the time-varying
effective vacancies. The mass of effective worker search effort St
                                                                               K . Let type k = 1
search intensity akt of the K different searcher types, and their masses {Skt }k =1
denote unemployed workers. We normalize the search intensity of the unemployed to 1 such
that in (6) we have a1t S1t = Ut where Ut is the measure of unemployed workers. If we then
                                              1-                         1- 
multiply and divide the matching function by Ut   we obtain Ht = At Vt  Ut   , where At is
aggregate worker search intensity:
                                                                      1- 
                                                        K
                                                    S
                                          At =  akt kt                      .                                (7)
                                               k =1
                                                    Ut

The term in the square bracket reflects the composition of the pool of job seekers and can be
estimated from type-k worker flow data. In what follows, however, we show how to estimate
At as a residual from aggregate data.
                                                1- 
   The empirical matching function Ht = At Vt  Ut   contains unobserved effective vacan-
cies, but can be expressed in terms of JOLTS vacancies, unemployment and aggregate recruiting
intensity t , which we define:
                                                                                    ^
                                                                 Vt    
                                                                                             v        
                    Ht =            1- 
                           t At Vt Ut       ,       t =                     =           i eit it di      .   (8)
                                                                 Vt                          Vt

However, this is only a partial equilibrium definition since the establishment-level choice of eit



                                                            10
itself depends on t through the slackness of the labor market Qt.



General equilibrium.        To solve for t in general equilibrium, first let t = (Vt /Ut ) denote mea-
sured market tightness. The matching function implies the aggregate meeting rate Qt depends

on {t , At , t }:

                                                                - (1-  )
                                          Ht              Vt                      - 1- 
                                                                                               - (1-  )
                    Q (t , At , t ) =        = At                          = t       
                                                                                          At t                 (9)
                                          Vt              Ut
                                                                                          : = Q ( A t , t )


where we define the measured meeting rate Q( At , t ) := Q (1, At , t ) which we use extensively
below.
   We measure aggregate recruiting intensity in general equilibrium by substituting the mi-
croeconomic optimal policy (4) into the macroeconomic aggregate (8):

                    ^                                                   
                                          -   1-    hit        vit                           v
           t =          Q (t , At , t )       i                    di         ,     :=            (0, 1).     (10)
                                                    nit        Vt                          e + v

Along with (9), this describes a mapping  = (, Q( At , t )), for which general equilibrium
ARI is the fixed point. A key property of this mapping is that recruiting intensity decisions
across firms are strategic complements:  given by (10), is such that  > 0. But despite this, the
solution is stable since  < 1.
   Intuitively the reason for stability is as follows. An increase in  tightens the labor mar-
                                                                        1- 
ket. This decreases the meeting rate Q with elasticity                        (equation 9). Firms respond to this
decline in effective meeting rates by increasing recruiting intensity with elasticity  (equation
4). When aggregated, this microeconomic response increases  with elasticity  (equation 8).
On net, therefore, a one percent increase in  increases  by (1 - )  (0, 1) percent. Since
(1 - ) < 1, this recursive system is stable, and features a multiplier of 1/(1 - (1 - )). If 
is large, as we will find it is in the data, then these general equilibrium effects can also be large.
   A key byproduct of this result is the general equilibrium multiplier associated with a change
in the effective meeting rate Qt . The partial equilibrium direct effect of an increase in Qt on t
                                                                                            

is -. This is measured directly through the firm level policy function as the product of the



                                                          11
                        Figure 3: Macro of recruiting intensity decisions
Notes: This figure describes the general equilibrium of the model. Given  on the x-axis, the angled
lines plot the equilibrium response  = (, Q ). An increase in Q          
                                                                   t > Qt shifts this function down,
leading to a greater than one-for-one decrease in t < t .


effect of Qt on eit (-) times the effect of eit on t (). To get to the general equilibrium indirect
effect we apply the multiplier and conclude that a one percent increase in Qt decreases t by

-/(1 - (1 - )) < -.
   Figure 3(c) illustrates this argument graphically for an increase in Q      
                                                                         t to Qt and the resulting

decline in t .


Theoretical decomposition of ARI. We obtain our main decomposition by consolidating (10).
First, we substitute our expression for the meeting rate (9) and collect t terms. Second, we
write the firm hiring rate in deviations from the aggregate hiring rate. Third, we extract from
the integral terms that do not depend on i. We obtain the following expression for ARI which
includes the general equilibrium multiplier:

                                                            ^                                     
                             - 1-         Ht   1-  (1-  )
                                                                1-    hit /nit       vit      1-  (1-  )
           t = Q( At , t )       (1-  )                         i                        di                .   (11)
                                          Nt                          Ht / Nt        Vt
                       Slack t             Growtht                        Compt


   The first term is the slackness component. The labor market slackens in response to increasing
worker search effort or a compositional shift toward higher search intensity types, both encoded


                                                       12
in residual match efficiency At . It also slackens due to changes in the ratio of vacancies to un-
employed workers in the economy, which is encoded in measured market tightness t = (Vt /Ut ).
When the labor market slackens, a firm's desired hires can be attained with less costly inputs:
recruiting intensity and vacancies. The elasticity at which firms cut-back on eit relative to vit
is . Therefore, the closer is  to one (i.e., the smaller e is relative to v ) the stronger is the
response of t to changes in labor market tightness.
   The second term is the growth component. When a firm grows it requires more recruiting
intensity to realize hires. The common hiring rate of firms in the economy therefore effects
aggregate recruiting intensity. Symmetric exponents on the two components stem from the
hiring technology:

                                                             vit        1       1      hit
                 hit = Qt i eit vit        =           eit         =                         .
                                                             nit        Qt      i      nit

The response of eit is the same in magnitude, but opposite in sign, following an increase in input
productivity ( Qt ), or a increase in input demand ( hit / nit ).

   The final term is the composition factor which reflects the contribution of firm heterogeneity.
This term increases when the distribution of vacancies shifts toward (i) firms that are highly
efficient in recruiting, i.e. that have high i 's, and (ii) firms that hire a lot relative to the aggre-
gate. By construction, absent heterogeneity, if hiring firms are identical then t exactly equals
(Slack t × Growtht ).


Implementation and At .         Equation (11) can be used exactly to answer our question: what
drives aggregate recruiting intensity over the business cycle, and what are the roles of micro
decisions and macro propogation. Our approach is to implement (11) empirically by construct-
ing each term entirely from microdata.8
   In doing so we face the issue that At is not observed. Even though we observe Ht , Nt and t
from aggregate data and { hit , nit , vit } from JOLTS microdata, we cannot fully construct t from
(11) because we do not observe At . Rather than try to construct At from worker search data and

   8 This exercise is therefore distinct from the simulations in Gavazza, Mongey, and Violante (2018), where ARI
was inferred within the model and what was studied was an impulse response function of ARI to a financial shock.

                                                      13
(7), which we do not seek to model here, we approach this in a model-consistent way by using
an additional equation from the model. We note that the matching function itself provides an
additional equation in observables { Ht , Vt } and the same two unknowns {t , At } as (11):

                                                            1- 
                                              Ht = t At Vt Ut                                                  (12)


Our empirical implementation therefore proceeds in three steps. First, we estimate i and 
using the firm's first order condition (5). Second, we combine these estimates with a choice of
 and microdata {hit , nit , vit }, to construct Compt . Third, we use Compt along with aggregate
data { Ht , Nt , Vt , Ut } to simultaneously solve for t and At from equations (11) and (12).9



3     Data, identification, and estimation

Data.     Our primary data sources are the restricted-use BLS microdata underlying JOLTS and
the QCEW. JOLTS data are monthly establishment level responses of hiring managers with re-
spect to employment on the twelfth of the month, hires over the calendar month, and open
positions (vacancies) at the end of the month.10 Apart from a permanent sample of firms that
have remained in the JOLTS since inception, most establishments are present in the survey for
12 months, giving a short panel dimension. Our sample runs from 2002 to 2018. We drop 2001
due to reliability of JOLTS data in the year in which the initial panels of the survey were being
rolled in.11
    QCEW data are obtained through the UI system and provide month-end payroll and em-
ployment observations for the universe of establishments.12 From the QCEW we compute es-

    9 Specifically,equation (12) can be written ( Ht /Vt ) = t Qt , and equation (11) can be written t =
 -µ                 µ/
Qt ( Ht / Nt )µ Compt     where µ = /(1 - (1 - )). These can be solved for t and Qt . We then use
Qt = At (Vt /Ut )-(1-)    to back out At . The data requirements for this inversion are the hiring rate ( Ht / Nt ),
vacancy yield ( Ht /Vt ) and market tightness (Vt /Ut ), as well as Compt which we construct from microdata.
   10 Since only some or one of a firm's establishments may be surveyed in a given month, one cannot construct

firm level measures for multi-establishment firms.
   11 In Appendix A, from the JOLTS micro data, we plot the classic `hockey stick' figures for hiring rate, separa-

tion rate, vacancy yield, vacancy fill rate, and vacancy flow as a function of the establishment growth rate. The
estimated patterns conform with those previously documented in the literature for different time periods.
   12 We check monthly employment in the QCEW against the establishment reported employment in the JOLTS

and find them to have a correlation coefficient close to one.

                                                        14
tablishment wage as payroll divided by employment. We obtain establishment age using a BLS
produced measure of entry into QCEW sample. The data are merged using BLS identifiers. To
the best of our knowledge, few previous papers have used the JOLTS microdata, and this is the
first to combine them with the QCEW to construct age and average wage for JOLTS establish-
ments.13


Summary statistics. The decomposition (11) shows that, theoretically through Compt , hetero-
geneity can play an important role in shaping ARI. Figure 4 motivates careful measurement of
Compt by depicting the vast heterogeneity in hiring in the cross-section. There is systematic
heterogeneity across industries, ages, sizes and wages in recruiting outcomes of firms. The va-
cancy rate and gross hiring rates (panels A, B, C, D) and the number of hires relative to open
vacancies (panels E, F, G, H), all vary systematically.14 This evidence rejects the standard ran-
dom matching model where all firms face the same vacancy filling rates. Our model interprets
these differences as systematically different recruiting intensities, and aggregates them into the
Compt term.


Specification.      Using data at the month t, establishment i level, we would ideally estimate the
following specification, which is the empirical counterpart of (5):

                                         hit                          hit
                                  log          = t +  i +  log               +  ijt .                            (13)
                                         vit                          nit

The time effect t absorbs other unobserved aggregates beyond Qt , so we do not use it to infer

Qt in our construction of (10). Instead, as we have shown, we construct Q ( At , t ) directly.

However we do use estimates of fixed effects  i to infer recruiting efficiencies i , and  to infer
. With a choice of , and microdata on {hit , nit } we can then construct all terms in Compt (11).




   13 Examples    of previous articles to use the JOLTS microdata are Faberman and Nagypal (2008), Davis, Faber-
man, Haltiwanger, and Rucker (2010), Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2012), Faberman (2014), DFH, Elsby,
Michaels, and Ratner (2018).
   14 The daily filling rate in these last four panels is computed from the daily recruiting model of DFH. Details and

closed forms are found in Appendix B.

                                                         15
                      A. Industry                                         B. Age                                              C. Size                                     D. Wage
8.0                                                  10.0                                               40.0                                            15.0
                               Hiring rate                                   Hiring rate                                          Hiring rate                                    Hiring rate
                               Separation rate                               Separation rate                                      Separation rate                                Separation rate
6.0                            Vacancy rate           8.0                    Vacancy rate               30.0                      Vacancy rate                                   Vacancy rate
                                                                                                                                                        10.0

4.0                                                   6.0                                               20.0

                                                                                                                                                         5.0
2.0                                                   4.0                                               10.0



0.0                                                   2.0                                                0.0                                             0.0
      0              5            10            15          0        10            20          30              1       2     3     4       5       6           7     8       9          10        11
               Ind. sorted by hiring rate                       Mean age in age quantile                           Log mean emp. in emp. quantile              Log mean wage in wage quantile


                         E. Industry                                      F. Age                                              G. Size                                     H. Wage
0.08                                                 0.10                                               0.50                                            0.15
                               Daily filling rate                             Daily filling rate                                   Daily filling rate                            Daily filling rate

                                                                                                        0.40

0.06                                                 0.08                                                                                               0.10
                                                                                                        0.30


                                                     0.06                                               0.20
0.04                                                                                                                                                    0.05

                                                                                                        0.10

                                                     0.04
0.02                                                                                                    0.00                                            0.00
          0          5             10           15          0        10            20          30              1       2     3     4       5       6           7     8       9          10        11
               Ind. sorted by hiring rate                       Mean age in age quantile                           Log mean emp. in emp. quantile              Log mean wage in wage quantile



                                            Figure 4: Summary statistics of heterogeneity in recruiting
      Notes: Consider a point in panel B, for example. Establishment-month observations are first categorized by 15
      quantiles of firm age. When constructing quantiles we pool all data from 2002-2018. Within an age quantile, we
      then pool across time and compute total hires, vacancies, employment, separations. We use these to construct the
      hiring rate, separation rate and vacancy rate. For Panel A, establishments are categorized into industries according
      to groupings of NAICS codes defined in Table C1, we then sort industries by hiring rate to construct the x-axis.
      In Panel C, they are categorized into size-groups measured as total employment. In panel D, they are categorized
      by average firm-wage computed as total payroll divided by employment. Panels E to H plot the daily filling rate
      computed from the daily recruiting model of DFH outlined in Appendix B.


      Implementation.                         First, due to short panels of only twelve months at the firm level, we es-
      timate fixed effects  for groups of firms j = 1, . . . , J . We seek to be robust to the particular
      grouping of firms used, so consider different approaches, allowing j to determine quintiles of
      either (i) age, (ii) employment, or (iii) wage, as well as (iv) 11 industry categories. Second,
      within these groups j, we aggregate firms within narrow industries. For example, one specifica-
      tion uses age quintiles for j and then within each age quintile we aggregate firms within N AICS
      4-digit industries to construct hijt , nijt and vijt . Thus, in this case, i indexes all firms of a specific
      4-digit industry within an age quantile.15 This also addresses issues of time aggregation. We

              15 When
                 constructing hijt , vijt and nijt we aggregate within ijt using the same weights that the BLS applies to
      compute published aggregates. These account for systematic biases for non-response, as well as generating a
      representative sample.

                                                                                                   16
observe hires for all firms during the month hit but some firms will hire with no vacancies vit-1 .
As noted by DFH, around 40 percent of hires in month t (hit > 0) occur in establishments with
no vacancies at the end of month t - 1 (vit-1 = 0).16
    The above strategy delivers 15 alternative approaches to estimating the following modifica-
tion of (13):
                                          hijt                            hijt
                                  log            = t +  j +  log                  +  ijt .                             (14)
                                          vijt                            nijt

    We have 4 different variables {age, size, wage, 1-digit industry} whose quintiles are used to
define the groups j. Then, within the first three groups we have 4 different levels of aggregation
at either the NAICS-{1,2,3, or 4} digit level (3 × 4 = 12) that determine how we aggregate nijt ,
hijt and vijt . For the fourth group in which we let j denote the NAICS 1-digit level industry (11 in
total), we only consider NAICS-{2,3, or 4} digit aggregation leading to 12 + 3 = 15 specifications
in total.
    We are confident in the specification of the log-linear model and constant coefficients. Recall
that Figure 1 showed (i) non-parameterically that imposing a log-linear relationship is without
loss of generality, and (ii) that the relationship is stable in and out of the Great Recession.


Estimates.      Table 1 provides estimates of  =  for these 15 different specifications of (14).
From left to right, aggregating at finer industry levels within groups lowers the coefficient esti-
mate, which is suggestive of measurement error.
    Holding the level of aggregation fixed, and going from top to bottom, the estimate of  is ro-
bust to the categorization of j. The overall inter-quartile range of estimates is only 0.07. By com-
parison, DFH group firms by net employment growth, aggregate all observations within these
groups over six years, and obtain an estimate of 0.82 (cf: Figure IX). Our estimates are remark-
ably similar given that we aggregate at the far finer {month, NAICS4, employment quintile}-
level.17

   16 They pool data across time (2001-2006) within a growth rate bin in constructing their key Figure IX. Our
approach is to pool at a far finer level: for example, within an {age-quantile}-{4 digit industry code}-{month} cell.
   17 Two points regarding disclosure of our BLS microdata results. First, we cannot disclose estimates of the 
                                                                                                                           j
terms that are used to infer j coefficients, or the hijt , vijt , nijt terms constructed for the estimation of (14). Second,
allowing these terms to vary by time ( jt ) is found to have no effect on coefficient estimates in Table 1. Using
time-varying estimates to infer jt and then also using these in the decomposition (11) also has no effect on the

                                                            17
                                                                  NAICS
                                     Categories j
                                                           1      2      3      4
                                     Industry              -  0.76 0.77 0.73
                                     Age                 0.84 0.77 0.76 0.73
                                     Size                0.83 0.76 0.65 0.64
                                     Wage                0.73 0.70 0.74 0.70

                              Table 1: Recruiting intensity in the cross-section
Notes: Point estimates of the coefficient on the hiring rate from regression (13). In all cases the coefficient is statis-
tically significant at the one percent level. The estimation uses JOLTS microdata from 2002:1 to 2018:12. Rows give
the manner in which establishments are grouped in order to estimate j terms. Columns give the industry level at
which hires, vacancies and employment are aggregated within these groups.


    One may be concerned that `luck' drives these results. Given some measure of vacancies,
some firms get lucky and hire many workers, which increases both their vacancy-yield and
hiring-rate. These appear on the left and right side of (13), and would lead to a positive  while
the underlying parameter  is potentially zero. This possibility is comprehensively covered by
DFH through Monte-Carlo exercises.18 They conclude that "the luck effect accounts for one-tenth of
the observed positive relationship", which would moderate our estimates in Table 1 by 0.06 - 0.08.
In addition, based on Figure 5 which we discuss below, for `luck' to be driving the relationship
between hiring rate and vacancy yield, this luck would have to be perfectly correlated with
establishment age, size, wage, and industry.


Discussion.       Figure 5 sheds light on the robustness of these results across different categoriza-
tions of firms. For a given categorization--size, age, wage, industry--we split firms into 15
quantiles. Within each group we pool employment, hires and vacancies to compute the aver-
age hiring rate and vacancy yield.19 Remarkably, across-group differences in vacancy yields
are revealed entirely through differences in hiring rates. If there was something special about

decomposition. This is consistent with our results that common micro-responses to labor market conditions rather
than heterogeneity drive fluctuations in ARI. To accelerate disclosure from the BLS, results under time varying
( jt ) were not part of the data that we disclosed for this version of the paper. These results may be disclosed in the
future for purposes of robustness. The specification makes clear identification of  in (14):  jt pulls out the time
series of group (e.g. age-quintile) means, while  is identified using within-group-month, across-industry variation,
where this variation is at as fine as a NAICS4 level.
   18 See their page 601 and Figure VIII.
   19 Note that computing total quantile hires H =
                                                     q     itq hit , and total employment Nq = itq nit , and then
computing the hiring rate as Hq / Nq , is equivalent to computing the employment weighted hiring rate within
quantile q.

                                                           18
           A. Hiring rates and daily vacancy flow                                                                       B. Hiring rates and daily job filling rate
                                 4.00                                                                                                          0.00
                                            Age                                                     1                                                     Age
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                            Size                                                                                                          Size
   Log daily vacancy flow rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                2
                                            Wage                                            3                                                             Wage
                                                                                                                                              -1.00




                                                                                                                    Log daily filling rate
                                 3.00                                                   4
                                            Industry                                5                                                                     Industry                                  3
                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                         9 87                                                                                                              5
                                                                      10     1                                                                                                            6
                                                                    11 3 2                                                                                                              7
                                 2.00                           1312
                                                                        2
                                                                        3 1
                                                                          51
                                                                           4                                                                  -2.00                                   8 1
                                                               14 43    2
                                                                        6                                                                                                        10 9
                                                                     5
                                                                     7
                                                                     54                                                                                                        11
                                                                   8
                                                                   76                                                                                                       1312        2
                                                       15 6    1210
                                                                 11
                                                                 99                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                    543
                                                              13
                                                              10
                                                              14                                                                                                           14     6  1
                                                            7
                                                            11                                                                                                                 87 2
                                                        812
                                                           15
                                                                                                                                              -3.00                       109 7 543
                                 1.00                  13
                                                      14
                                                        1
                                                        9
                                                       11 0                                                                                                          15 116   98
                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                                                           12  6 532
                                                     15                                                                                                                 7
                                                                                                                                                                       12 13
                                                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                    148 1514
                                               12                                                                                                                  159
                                                                                                                                                             12       10
                                 0.00                                                                                                         -4.00
                                     0.00        1.00          2.00       3.00                          4.00                                      0.00         1.00          2.00       3.00                    4.00
                                                           Log hires rate                                                                                                Log hires rate


                                        C. Hiring rates and vacancy rate                                            D. Hiring rates and vacancy yield
                                 2.50                                                                                                          3.00                                                     2
                                            Age                                                                                                           Age
                                            Size                                                                                                          Size
                                                                                                    1
                                            Wage                                                                                                          Wage                                              1
                                                                                                                                               2.00
                                                                                                                          Log vacancy yield
            Log vacancy rate




                                            Industry                                                                                                      Industry
                                 2.00                                                           2                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                              54
                                                                                            3                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                       3
                                                                       2                                                                       1.00                                10 98 1
                                                                                        4                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                                                12        2
                                                                     5                                                                                                        13      1
                                                                                                                                                                                      5 3
                                                         10                     5                                                                                            14     6  4
                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                     4 87 6                                                                                                      87 2
                                 1.50                                 10 9                                                                                                  109 7 543
                                                          9 14
                                                            15 14 121143  1    1                                                                                       15 1161210
                                                                                                                                                                              11 6
                                                                                                                                                                                98 532
                                                          8 13
                                                         15     13
                                                                10
                                                                119865 21 43 2                                                                 0.00                    11
                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                          7 13
                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                   7     5                                                                                            148 1514
                                                            7 612 7 6                                                                                                159
                                                                   8                                                                                          12
                                                       15                                                                                                               10
                                                         11
                                                        14       9
                                                           12
                                                            11
                                                         13 10
                                                12
                                 1.00                                                                                                         -1.00
                                     0.00           1.00          2.00       3.00                       4.00                                       0.00           1.00        2.00       3.00                   4.00
                                                              Log hires rate                                                                                              Log hires rate


                                                               Figure 5: Recruiting intensity in the cross-section
Notes: These figures plots the log of the employment weighted hiring rate against (A) daily vacancy flow, (B) daily
filling rate (both computed from the DFH daily hiring model), (C) vacancy rate, and (D) vacancy yield (hires over
vacancies). These are computed within 15 unweighted quantiles of establishment age, size, wage (measured as
total payroll per worker), and the 12 industry groups defined in Table C1. Quintiles are marked, and industries
are sorted from highest (=1) to lowest (=12) by hiring rate. The main take-away from the markings is that low
numbers--young, small, low wage--gravitate to the North-East, and high numbers--old, large, high wage--
gravitate to the South-West.


the efficiency of young (or small, high-wage, etc.) firms in attaining higher vacancy yields, we
would expect them to deviate from the systematic relationship between hiring rate and vacancy
yield displayed in the data.




                                                                                                               19
4     Results

Given our estimates of  and j and microdata { hijt , nijt , vijt }, we can compute our measure of
aggregate recruiting intensity t from (10), and decompose it using (11). The only additional
object we require is the matching function elasticity of meetings to effective market tightness.
We set  = 0.50, a value common in the literature.


4.1     Variance decomposition

Table 2 decomposes the time-series variance of aggregate recruiting intensity using (11). We
take logs of (11), first difference to remove the constant, smooth the series using the X13-
ARIMA-SEATS filter, then compute time-series variances of each term.20 Regardless of how we
group establishments to compute j or coarseness of aggregation within groups, the dominant
component is Slack t , on average accounting for nearly 60 percent of the time-series variance of
t .21 The Growtht and Compt terms, combined, account for less than 10 percent. Unsurpris-
ingly the covariance term is positive and large, and driven mostly by the covariance between
the slackness and growth factors.
    Empirically, one key result is the small role of heterogeneity. To further understand this




    20 X13-ARIMA-SEATS is processed in the      R package `seasonal' and chooses the appropriate transformation of the
raw series. The X13-ARIMA model assumes the first difference of nonseasonal and seasonal components follow
MA(1) processes. This approach was chosen to most closely match the relationship between published (i) non-
seasonally-adjusted and (ii) seasonally adjusted BLS data for aggregate hires, unemployment, employment and
vacancies.
   21 This macro finding has a micro counterpart. There is a tradition in labor economics of designing small-

scale ad-hoc surveys to investigate recruitment methods of firms. Some papers in the literature document that
firms respond to aggregate conditions. A recent example is Forsythe and Weinstein (2018) which finds that when
campus recruiters expect the labor market to be slack, they cut recruiting intensity through on-campus career fairs,
job postings and advertising. A classic article in this literature is Malm (1954). On page 519, the author writes:
During a tightening of the labor market [...] employers react to the increasing difficulty of finding job applicants by using
more intensive (usually more expensive, both in terms of time and in cash outlay) recruiting methods.

                                                             20
              j               NAICS                  1. Aggregate recruiting intensity                                2. Composition
                                                     Slack        Growth              Comp.         Cov.         Between          Within   Cov.
              Industry                2               0.57           0.028            0.020         0.38            0.13           0.47    0.40
                                      3               0.57           0.025            0.026         0.38            0.09           0.57    0.34
                                      4               0.54           0.033            0.050         0.38            0.08           0.68    0.24
              Age                     1               0.67           0.015            0.058         0.26            0.05           0.64    0.31
                                      2               0.61           0.028            0.045         0.32            0.05           0.67    0.28
                                      3               0.61           0.030            0.042         0.32            0.03           0.78    0.19
                                      4               0.55           0.035            0.138         0.28            0.05           0.68    0.27
              Size                    1               0.72           0.018            0.017         0.24            0.02           0.84    0.14
                                      2               0.63           0.031            0.028         0.31            0.03           0.85    0.12
                                      3               0.52           0.051            0.045         0.38            0.02           0.84    0.14
                                      4               0.50           0.054            0.081         0.36            0.02           0.88    0.10
              Wage                    1               0.44           0.033            0.074         0.45            0.12           0.47    0.41
                                      2               0.47           0.042            0.050         0.44            0.11           0.58     0.31
                                      3               0.54           0.037            0.046         0.38            0.06           0.75     0.19
                                      4               0.55           0.047            0.078         0.32            0.04           0.98    -0.02
              Average                                 0.57           0.034            0.051         0.35            0.07           0.69    0.24


                                      Table 2: Decomposing aggregate recruiting intensity
Notes: This table presents the time-series variance decomposition of equation (11) (1. Aggregate recruiting inten-
sity) and (15) (2. Composition). The decomposition in each case is computed as follows. First, logs of the equation
are taken. Second, the time-series variance of each term is computed. Third, the entry in the table gives the fraction
of the time-series variance of the left-hand side variable attributable to the different right-hand side variables. The
contribution due to covariance terms are grouped together under Cov.. The different rows represent the alterna-
tive groupings used to estimate (13). For example for j ="Age" and N AICS = 3, the categorical variable used to
construct the j match efficiency terms are quintiles of establishment age. Within these quintiles firms are split into
3-digit NAICS subsectors. Within these sub-groups we then aggregate establishment-month hires, employment,
and vacancies to compute hijt , nijt , vijt which are used as inputs into the regression and for the computation of
the terms in the variance decompositions.


finding we split the composition term Compt between and within groups:

      ^                                                  
            1-           hijt /nijt          vijt    1-  (1-  )
            j                                                     =                                                                                          (15)
                         Ht / Nt             Vt
                  Composition from (11): Compt
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                            ^
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                  v
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                   1-                                   1-  (1-  )
        J
                         h jt /n jt       
                                             v jt   1-  (1-  )        J
                                                                                       hijt /nijt   
                                                                                                       vijt       j (h jt /n jt ) Vjt        
        j                                                         
                  1-                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                  di 
       j =1
                         Ht / Nt             Vt                      j =1       i j    h jt /n jt      v jt     J 1- (h jt /n jt ) v jt      
                                                                                                                j =1 j                Vt
                  Between groups j: Betweent                                                           Within groups j: Withint


where h jt , v jt and n jt are aggregates at the group- j, month-t level. The final columns of Table


                                                                                       21
2 show that in general the within group- j term dominates. That is, Compt is not driven by the
cyclical reallocation of vacancy-shares across high or low j groups, which would be captured
by Betweent . A single sector model, that captures both aggregate (Slack t , Growtht ) and firm-
level behavior (Withint ) could therefore approximate well the cyclical behavior of t .
     Figure 6 presents these results graphically. We fix a particular case in order to plot results,
choosing the case where j denotes quintiles of firm size, and within j we aggregate at the
N AICS4 level (corresponding to line 11 in Table 2). Panel A shows the slackness component
closely following t . A steep drop in the growth component also contributes to the decline in
ARI over the Great Recession. In this case, almost 100 percent of the composition term is driven
by within size-quantile, across-NAICS4 variation in recruiting intensity (panel B).22
     In summary, we find that empirically, the components of aggregate recruiting intensity that
do not reflect firm heterogeneity per se are the dominant forces that shape aggregate recruiting
intensity. This result is robust to the manner in which permanent heterogeneity in recruiting
efficiency is handled.



5      Applications

We use the above empirical results to first construct an easily computable index of ARI. We
test this index against the exact time-series for ARI that we have constructed, and show that it
corresponds to true ARI in a representative firm model. We then use this formulation to conduct
a simple counterfactual exercise to understand the role that ARI played in unemployment in the
Great Recession.


5.1     An easily computable index of ARI

We build on the results of Section 4 to produce an easy to measure, microfounded, index of
aggregate recruiting intensity which we denote t
                                               Index . Our microdata exercise has taught us

that we can capture the true empirical measure of t with only Slack t and Growtht . Abstracting
    22 FigureA3 in Appendix A plots the implied residual match efficiency At . Our estimates suggest that this
residual is countercyclical, but less volatile than ARI. This would be consistent with countercyclical worker job
search effort as documented by (Mukoyama, Patterson, and S    ¸ ahin, 2018).

                                                       22
                                                      A. Baseline                                                                           B. Composition
                                    0.20                                                                                  0.10
      Log difference from 2007:12




                                                                                           Log difference from 2007:12
                                    0.00                                                                                  0.05



                               -0.20                                                                                      0.00



                               -0.40                                                                                     -0.05



                               -0.60                                                                                     -0.10
                                       2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018                                          2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
                                                      Slack     Growth       Comp.                                                     Comp.       Between        Within


                                                   Figure 6: Decomposing aggregate recruiting intensity
Notes: Panels A and B present an example of the components of equations (11) and (15). In this case we have
grouped firms by quintiles of employment for estimating j , and within these quintiles aggregated hires, vacancies
and unemployment within 4 digit industries. Time-series are first deseasonalised using X13-ARIMA-SEATS. For
presentation only we also apply a three month centered moving average to each series.


from the composition factor in (11), we obtain

                                                                                                                                         
                                                          Index                     - 1-                                         Ht   1-  (1-  )
                                                          t        = Q ( At , t )       (1-  )                                                                              (16)
                                                                                                                                 Nt
                                                                               Slack t                                            Growtht


Since it contains At , this expression cannot be computed on publicly available data. However,
we can use the aggregate vacancy yield from the matching function to substitute out Q ( At , t ):

                                                                       Ht   Index
                                                                          = t     Q ( At , t ) .                                                                            (17)
                                                                       Vt

Substituting (17) into (16) via Q( At , t ), it is clear that Ht drops out and we are left with a con-
venient expression that depends only on the aggregate vacancy rate. This expression is indexed
by the elasticity of the matching function () and the micro-elasticity of recruiting intensity
(), and is consistent with how firm behavior (16) depends on aggregates, and how aggregates



                                                                                      23
                                  0.20
   Log difference from 2007:12



                                  0.00


                                 -0.20


                                 -0.40


                                 -0.60
                                     2002      2004    2006     2008     2010         2012        2014      2016   2018
                                                                       MV Index                 DFH Index


                                                  Figure 7: Indexes of aggregate recruiting intensity
Notes: This figure plots our estimated measure of ARI (t ), alongside our empirical index t
                                                                                          Index , and that con-

structed by DFH. Time-series are first deseasonalised using X13-ARIMA-SEATS. For presentation only, we also
apply a three month centered moving average to each series.


depend on firm behavior (17):
                                                                                       
                                                                  Index          Vt   1- 
                                                                  t     =                   .                             (18)
                                                                                 Nt

Figure 7 plots t
               Index , alongside our empirical measure  . The index closely tracks  . On
                                                       t                           t

average across our 15 specifications t
                                     Index accounts for 98 percent of the time-series variance

of t . We therefore conclude that this index delivers an excellent approximation of estimated
aggregate recruiting intensity.


Comparison.                                 We now compare our index to that computed by DFH. Their index is computed
   DFH = ( H / N )0.82 . The foundation for their index is as follows. As discussed earlier, from
as t        t   t

JOLTS microdata they estimate equation (5) and obtain a micro-elasticity of the job filling rate
to the gross hiring rate of 0.82. They then set the macro elasticity equal to this micro-elasticity.
Our measure differs. We find that the main contributing factor to the variation of job filling rates
is the response of firm recruiting choices to equilibrium aggregate market tightness, which their
transition from cross-sectional to time-series does not capture.


                                                                            24
Representative firm.    To further ground our index in theory, we show that in general equilib-
rium, a representative firm model delivers t
                                           Index as the exact measure of aggregate recruiting

intensity.
   Consider an economy populated by a unit measure of identical firms. Given initial em-
ployment nt , each firm chooses its hires for the period ht . They then choose vacancies vt and
recruiting intensity et to minimize total hiring costs. Firms are competitive in that they take the
meeting rate for effective vacancies Qt as given. For any given pair ( ht , nt ) the firm solves:



                              min C (et , vt , nt ) vt        s.t.     ht = Qt et vt .
                              e t ,v t


Under the assumptions on C in Proposition 1, and the definition  := v / (e + v ), the first
order conditions of this problem deliver the same policies for recruiting intensity we derived in
our model with heterogeneous firms:

                                                                 -                
                                                                          ht
                                         et = Const. ×    Qt                         .                         (19)
                                                                          nt

                                                                        ´1
In equilibrium, xt = Xt for all variables. Since Vt =                                                       
                                                                        0 et vt di = Et Vt , then Et = (Vt /Vt ) =
                                                                      - (1-  ) / 
1/                                            
t . As before, the matching function implies Qt =                     t           Q( At , t ). In equilibrium, these
properties and the first order condition (19) imply:

                                                                                                 
                                               
                           -              Ht                         - 1-                Ht   1-  (1-  )
                    t =   Qt                      = Q( At , t )          (1-  )                            .   (20)
                                          Nt                                             Nt

This expression contains the slackness and growth components of our general model, and cor-
responds exactly to t
                    Index . This formulation may be used by future researchers to represent

firm recruiting choices in arbitrarily rich DSGE environments with frictional labor markets.


5.2   Counterfactual

As a final exercise we seek to isolate the role of aggregate recruiting intensity for the dynamics
of the job finding rate and the unemployment rate in the Great Recession. Besides unemploy-
ment, there are three other inputs into the evolution of job finding rate: vacancies Vt , aggregate

                                                         25
recruiting intensity t , and residual match efficiency At .
   Formally, we ask the following question: Over the Great Recession, how would the job
finding rate Ft and unemployment Ut have evolved if aggregate recruiting intensity t fell, but
vacancies Vt and residual match efficiency At remained unchanged at their pre-recession level?
   To answer this question we consider the following dynamic system:


                             Ht = t At Ut Vt1-                                                               (21)

                           Ut+1 = (1 - Ft ) Ut + St        ,   where   Ft := Ht /Ut .                        (22)


First, with our series for t , and data on { Ht , Ut , Vt } we construct residual match efficiency
At from the matching function (21). We also construct a consistent series for separations St
from observed unemployment dynamics (22). Second, we construct our counterfactual series
for match efficiency and vacancies, by fixing values at their pre-recession levels: At = A2008:1
and Vt = V2008:1 for all t. Hence, the only time-varying input into hiring is t . Third, we
construct our counterfactual series for our variables of interest by starting from U2008:1 , and
                                                                                                  2018:12
using   At , Vt , t , St     along with (21) and (22) to construct counterfactual       Ft , Ut              (for
                                                                                                  t=2008:1
more details see the footnote of Figure 8).
   Figure 8 shows that the decline in the recruiting intensity of hiring firms alone accounts for a
large part of the decline in the job finding rate, and for about half the increase in unemployment
at the onset of the recession. However, as the vacancy rate recovers quickly and the labor
market starts tightening again, recruiting intensity rebounds as firms once more increase their
recruiting inputs to realize hires. Thus under our counterfactual, unemployment returns to near
its pre-recession level by 2012. In the data 2012 unemployment is still 60 percent above its pre-
recession level. We conclude that the decline in ARI is important in explaining unemployment
dynamics at the onset of the recession, but not its slow recovery
   Further proof on the role of ARI is offered by the dynamics of the aggregate vacancy yield
                  - (1-  )
Ht /Vt = t At t              . The sharp drop in ARI is key to the moderate rise of vacancy yield in
the Great Recession (by approximately 50% relative to its pre-recession level). In its absence,
the vacancy yield would display a wildly counterfactual fourfold increase relative to the data.
This finding represents a challenge for models of the last recession which claim to succeed in

                                                      26
    Figure 8: Counterfactual job finding rate and unemployment due only to the decline in t
Notes: The counterfactual series in this figure are constructed as follows. First take the aggregate matching func-
tion Ht = t At Ut Vt1- . The job finding rate is f ( At , t , Ut , Vt ) = Ht /Ut . We combine this with the empirical
law of motion Ut+1 = (1 - f ( At , t , Ut , Vt )) Ut + St . Given data on { Ht , t , Ut , Vt } we use the matching func-
tion to construct At , and the law of motion for unemployment to construct St . We then freeze non-recruiting
intensity inputs, setting At = A0 , Vt = V0 . We then use { A0 , V0 , t , St } to construct a counterfactual path
for unemployment Ut starting at U0 as in the data. That is, U1 = (1 - f ( A0 , 0 , U0 , V0 )) U0 + S0 , and then
U2 = (1 - f ( A0 , 1 , U1 , V0 ))U1 + S1 . Panel A plots f t = f ( A0 , t , Ut , V0 ). Panel B plots Ut . The red lines therefore
measure the drop in the job finding rate and the consequent rise in unemployment due only to the decrease in
aggregate recruiting intensity t , holding all other determinants of the job finding rate fixed, i.e. residual match
efficiency A0 and aggregate vacancies V0 . Note that, by construction, by feeding in also the observed series for Vt
and our estimated series for At , we would match exactly the data for both job finding rate and unemployment.


explaining unemployment dynamics with constant aggregate match efficiency and without any
role for cyclical firm recruiting intensity (e.g. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt, 2015).



6     Conclusion

We conclude by highlighting two natural directions for further research.
    First, motivated by empirical evidence (O'Leonard, Krider, and Erickson, 2015; Forsythe
and Weinstein, 2018), we emphasized expenditures on recruiting activities as the key instru-
ment firms use to modulate their search effort. Other margins, such as varying compensation
packages and screening standards, may be important too. There is currently no representa-
tive microdata for the U.S. that allows researchers to disentangle these different mechanisms,
but progress is being made for other countries, such as Austria and Germany (Mueller, Kette-


                                                              27
mann, and Zweimuller, 2018; Carrillo-Tudela, Kaas, and Gartner, 2018). This promising line
of research that digs deeper into the black box of firm-level recruiting decisions could lead to a
comprehensive model of firm recruiting which can be embedded into the canonical frameworks
used by macroeconomists to study labor market dynamics.
   Second, firms' recruiting intensity is only one of the factors that moves aggregate match
efficiency and, at the end of the day, that is what matters for the volatility of the unemploy-
ment rate. The literature linking micro to aggregate recruiting intensity, effectively initiated by
Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2013), is still in its infancy. A more established literature
has studied two other sources of match efficiency dynamics over the business cycle: variation
in worker's search effort and variation in misallocation (`mismatch') between vacant jobs and
job seekers across sectors (occupations, industries, regions) of the economy. Research on these
three factors has been, so far, disjoint. A unified framework to coherently estimate these various
forces and theoretically understand how they interact with each other--in producing amplifi-
cation and complementarities--would be another welcome advancement in the literature (see
Crump, Eusepi, Giannoni, and S
                             ¸ ahin (2019) and Leduc and Liu (2019) for first steps in this
direction).




                                                28
References
B ARLEVY, G. (2011): "Evaluating the Role of Labor Market Mismatch in Rising Unemployment," Eco-
   nomic Perspectives, 35(3).

C ARRILLO -T UDELA , C., L. K AAS , AND H. G ARTNER (2018): "Understanding Vacancy Yields: Evidence
  from German Data (Slides)," Slides, University of Essex.

C HRISTIANO , L., M. E ICHENBAUM , AND M. T RABANDT (2015): "Unemployment and Business Cycles,"
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1), 110­67.

C RUMP, R. K., S. E USEPI , M. G IANNONI , AND A. S¸ AHIN (2019): "A Unified Approach to Measuring
   u ," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

D AVIS , S. J., R. J. FABERMAN , AND J. C. H ALTIWANGER (2012): "Labor Market Flows in the Cross
  Section and Over Time," Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(1), 1­18.

       (2013): "The Establishment-Level Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 128(2), 581­622.

D AVIS , S. J., R. J. FABERMAN , J. C. H ALTIWANGER , AND I. R UCKER (2010): "Adjusted Estimates of
  Worker Flows and Job Openings in JOLTS," in Labor in the New Economy, ed. by K. G. Abraham, J. R.
  Spletzer, and M. Harper, pp. 187­216. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

E LSBY, M. W., R. M ICHAELS , AND D. R ATNER (2015): "The Beveridge Curve: A Survey," Journal of
   Economic Literature, 53(3), 571­630.

        (2018): "Vacancy Chains," Working paper, University of Edinburch.

FABERMAN , R. J. (2014): "Recruiting Intensity," IZA World of Labor, pp. 1­21.

FABERMAN , R. J., AND E. N AGYPAL (2008): "Quits, Worker Recruitment, and Firm Growth: Theory and
  Evidence," Working Paper 08-12, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

F ORSYTHE , E., AND R. W EINSTEIN (2018): "Recruiting Intensity Over the Business Cycle," Working
   Paper, University of Illinois at Uraban-Champaign.

G AVAZZA , A., S. M ONGEY, AND G. L. V IOLANTE (2018): "Aggregate Recruiting Intensity," American
  Economic Review, 108(8), 2088­127.

H ALL , R. E., AND S. S CHULHOFER -W OHL (2018): "Measuring Job-Finding Rates and Matching Effi-
  ciency with Heterogeneous Jobseekers," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(1), 1­32.

H ERZ , B., AND T. VAN R ENS (2019): "Accounting for Mismatch Unemployment," Journal of the European
  Economic Association, Forthcoming.

H ORNSTEIN , A., M. K UDLYAK , AND F. L ANGE (2016): "Estimating Matching Efficiency with Variable
  Search Effort," Working Paper 2016-24, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.




                                                   29
K AAS , L., AND P. K IRCHER (2015): "Efficient Firm Dynamics in a Frictional Labor Market," American
  Economic Review, 105(10), 3030­60.

K OTHARI , S., I. S APORTA -E KSTEN , AND E. Y U (2013): "The (Un) Importance of Geographical Mobility
  in the Great Recession," Review of Economic Dynamics, 16(3), 553­563.

L EDUC , S., AND Z. L IU (2019): "The Slow Job Recovery in a Macro Model of Search and Recruiting
   Intensity," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Forthcoming.

L OCHNER , B., C. M ERKL , H. S TUBER , AND N. G URTZGEN (2019): "A Note on Recruiting Intensity and
   Hiring Practices: Cross-Sectional and Time-Series Evidence," FAU Discussion Papers in Economics
   04/2019, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Institute for Economics.

M ALM , F. T. (1954): "Recruiting Patterns and the Functioning of Labor Markets," Industrial and Labor
  Relations Review, 7(4), 507­525.

M UELLER , A., A. K ETTEMANN , AND J. Z WEIMULLER (2018): "Vacancy Durations and Entry Wages: Evi-
  dence from Linked Vacancy-Employer-Employee Data"," Working paper, University of Texas (Austin),
  Unpublished.

M UKOYAMA , T., C. PATTERSON , AND A. S ¸ AHIN (2018): "Job Search Behavior over the Business Cycle,"
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(1), 190­215.

O'L EONARD , K., J. K RIDER , AND R. E RICKSON (2015): "Talent Acquisition Factbook 2015: Benchmarks
  and Trends of Spending, Staffing and Key Recruiting Metrics," Discussion paper, Bersin and Asso-
  ciates.

P ETRONGOLO , B., AND C. A. P ISSARIDES (2001): "Looking into the Black Box: A Survey of the Matching
   Function," Journal of Economic Literature, 39(June), 390­431.

P ISSARIDES , C. A. (2000): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

¸ AHIN , A., J. S ONG , G. T OPA , AND G. L. V IOLANTE (2014): "Mismatch Unemployment," American
S
   Economic Review, 104(11), 3529­64.

S HIMER , R. (2012): "Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment," Review of Economic Dynamics,
   15(2), 127­48.




                                                 30
                         A PPENDIX F OR O NLINE P UBLICATION

  This Appendix is organized as follows. Section A provides additional figures and tables. Sec-
  tion B provides details on math. Section C provides additional data on variable construction.




  A     Additional figures and tables

  This appendix section contains additional figures and tables referenced in the main text.

             Figure A1: Hockey stick plots - Hiring rate, separation rate, vacancy yield


            A. Hiring rate                       B. Separation rate                        C. Vacancy yield
40.0                                                                            6.0
                                       30.0

30.0
                                                                                4.0
                                       20.0
20.0

                                       10.0                                     2.0
10.0


 0.0                                    0.0                                     0.0
    -30 -20 -10 0     10     20   30       -30 -20 -10 0     10       20   30      -30 -20 -10 0      10      20   30
             Growth rate                            Growth rate                             Growth rate



  Notes Establishment-month observations in JOLTS microdata 2002-2018 are pooled in bins,
  where bins are determined by net monthly growth rate, and have a width of 1 percent. Growth
  rates computed as in DFH. Within bins b, total hires hb , separations sb , employment nb , vacan-
  cies vb are computed. From these, the gross hiring rate hb /nb (panel A), separation rate sb /nb
  (panel B), and vacancy yield hb /vb (panel C) are computed. Bins with positive gross hiring rates
  are kept.




                                                         31
                                                Figure A2: Hockey stick plots - Filling and vacancy flow


                                                A. Daily filling rate                             B. Vacancy flow rate
        0.40
                                                                                    30.00

        0.30
                                                                                    20.00
        0.20

                                                                                    10.00
        0.10


        0.00                                                                         0.00
            -30 -20 -10 0     10                                        20    30         -30 -20 -10 0 10           20    30
                     Growth rate                                                                  Growth rate


Notes: See note to Figure A1. Daily filling rate and vacancy flow rates are computed using our
simplifications of the algebra of DFH daily hiring model. See Appendix B for details.


                                         0.30
          Log difference from 2007:12




                                         0.20


                                         0.10


                                         0.00


                                        -0.10
                                             2002    2004      2006          2008    2010       2012    2014    2016     2018
                                                                                            A


                                                            Figure A3: Residual match efficiency
Notes: This Figure plots the residual match efficiency term At implied by our estimation. This time-series is first
deseasonalised using X13-ARIMA-SEATS. For presentation only we also apply a three month centered moving
average to each series.




                                                                                    32
B     Mathematical details

This section contains (1) the proof of Proposition 1 and (2) the derivation of the daily filling rate
and vacancy flow rate used in the text.


B.1    Proof of Proposition 1

We begin by working explicitly with a cost function in the form of Ci (eit , vit , nit )             =
xi C (eit , vit /nit ), and in the necessity part of the proof show that this is the only way in which v
and n can enter. Let v = (v/n) denote the vacancy rate, and h = (h/n) denote the hiring rate.
The hiring problem can be written as follows:

                                        vit
                       min xi C eit ,         vit          s.t.      hit = Qt i eit vit
                       eit ,vit         nit

which, removing it subscripts for convenience, and setting i = 1 without loss of generality, we
write as:

                            min xC (e, v) vn                  s.t.          h = Q ev               (B1)
                              e,v


Sufficiency.   We first show the following. If C is an isoelastic function m(·) of two, additive,
isoelastic functions g(e) and f (v), then the solution to (B1) delivers a vacancy yield h/v = h/v
and vacancy rate v that are log-linear in the hiring rate h.
    The first order conditions of the problem imply the following optimality condition, which
along with the hiring constraint can be solved for e Q , h and v Q , h :

                                    Ce (e, v) e = Cv (e, v) v + C (e, v) .                         (B2)

Note that since x scales the cost function, it does not appear in the optimality condition. De-
spite affecting the firms' dynamic decision that controls h, x does not affect the recruiting input
decision. If C (e, v) has the form just described:

                                       C ( e, v ) = m g ( e ) + f ( v ) ,




                                                      33
then the optimality condition (B2) can be written:

          m ( g(e)+ f (v))( g(e)+ f (v))    g (e)e                                  m ( g(e)+ f (v))( g(e)+ f (v))   f (v)v
g (e)            m( g(e)+ f (v))             g(e)
                                                        - 1 = f (v)                        m( g(e)+ f (v))            f (v)
                                                                                                                              +1

Since m, g and f are constant elasticity, this reduces to

                                       g ( e ) [ m e - 1 ] = f ( v ) [ m v + 1 ] .                                            (B3)

Given that g and f are isoelastic, the solution to (B3) is of the form v = e . Substituting this
into the hiring technology h = Q ev gives

                                                                                   h= Q ev
                                                   1
                                                - 1+            1
                                                             - 1+         1                   h       1           1
                   1+ 
                                                                                                =  - 1+  Q 1+  h 1+  .
                                                                                                            
         h = Q e              =            e=           Q            h   1+    .    =
                                                                                              v

Since h = Q ev then it is immediate that v is also isoelastic in h. Since m only appears in the
constant , it can be normalized to one (i.e. m( x ) = x) as we do in the paper without any
impact on the key properties of the recruiting policies.


Necessity.     We want to show the following. Suppose that under optimality the vacancy yield
and vacancy rate are isoelastic in the hiring rate. Then the cost function takes the following
                                                                                     v
form, where g and f are isoelastic: C (e, v, n) = g (e) + f                          n   . Given our previous result that
constant elasticity m only affects policy function constants we ignore it here. We proceed in five
steps.


Step 1.    We begin by simplifying the statement that we wish to prove. First, we show that if
the supposition is true, then v and recruiting intensity must be isoelastic with respect to each
other, i.e. have a constant elasticity relationship, as in v = e . By the supposition (h/v) is
log-linear in h. From the hiring constraint (h/v) = Q e. Therefore e is log-linear in h: e = h ,
which implies that h is an isoelastic function of e. Substituting this isoelastic function of e into
the hiring constraint for h gives
                                                         1    1
                                                   -  e  = Q  e v.

The relationship between e and v is therefore constant elasticity: v = e for some  and .



                                                               34
   Second, the supposition requires that the first order conditions hold. These give the opti-
mality condition (B2).
   Combining these two points allows us to simplify the statement that we wish to prove:

     Suppose the optimality condition Ce (e, v) e = Cv (e, v) v + C (e, v) implies that v = e ,
     for some , . Then C (e, v) = m ( g(e) + f (v)), with isoelastic m( x ), g(e) and f (v).

We construct the proof by contradiction. Under the assumption that the cost function is not
                                                        ~ that features constant elasticity leads
isoleastic, obtaining an optimal relation between e and v
to a contradiction.


Step 2. We establish a particular implication in the case that C (e, v) is not additively separable.
Taking (B2), and rearranging:

                                             Cv (e, v)     C ( e, v )
                                    e=                 v +            .                             (B4)
                                             Ce (e, v)     Ce (e, v)

In order for the supposition to hold, this must imply that e = v . If C is not additively
                                        -1
separable, then this requires that e         can be factored out of both terms on the right side of (B4),
leaving only terms involving v:

                      Cv (e, v) v             -1             C ( e, v )             -1
                                  = 1 ( v ) e          ,                = 2 ( v ) e  .
                       Ce (e, v)                             Ce (e, v)

Moreover, to obtain e = v we require that 1 (v) = 1 v and 2 (v) = 2 v , so that we can
add the terms on the right side of (B4). Imposing this condition and then dividing the above
two expressions gives
                                              Cv (e, v) v  
                                                          = 1.
                                               C ( e, v )  2
For this condition to hold, then it must be the case that C (e, v) =  g(e)v . We prove this last
step at the end of the proof in Lemma 1.




                                                     35
Step 3.     We show that if C (e, v) =  g(e)v , then there is no way for the supposition to hold.
Under this functional form the optimality condition (B2) becomes:

                                      Ce (e, v) e = Cv (e, v) v + C (e, v) ,

                                    g (e)v e =                g ( e ) v  -1 v +  g ( e ) v  .

Since v can be factored out of both sides, the optimality condition implies that e is independent
of v which violates the supposition.


Step 4. From steps 2 and 3 above we have established by contradiction that C must be addi-
tively separable for the supposition to hold. Now we show that if C is separable, then g and e
must be isoelastic for the supposition to hold. If C (e, v) = m( g(e) + f (v)), then the optimality
condition can be written

m ( g(e) + f (v))( g(e) + f (v))                        m ( g(e) + f (v))( g(e) + f (v))
                                 ge ( e ) e - g ( e ) =                                  f v (v) v - f (v) .
       m( g(e) + f (v))                                        m( g(e) + f (v))

The supposition requires that the addition of functions on both left and right sides are isoelastic
in e and v. This requires that m, g and f are themselves isoelastic.23


Step 5. Finally, note that the dependence of C (e, v, n) on v and not v and n separately can be
shown. In terms of sufficiency we have already covered this. In terms of necessity, if (v, n)
entered not as v = (v/n), then the first order conditions would produce an extra term involv-
ing n's which would violate the requirement imposed by the data of an isoelastic relationship
between v and e.

Lemma 1. If a function f ( x, y) has the property that

                                                       f x ( x, y) x
                                                                     = c,
                                                         f ( x, y)

   23 It
       is immediate that the terms involving m must both be constants, and hence m is isoelastic. The terms are
the same and if they involve both or either of v and e will not result in an isoelastic relationship between e and v.
To observe that f and g are isoelastic consider the following. We require that Fx ( x ) x - F ( x ) = ax b . The left side
can be written F ( x ) [ Fx ( x ) x / F ( x ) - 1]. Therefore we require the term in the bracket to be a constant. This will only
be the case if F ( x ) is a constant elasticity function. We then require that the term outside the bracket is isoelastic.
Therefore F ( x ) must be isoelastic.

                                                              36
where c is a constant, then f ( x, y) = h(y) x c for some function h(y).
Proof. Rearrange the above expression:

                                                  f x ( x, y)  c
                                                              = .
                                                   f ( x, y)   x

Integrating both sides and, without loss of generality, writing the constants of integration log h1 (y), and
log h2 (y):

                             log h1 (y) + log f ( x, y) = log h2 (y) + c log x.

Exponentiating delivers our the functional form we wished to establish:

                                                              h2 ( y ) c
                                             f ( x, y) =               x.
                                                              h1 ( y )
                                                              :=h(y)




Policies.    We now derive the policy functions in the text. Without loss of generality we let
C (e, v) = cm (ce ee + cv vv )m . Recalling equation (B3), the first order conditions implied
                                                                                            1
                                                                              c e m e - 1   v    e
             g ( e ) [ m e - 1 ] = f ( v ) [ m v + 1 ]                 v(e) =                   e v
                                                                              c v m v + 1
                                                                                  : =

which is of the form v(e) = e as required. Proceeding as above, (i) substituting in for v in the
hiring function hit = Q eit v(eit ), (ii) solving for eit as a function of hit and Qt , (iii) multiplying

by Qt to convert eit into the vacancy yield, (iv) taking logs:

            hit             1            e              e             v                               hit
    log            = -          log  +       log Qt +       log i +       log                               .
            vit           e + v        e + v          e + v         e + v                             nit

The vacancy rate can then be obtained from v(e):

            vit             1            e              e             e                               hit
    log            =            log  -       log Qt -       log i +       log                               .
            nit           e + v        e + v          e + v         e + v                             nit

One can observe immediately that summing the two equations delivers log(hit /nit ), which
verifies that the hiring constraint holds.




                                                         37
B.2    Daily hiring model of DFH

Here we present the model and computations that underlie the estimates of the (i) daily job
filling rate, (ii) daily vacancy flow rate referenced in the text and figures. We progress the
results of their paper to arrive at a simple set of equations that can be solved numerically.
   Define the following variables. Hires at firm i on day s of month t are hist . Vacancies at the
end of the day are vist . Let f it be the daily job filling rate, such that hist = f it vis-1t , assumed to be
constant over the month t. Let it be the daily vacancy in-flow rate and it be the daily exogenous
vacancy out-flow rate such that

                                      vist = (1 - f it ) (1 - it ) vis-1t + it .

Let there be  days in a month. We observe the following in the JOLTS microdata: (i) monthly
hires hit = s=1 hist , (ii) beginning of month vacancies vit-1 = vi0t , (iii) end of month vacancies

vit = vi t-1 .
   Our aim is to use these data and the above equations to estimate f it , it , it . Iterating on the
vacancy equation, vacancies at any day s can be written in terms of f it , it , it and vit-1 :

                                                                           s -1
                 vis-1t = [1 - f it - it + it f it ]   s -1
                                                              vit-1 + it    [1 - fit - it + it fit ] j-1 .
                                                                           j =1

Using hit = s=1 hist = s=1 f it vis-1t and this expression:
                       


                                                                             
      hit = f it vit-1      [1 - fit - it + it fit ]s-1 + fit it            ( - s) [1 - fit - it + it fit ]s-1 .   (B5)
                          s =1                                             s =1

Evaluating the vacancy equation at the end of the month, we also have
                                                                       
                      vit = [(1 - f it ) (1 - it )] vit-1 + it         [(1 - fit ) (1 - it )] j-1 .                (B6)
                                                                      j =1

Equations (B5) and (B6) are two equations in three unknowns { f it , it , it }. As in DFH we
simplify this by assuming that it is equal to the daily layoff rate  it . The daily layoff rate
is computed by taking month layoffs sit divided by employment nit and then dividing by  :
 it = (sit / nit ). Setting it =  it makes (B5) and (B6) two equations in two unknowns { f it , it }.
   We can make some progress beyond DFH by applying results in algebra for finite sums. Let

                                                               38
xit = 1 - f it - it + it f it . Plugging this in:
                                                               
                                                                         j -1
                                  
                           vit = xit vit-1 + it                xit              ,
                                                              j =1
                                                                                         
                           hit = f it                  s -1
                                                      xit      vit-1 + f it it           ( - s) xit
                                                                                                 s -1
                                                                                                        .
                                             s =1                                       s =1

Manipulating these obtains two expressions that can be computed sequentially given xit :

                                                       vit - xit v
                                                                    it-1
                                           it =                                                               (B7)
                                                           g0 ( xit )
                                                                      hit
                                           f it      =                                                        (B8)
                                                       g0 ( xit )vit-1 + it g1 ( xit )

where the functions g0 and g1 are given by

                                                     1 - x                               - g0 ( x )
                                    g0 ( x ) =                       ,     g1 ( x ) =               .
                                                     1-x                                 1-x

This implies a simple algorithm:

               (0)                                            (0)                              (0)
   1. Guess f it and use this to compute xit = (1 - it )(1 - f it ).

                                                      (0)                                               (1)
   2. Use equation (B7) to compute it , then equation (B8) to compute f it .

                       ( k +1)       (k)
    - Iterate until f it         - f it     < .

In practice this converges after a very few iterations. In the figures and text instead of plotting
it directly, we transform it into a monthly rate as a fraction of employment: it  /nit .




                                                                         39
C                               Empirical details

This section contains additional details about the data used in our estimation.


C.1                               Trends in data

                                  A. Differences between constructed and published JOLTS                                                 B. Residual after removing linear trend
                              0.10                                                                                         .04
 Log(Our series/BLS series)




                                                                                              Log(Our series/BLS series)
                              0.05                                                                                         .02




                              0.00                                                                                           0




                              -0.05                                                                                        -.02
                                                                  Aggregate employment                                                                              Aggregate employment
                                                                  Aggregate hires                                                                                   Aggregate hires
                                                                  Aggregate vacancies                                                                               Aggregate vacancies
                              -0.10                                                                                        -.04
                                   2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018                                                2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018



                                         Figure C1: Trends in our data relative to published JOLTS aggregates


                       Figure C1A compares our construction of aggregate hires, employment and vacancies to
officially published BLS data. For a given series Xt we first adjust our series for mean differences
from published series in logs. Figure C1A then plots the ratio of the log of our adjusted series to
the published series. As can be observed for all three series there is a trend in the bias, with our
series being slightly less than the published data in the early part of the sample, and slightly
larger in the latter part. This may be due to differences in compilation of published data or
imputation in either data set. To account for these differences we take a linear trend out of
both our data and the published data--both in logs--saving the residuals from the regression
using our data. We then put the trend of the published data back into our residualized data.
Figure C1B, plots the log difference between our final data and published data. There is now no
longer any trend in bias between the two series, and differences are small, everywhere less than
3 percent in magnitude. There is some cyclicality but this is small. Importantly as our main
measures in the paper consist of various ratios of Ht , Nt and Vt , we find that the difference


                                                                                         40
 NAICS categories     Industry categories from DFH
 21                   Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
 23                   Construction
 31,32,33             Manufacturing
 22, 42, 48, 49       Utilities; Wholesale Trade; Transportation and Warehousing
 44, 45               Retail Trade
 51                   Information
 52, 53               Finance and Insurance; Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
 54, 55, 56           Professional Services, Management, Administrative Services
 62                   Health Care and Social Assistance
 71, 72               Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation; Accommodation and Food Services
 81                   Accommodation and Food Services
 >90                  Government

                     Table C1: Categorization of industries used in analysis

relative to published series move in step across the three variables. Finally, and separately, we
take a linear time trend out of each of these series.


C.2    Microdata details

   · All data are at the establishment level
   · Age is defined as the number of years since the establishment first reported having more
      than one employee.
   · QCEW data are reported quarterly but contain monthly payroll and employment at the
      establishment. These were checked for consistency against the JOLTS.
   · Industry categorizations are given in Table C1. We drop Agriculture (11) and Educational
      Services (61) due to data collection issues that we were informed of by BLS staff.
   · Participation in external researcher programs using employment and wage microdata are
      at the discretion of the states, which run the unemployment insurance programs report
      data used in the QCEW. Accessibility varies from project to project. Our project was
      granted access to data from 37 states: AL, AR, AZ, CA, CT, DE, GA, HI, IA, IN, KS, MD,
      ME MN, MO, MT, NJ, NM, NV, OH, OK, SC, SD, TN, TX, UT, VA, WA, WI, and WV.
      These represent over 70 percent of the population. The 5 largest states not included are
      FL, MI, NC, NY, and PA. Throughout we restrict our sample to the states made available

                                                 41
  to us. This avoids changing samples when only using JOLTS data, versus when also using
  establishment age or wage, for which we require the QCEW.
· Wages wit are computed as total payroll divided by total employment in a given month t
  at establishment i. Nominal wages are deflated to 2016 values using the CPI. These real
  wages are then detrended using annual fixed effects, and deseasonalized using month
  fixed effects.
· All aggregation is performed using weights provided by the BLS that adjust for systematic
  bias in survey non-response rates, and generate a representative sample.
· For further details on data definitions and statistical methods see the BLS Handbook of
  Methods - Chapter 18 - Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey.




                                           42
