                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     A MACROPRUDENTIAL THEORY OF FOREIGN RESERVE ACCUMULATION

                                       Fernando Arce
                                       Julien Bengui
                                       Javier Bianchi

                                     Working Paper 26236
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26236


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




For useful comments and suggestions, we thank Manuel Amador, Tim Kehoe, Anna Lipinska,
and Nicolas Magud, as well as conference/seminar participants at the 2019 BIS-BoE-ECB-IMF
Basel Workshop, the 2019 Midwest Macro Meetings, 2019 SED, and the University of
Minnesota Trade Workshop. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Bank of Canada, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Fernando Arce, Julien Bengui, and Javier Bianchi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Macroprudential Theory of Foreign Reserve Accumulation
Fernando Arce, Julien Bengui, and Javier Bianchi
NBER Working Paper No. 26236
September 2019
JEL No. E0,F3,F31

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a theory of foreign reserves as macroprudential policy. We study an open
economy model of financial crises, in which pecuniary externalities lead to overborrowing, and
show that by accumulating international reserves, the government can achieve the constrained-
efficient allocation. The optimal reserve accumulation policy leans against the wind and
significantly reduces the exposure to financial crises. The theory is consistent with the joint
dynamics of private and official capital flows, both over time and in the cross section, and can
quantitatively account for the recent upward trend in international reserves.


Fernando Arce                                           Javier Bianchi
University of Minnesota                                 Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Minneapolis, MN 55426                                   90 Hennepin Avenue
arcex017@umn.edu                                        Minneapolis, MN 55401
                                                        and NBER
Julien Bengui                                           javieribianchi@gmail.com
Bank of Canada
International Economic Analysis Department
234 Wellington Street
Ottawa ON K1A 0G9
Canada
jbengui@bankofcanada.ca
1    Introduction
Prior to the wave of nancial globalization of the 1990s, central banks' holdings of international
reserves represented on average less than 5 percent of GDP. By 2015, this ratio had more than tripled.
   is unprecedented accumulation of reserves has been the focus of a large and growing literature.
Yet, despite much progress on both the theoretical and empirical fronts, accounting for the observed
surge in reserves and its dispersion across countries remains a challenge. In this paper, we propose
a theory of foreign reserve accumulation based on a macroprudential motive and show that it can
quantitatively account for the recent buildup of international reserves while being consistent with
salient cross-sectional pa erns.
    Our theory is motivated by a prevalent intertwined relationship between foreign reserves and
private external debt, which we document in Section 2 for a sample of middle-income countries.
First, concomitantly with the increase in foreign reserves, there has been an increase in private
external debt. In other words, in the aggregate, the rise in o cial capital out ows has coincided
with an increase in private capital in ows. Second, and turning to cross-sectional evidence, foreign
reserve growth has been particularly high in countries that have also experienced high growth of
external private debt. ird, reserve and private external debt accumulation appear to be positively
correlated over time and procyclical for most countries. Fourth, reserve holdings tend to be larger for
those economies with a more open capital account. We argue that these facts point to a hypothesis
linking international reserves to the management of private capital ows, in line with our theory.
       e environment we consider is a small open-economy model of nancial crises with ine cient
private borrowing. Domestic households face uninsurable income shocks and trade non-state con-
tingent bonds denominated in foreign currency with external creditors. Households are subject to a
credit constraint that depends on income, which links the borrowing capacity to the real exchange
rate (Mendoza, 2002). When an adverse shock hits and the economy is su ciently leveraged, house-
holds hit the credit constraint and become unable to smooth consumption. Households' deleveraging
then leads to a further tightening of the borrowing constraint through a feedback loop between the
real exchange rate and the borrowing capacity. Households fail to internalize these general equi-
librium e ects and overborrow relative to a constrained social optimum (Bianchi, 2011). Our main
theoretical contribution in this paper is to show that the constrained-e cient allocation can be im-
plemented via reserve accumulation. While the externality problem is one of overborrowing, the
optimal reserve accumulation policy leads to even larger gross private borrowing. Yet, as agents
are ultimately prevented by the borrowing constraint from fully o se ing the government's foreign
reserve accumulation, the economy's net foreign asset position improves and there is a reduction in
the vulnerability to a nancial crisis.




                                                  1
       e model yields a number of predictions consistent with the aforementioned empirical observa-
tions. First, regarding the interplay between private external debt and reserves, the model is capable
of generating both a concomitant aggregate increase in the two variables following a nancial liber-
alization episode, and a positive association between these variables in the cross-section of countries.
Second, the model predicts procyclical reserve and private external debt accumulation and a positive
correlation between in ows and out ows. is procyclicality is driven by the larger excess borrow-
ing capacity during good times. Finally, the model implies that economies whose governments resort
less to nancial regulation instruments for macroprudential purposes should accumulate more re-
serves. Conversely, the more a government uses capital controls or other measures such as capital
requirements and reserve requirements to manage the credit cycle, the less international reserves
are needed.


Literature. Our paper is related to a vast literature seeking to explain the demand for interna-
tional reserves. A rst strand of the literature emphasizes precautionary aspects and has a long tra-
dition going back to Kenen and Yudin (1965), Heller (1966), Clower and Lipsey (1968), Clark (1970),
and Kelly (1970). Using a modern approach, these precautionary theories have focused on shocks
to income or shocks to countries' access to credit markets. Durdu, Mendoza and Terrones (2009)
examine how the risk of sudden stops a ects the determination of net foreign asset positions. Ca-
ballero and Panageas (2008) and Jeanne and Ranci´   ere (2011) model reserves as insurance contracts
against the risk of sudden stops. In Bianchi, Hatchondo and Martinez (2018), reserves are modeled
as non-state-contingent assets that provide insurance against rollover risk. Bianchi and Sosa-Padilla
(2018) examine a macroeconomic stabilization channel and its interaction with a precautionary mo-
tive. Our paper shares with this line of research the broad idea that reserve accumulation is useful
in anticipation of future sudden stops.1 However, it di ers in that we model reserves as a policy
tool designed to correct an externality a ecting private borrowing decisions and systemic risk. is
distinction makes our model particularly suited to study the joint dynamics of private and o cial
capital ows.
       e idea that the motive for reserve accumulation derives from the correction of an externality
is also present in the literature on the mercantilist motive of reserves, which argues that reserve
accumulation may be a by-product of industrial policies promoting exports in the presence of growth
externalities (Rodrik, 2008; Benigno and Fornaro, 2012).2 In contrast to that literature, however, we
focus on an externality that occurs directly on nancial markets and leads to excessive systemic risk.
   1 Other related papers in this line of work include Aizenman and Lee (2007), Bacchea, Benhima and Kalantzis (2013),
Hur and Kondo (2016), and Jeanne and Sandri (2017), among others. For empirical work tackling the precautionary
motive of reserves, see Edwards (1983), Aizenman and Lee (2007), Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2010), Frankel and
Saravelos (2012), Bussiere, Cheng, Chinn and Lisack (2013), and Calvo, Izquierdo and Loo-Kung (2013).
   2 Jeanne (2012) also studies how reserve accumulation can alter the real exchange rate in an economy with a closed

capital account for the private sector.


                                                           2
    Our paper also relates to the literature that studies foreign exchange intervention in the presence
of limits to international arbitrage. Examples include Cavallino (2018), who shows how foreign ex-
change intervention can deal with dynamic terms of trade externalities and capital account shocks;
Amador, Bianchi, Bocola and Perri (2017), who show the need to accumulate reserves to implement
exchange rate policies when monetary policy faces a zero lower bound constraint; and Fanelli and
Straub (2017), who characterize optimal policies when exchange rate uctuations lead to distribu-
tional consequences. While a common theme in these papers is that international intermediaries
have limited leverage capacity, as in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015), our focus is instead on frictions
in domestic nancial markets. In addition, a key distinction of our paper is that we study the scope
for reserve accumulation due to a nancial stability motive. In this respect, our paper is related to
the arguments in Calvo (2006) and Obstfeld et al. (2010) and is complementary to Bocola and Loren-
zoni (2017), who show that reserves can enhance the credibility of lender of last resort policies by
relaxing scal constraints.
   Our paper also relates to the literature on macroprudential policy.        is literature has shown
how taxes on borrowing and capital requirements can correct pecuniary externalities that generate
excessive systemic risk (e.g., Lorenzoni, 2008; Bianchi, 2011; Bianchi and Mendoza, 2018; Jeanne and
Korinek, 2018). We complement this literature by studying the role of international reserves as a
macroprudential policy and demonstrate that the accumulation of international reserves constitutes
an alternative policy tool that can substitute for the use of nancial regulation policies.
    Our nding that private borrowing rises as a result of the policy intervention is an aspect shared
with studies arguing for the possibility of underborrowing, such as Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci
and Young (2013) and Schmi -Groh´    e and Uribe (2016). In Benigno et al. (2013), the government has
access to a richer set of tax instruments, enabling it to relax borrowing constraints ex post, which
results in more borrowing ex ante than in the laissez-faire. In Schmi -Groh´   e and Uribe (2016), the
government intervention induces more borrowing when there is a possibility of multiple equilibria
and the bad equilibrium is selected. In contrast with these studies, our model distinguishes between
private and o cial ows, and we nd that the optimal intervention entails higher gross private
borrowing but at the same time a larger net foreign asset position for the economy as a whole.
      e paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the motivating facts. Section 3 presents
the model and the main theoretical result. Section 4 contains a quantitative analysis, and Section 5
concludes.




                                                  3
2        Motivating facts: reserves, debt, and capital mobility
In this section, we present empirical evidence on international reserves and private external debt that
illustrates the intertwined relationship between these two variables. We use data for middle-income
countries from 1980 to 2015.3       e data for private external debt are from the International Debt
Statistics collected by the World Bank and measure private external debt as non-publicly guaranteed
external debt.4

        We summarize the evidence in four facts:

    FACT 1: Over the past three decades, there has been a concomitant substantial increase in private
external debt and international reserves in the aggregate. Figure 1 shows the evolution of private
external debt and reserves for the average GDP-weighted middle-income country from 1980 to 2015.5
Until 1990, both international reserves and private external debt were below 5 percent of total GDP.
By 2015, reserves and private external debt reached, respectively, 16.6 percent of GDP and 13.3
percent of GDP. It is worth noting that the sharp rise in private external debt contrasts with the
modest decline in publicly guaranteed external debt (PGD) in the countries in our sample. Over the
same time period, PGD decreased from 14.1 percent of GDP in 1980 to 13.5 percent of GDP in 2015
for the average GDP-weighted middle-income country.

    FACT 2: Foreign reserve growth has been particularly high in countries that have also experienced
high growth of external private debt. Figure 2 shows a sca er plot of the di erences between 2015
and 1980 values of the ratios of private external debt to GDP (x -axis) and reserve to GDP (y -axis) for
the sample of countries considered, with each dot representing a country. It documents a positive
correlation between growth in reserves and growth in private external debt across countries during
our sample period.6
       e cross-sectional association between international reserves and private external debt is also
apparent from panel regressions. Table 1 reports results from estimations of regressions of logged
reserves-to-GDP ratios onto logged private external debt-to-GDP ratios. In the rst two columns,
we report results of pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions, while in the last two, we report
results of regressions with time and country xed e ects. e regressions of columns 1 and 3 include
a constant, while those of columns 2 and 4 also control for the logged ratio of PGD to GDP and for
    3   e complete list of countries, based on data availability, is Argentina, Brazil, Cameroon, Colombia, Costa Rica, Do-
minican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Kenya, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, South Africa, Sri Lanka, ailand, Tunisia, and Turkey.
   4 An advantage of using data from the International Debt Statistics is that it allows us to di erentiate PGD and non-

PGD. is distinction is important, as some middle-income countries in our sample have large publicly owned companies
that issue debt internationally.
   5    is trend also holds when we look at simple averages. Figure 1 excludes China.
   6 Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2010) report a positive correlation between domestic private debt and reserves.

We document instead the association with external debt.


                                                            4
GDP growth. In all cases, the coe cient on private external debt is positive and statistically sig-
ni cant at the 1 percent con dence level, indicating a robust statistical association between private
debt and reserves.

    FACT 3: e accumulation of reserves and private external debt are correlated with each other over
time and are procyclical for most countries. During our time period of interest (1980­2015), we nd
that the accumulation of international reserves and the expansion of private debt tend to correlate
positively with each other as well as with real GDP growth across middle-income countries. Figure
3 displays correlations of real GDP growth with the growth rates of reserves and of private debt
(panel a and b, respectively), as well as between the growth rates of reserves and private debt (panel
c). Similarly to Bianchi et al. (2018), we nd that reserves growth correlates positively with output
growth for a wide majority of countries. We also nd a positive correlation between growth of
private external debt and output growth for most countries. Finally, in line with Broner, Didier,
Erce and Schmukler (2013), we nd that in ows of private debt correlate over time with out ows of
international reserves for a majority of countries.

    FACT 4: Reserve holdings tend to be larger in economies with a more open capital account. Figure
4 shows a sca er plot of the Chinn and Ito (2008) index of capital account openness and the average
ratio of reserves to GDP over the 1980­2015 time period. It shows a positive correlation between
reserves and capital account openness in cross-country data of middle-income countries, in line
with the evidence presented by Aizenman and Lee (2007) and Bussiere et al. (2013). In other words,
emerging countries that impose signi cant controls on international private ows of capital tend
to have relatively smaller ratios of reserves to GDP than countries with more liberalized capital
accounts.

    To summarize the empirical evidence that motivates our theoretical analysis, we have that in the
data (i) there has been a substantial increase in private external debt and international reserves in
the aggregate; (ii) there is a positive correlation between reserves and private external debt in the
cross-section; (iii) both reserve and private external debt accumulation tend to correlate positively
with the business cycle, and with each other; and (iv) reserve levels are higher in countries with
more open capital accounts.7 We next propose a theory that sheds light on the interplay between
private external debt and reserves. In our model, both variables are endogenous and their dynamics
are consistent with the four aforementioned facts.




   7 While   these observations indicate positive associations, they do not point prima facie to any causality in either
direction.


                                                            5
                                               25




                                               20


                  Percent of GDP
                                               15




                                               10




                                               5




                                               0
                                               1980       1985     1990           1995          2000     2005     2010     2015
                                                                                         Year



    Figure 1: Reserves and private debt in the GDP-weighted average middle-income country




                                               35                                   THA

                                               30

                                               25
                   Reserves: 2015 minus 1980




                                                                                                         PER
                                               20                           MAR
                                                                  PHL
                                                                              BRA
                                               15                GHA                       MYS
                                                                HND         MEX
                                                                                         INDCRI        ZAF               TUR
                                                                 TUN
                                                                CMR
                                               10                                                  SLV
                                                          KEN
                                                                  PAK              DOM
                                                                                     COL           GTM
                                                5
                                                                                    LKA
                                                                            ARG
                                                0           EGY
                                                                 ECU
                                                -5

                                               -10                NGA

                                               -15
                                                     -5     0           5          10            15          20    25          30




Figure 2: Private external debt to GDP and reserves to GDP: di erences between 2015 and 1980
values



                                                                                     6
                                                Table 1: Reserves-to-GDP Ratios on Private External Debt-to-GDP Ratios (in logs)

                                                                                                                                                            Reserves                Reserves                                                      Reserves         Reserves

                                                           Private External Debt                                                                            0.183***                0.176***                                                      0.0526***        0.0553***
                                                                                                                                                            (0.0237)                (0.0227)                                                      (0.0203)         (0.0207)

                                                           Publicly Guaranteed                                                                                                      -0.450***                                                                      -0.0379
                                                           External Debt                                                                                                            (0.0480)                                                                       (0.0541)

                                                           GDP Growth Rate                                                                                                          0.00254                                                                        -0.000146
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.00194)                                                                      (0.00175)


                                                           Observations             874                                                                                             874                                                           874              874
                                                           Countries                26                                                                                              26                                                            26               26
                                                           Pooled OLS/ Fixed E ects pooled                                                                                          pooled                                                        FE               FE
                                                       Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


                                                           (a) Reserves and real GDP                                                                                                                                                            (b) Private debt and real GDP
                                                 1                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dominican Republic
                                                                                              Thailand




                                                                                                                                                                                         Correlation between private debt and output
                                                                                   Dominican Republic




                                               0.8                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
     Correlation between reserves and output




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Colombia (median)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Guatemala
                                                                                      Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Egypt, Arab Rep.
                                                                                      Colombia




                                               0.6                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Nigeria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cameroon



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kenya
                                                                                    Morocco
                                                                           Egypt, Arab Rep.

                                                                           Brazil (median)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Argentina
                                                                                Cameroon




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Turkey



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Peru
                                                                             El Salvador




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tunisia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Philippines



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mexico
                                               0.4                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                            Guatemala




                                                                                Turkey




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             South Africa
                                                                             Ecuador




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Costa Rica
                                                                          Philippines

                                                                           Sri Lanka




                                                                            Nigeria

                                                                             Kenya




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pakistan
                                                                            Ghana




                                               0.2                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                         Mexico




                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sri Lanka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               El Salvador

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ecuador
                                                               Tunisia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Honduras
                                                                India
                                                                Peru
                                                         Costa Rica




                                               -0.2                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Morocco




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 India
                                                       South Africa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ghana

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Brazil
                                                         Malaysia
                                                       Honduras
                                                      Pakistan




                                               -0.4                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.4

                                               -0.6                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.6

                                               -0.8                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.8

                                                -1                                                                                                                                                                                      -1



                                                                                                                                                 (c) Reserves and private debt
                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                Costa Rica
                                                                                                                                                                                             South Africa
                                                                                       Correlation between reserves and privatedebt




                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                               Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                          Colombia



                                                                                                                                                                                              Peru
                                                                                                                                                                                            India
                                                                                                                                                                                         Mexico




                                                                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                        Tunisia
                                                                                                                                                                             Nigeria (median)




                                                                                                                                                                                   Guatemala
                                                                                                                                                                                   Turkey




                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                              Cameroon
                                                                                                                                                                               Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                             Sri Lanka
                                                                                                                                                                             Morocco
                                                                                                                                                                            Kenya




                                                                                                                                      0.2

                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                Argentina
                                                                                                                                                                Honduras
                                                                                                                                                            El Salvador




                                                                                                                                      -0.2
                                                                                                                                                          Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                        Pakistan
                                                                                                                                             Dominican Republic




                                                                                                                                                          Egypt
                                                                                                                                                         Ghana
                                                                                                                                                    Philippines

                                                                                                                                                     Ecuador




                                                                                                                                      -0.4

                                                                                                                                      -0.6

                                                                                                                                      -0.8

                                                                                                                                       -1




Figure 3: Correlation between the growth rates of real GDP and reserves (panel a), real GDP and
private debt (panel b), and reserves and private debt (panel c)


                                                                                                                                                                             7
                                                               30                                                               MYS




                        Average reserves as a percent of GDP
                                                               25
                                                                                                     THA

                                                               20


                                                                                                                                        PER
                                                               15
                                                                                 MAR             PHL
                                                                                                               EGY
                                                                                   TUN        HND                 CRI
                                                               10
                                                                                  NGA
                                                                                  COL
                                                                                IND                  LKA                SLV
                                                                                                                                 GTM
                                                                                  BRA TUR
                                                                            GHA                                KEN      MEX
                                                                                                 ARG
                                                               5                ZAF     CMR                       ECU
                                                                                  PAK           DOM


                                                               0
                                                                    0   0.1       0.2     0.3            0.4     0.5      0.6     0.7         0.8




      Figure 4: Average 1980­2015 reserves and Chinn and Ito (2008) capital account openness




3     Model
We consider a dynamic small open-economy model with tradable and non-tradable goods.             e
economy is populated by a continuum of identical households of unit measure that borrow externally
subject to an occasionally binding borrowing constraint. We describe rst the household problem,
and then we analyze the competitive equilibrium and the role of international reserves.


3.1    Household problem

Households' preferences are given by
                                                                                              
                                                                                         E0           t u (ct ),                                    (1)
                                                                                              t =0

where E0 is the expectation operator conditional on date 0 information; 0 <  < 1 is a discount
factor; u (·) is a standard increasing, concave, and twice continuously di erentiable function satisfy-
ing the Inada condition; and consumption c is an Armington-type constant elasticity of substitution
(CES) aggregator with elasticity of substitution 1/( + 1) between tradable goods cT and non-tradable
goods c N , given by
                                                                                                              1
                                                                            -                             - - 
                                                                        T                            N
                       c=  c                                                    + (1 -  ) c                        ,  > -1,   (0, 1).




                                                                                                     8
In each period, households receive a random endowment of tradable goods T
                                                                        t and a xed endow-
                             N
ment of non-tradable goods . e endowment of tradables follows a rst-order Markov process.
We use the tradable good as the numeraire.
    Households can save and borrow using a one-period non-state-contingent bond b denominated
in units of tradables paying an interest rate R , which is exogenously determined in international
capital markets.8 eir budget constraint, in units of tradables, is given by

                                                           bt +1
                                    bt + cT    N N
                                          t + pt ct =            +   T
                                                                     t   + ptN   N
                                                                                     - Tt ,                              (2)
                                                            R

where ptN is the price of non-tradable goods and Tt is a lump-sum tax. In addition, households face
a credit constraint given by
                                        bt +1
                                               t T  t + pt
                                                          N N
                                                                .                                   (3)
                                          R
   is credit constraint captures in a parsimonious way the empirical fact that income is critical in
determining credit-market access, and it has been shown to be capable of accounting for the dy-
namics of capital ows in emerging markets (e.g., Mendoza, 2002). Non-tradable goods enter the
collateral constraint because while foreign creditors do not value the non-tradable good, they can
sell it in exchange for tradable goods in the domestic market, a er seizing these goods in the event of
a default.9 We allow for a shock to the degree of imperfect enforcement t , which we refer to as a -
nancial shock. One interpretation of this shock is that it captures uctuations in lenders' perceptions
about households' ability to repay.
   Households choose consumption and borrowing to maximize their utility (1) subject to their
budget (2) and credit constraint (3), taking prices and taxes as given. eir optimality conditions are
given by

                                            µ +1
                              1 -  cTt
                      ptN   =                      ,                                                                     (4)
                                   ctN

                   uT (t ) =  R Et uT (t + 1) + µt      with µt = 0 if bt +1 /R < t (ptN      N
                                                                                                  +   T
                                                                                                      t )   ,            (5)

where uT (t ) is shorthand notation for u c
                                        c cT and µt denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the borrowing
constraint. Condition (4) is a static optimality condition equating the marginal rate of substitution
between tradable and non-tradable goods to their relative price. Condition (5) is the household's Eu-
   8 Assuming no foreign in    ation, it is equivalent to denominating the bonds in foreign currency, capturing the liability
dollarization phenomenon.
    9   e credit constraint can be derived endogenously from a problem of limited enforcement under two assumptions.
First, households can default at the end of the current period. Second, upon default, foreign creditors can seize a fraction
t of the current income, and households immediately regain access to credit markets.             e current, rather than the
future, price appears in the constraint because the opportunity to default occurs at the end of the current period, before
the realization of future shocks (see Bianchi and Mendoza, 2018, for a derivation of a similar constraint).


                                                             9
ler equation for bonds. If µt > 0, the marginal utility bene ts from increasing tradable consumption
today exceed the expected marginal utility costs from borrowing one unit and repaying next period.


3.2     Government

   e government accumulates international reserves At +1  0 and nances them with lump-sum
taxes and existing holdings of reserves At . Its budget constraint is given by

                                                   At +1
                                                         = Tt + At .                                                 (6)
                                                    R

   e assumption that reserves are non-negative (i.e., we do not allow the government to borrow
externally) is mainly for simplicity. What is important for our analysis is that there is a nite limit
on external government borrowing. Absent a constraint on external borrowing, the government
could use its borrowing capacity to bypass the borrowing constraint on households using lump-sum
transfers and taxes.10


3.3     Competitive equilibrium

   e market clearing for non-tradable goods is

                                                      ctN =     N
                                                                t .                                                  (7)


    We can now de ne a competitive equilibrium for any government policies. Given {Tt , At +1 }t 0 , a
competitive equilibrium is de ned as a stochastic sequence of prices {ptN }t 0 and households' policies
{cT    N
  t , ct , bt +1 }t  0 such that (i) households maximize their utility (1) subject to the sequence of budget
constraints (2) and credit constraints (3), taking as given prices and government policies; (ii) the
government budget constraint (6) is satis ed; and (iii) the market clears for non-tradable goods (7).
    It will be useful to combine the household and the government budget constraint together with
market clearing for non-tradables. With this, we obtain the consolidated resource constraint for
tradable goods:
                                         At +1 - bt +1
                                    cT
                                     t +               = T
                                                         t + At - bt ,                            (8)
                                               R
   is condition illustrates that from the perspective of the small open economy, o cial reserves and
   10 We could allow the government to nance reserve accumulation with domestic debt, in addition to taxation (mo-

tivated by tax-smoothing considerations). In this extended se ing, the government would o er a high interest rate on
domestic bonds to alter households' intertemporal consumption. Provided that investors are excluded from the domes-
                                                                                                   uT (t )
tic bond market, the allocations would be isomorphic, with the domestic rate being determined by  u T (t +1)
                                                                                                             . If foreign
investors had access to domestic bonds, they would earn a rent at the expense of the small open economy generating
an extra cost from interventions (see Amador et al., 2017; Fanelli and Straub, 2017).


                                                           10
household-held bonds are perfect substitutes. Absent the credit constraint (3), Ricardian equivalence
would hold and the amount of foreign reserves accumulated by the government would be completely
irrelevant. However, as we show below, the presence of the credit constraint (3) makes reserve
accumulation both e ective and desirable.


3.4   Constrained e ciency

   e previous section de ned a competitive equilibrium in which households optimize over con-
sumption and savings, taking the price of non-tradables and government policies as given. We now
turn to a welfare analysis and consider a social planner who makes collective borrowing decisions
on behalf of the households.     e analysis is motivated by a pecuniary externality that arises be-
cause households' ability to borrow depends on the market-determined price of non-tradable goods.
In particular, households do not internalize that by borrowing more in the present and consuming
less in the future, they put downward pressure on the future price of non-tradables and thereby
contribute to tightening other agents' credit constraints. Following the analysis of constrained ef-
  ciency in Bianchi (2011), we consider the problem of a constrained social planner who directly
chooses the economy's debt subject to the borrowing constraint and allows goods markets to clear
competitively. at is, the planner borrows from the rest of the world and transfers the net proceeds
of its borrowing or savings decisions to households, who choose their allocation of consumption
between tradable goods and non-tradable goods in a competitive way.
      e constrained social planner's optimization problem in recursive form is given by:

                                   T
                          V (b ,       ,  ) = max u (c (cT ,       N
                                                                       )) +  EV (b ,   T
                                                                                           , )    (9)
                                              b   ,cT

                                       subject to
                                            b
                               b + cT = T + ,                                                    (10)
                                            R
                                                                             +1
                                        b               T     1 -  cT             N
                                                            +       N
                                                                                       .         (11)
                                        R                       

      e planner's rst-order condition for debt yields the Euler equation:

                          uT (t ) + µt t =  R Et (uT (t + 1) + µt +1 t +1 ) + µt ,               (12)

where µt is the non-negative Lagrange multiplier on the planner's borrowing constraint. e term
t  t (ptN ctN )/(cT
                  t ) (1 +  ) represents how much the collateral value changes in equilibrium when
there is a change in tradable consumption and is the product of three terms: the collateral parameter
t , the share of non-tradable consumption, and the inverse of the elasticity of substitution.

                                                              11
       ere are two wedges in this planner's rst-order condition with respect to the Euler equation
in the decentralized equilibrium (5). On the le -hand side, the term µt t captures that an increase
in aggregate consumption at time t helps to relax the credit constraint when it binds in the cur-
rent period. On the right-hand side, the same term updated one period captures how an increase in
borrowing today reduces consumption tomorrow and tightens tomorrow's credit constraint. us,
whenever the credit constraint is not currently binding but is expected to bind with strictly positive
probability next period, households fail to internalize that higher current borrowing imposes a neg-
ative externality on the rest of the economy in the future and hence tend to "overborrow" relative
to a constrained-e cient outcome.


3.5     Reserve accumulation

In this section, we prove that the constrained-e cient allocations can be decentralized via an ap-
propriate policy of reserve accumulation.        is result complements previously established decen-
tralizations via taxes on debt (Bianchi, 2011).11 One potential advantage of the implementation with
reserves is that capital controls are o en associated with leakages that undermine their e ectiveness
(Bengui and Bianchi, 2018). is may make reserve accumulation a more a ractive policy to pursue
in practice and can, in fact, rationalize why governments so o en resort to reserves as a primary
macroeconomic policy tool.
    To establish our result, it is convenient to impose the following assumption.

Assumption 1. Consumption is a Cobb-Douglas aggregator c = (cT ) (c N )1- , and the credit con-
straint parameter satis es t (1 -  ) < 1.

      is assumption, which implies unitary elasticity of substitution between tradables and non-
tradables, simpli es the analytics of our theoretical characterization. It guarantees that in any equi-
librium, an increase in aggregate consumption by one unit does not relax the credit constraint by
more than one unit in equilibrium. In our quantitative analysis of Section 4, however, we depart
from a unitary elasticity and obtain numerical results that are identical to those of the theoretical
analysis that follows.
    Our main result is summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 1. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Consider the solution to the constrained-e cient planning
problem {ct T , bt +1 , pt N , ct N } and initial conditions (b0 , A0 ) for a competitive equilibrium such that
b0 = b0 - A0 . en {ct T } is part of a decentralized equilibrium with reserve accumulation if the
  11 Amador et al. (2017) and Fanelli and Straub (2017) also analyze the connection between capital controls and foreign
exchange intervention, but the equivalence we highlight here is not present in their setups.



                                                          12
government follows the policy AR
                               t +1 that satis es

                                                                            N N
                    AR                  R
                     t +1 = -bt +1 + R At - bt + bt + t
                                                                 T
                                                                 t   + pt         t  0            (13)


   with initial conditions AR            R
                            0 = A0 and b 0 = b 0 .


Proof.    e proof is by construction and uses the rst-order conditions as they are necessary and
su cient. We start by conjecturing that the agent's credit constraint (3) holds with equality. Using
the credit constraint with equality, together with the reserve accumulation policy (13) and the market
clearing for non-tradable goods (7) in the household's budget constraint, we obtain

                                                     bt +1
                                      cT
                                       t =
                                             T
                                             t   +         - bt = cT t .
                                                      R

Hence, under the proposed reserve accumulation policy, the constrained-e cient consumption plan
is achieved. We are le to show that under the conjectured private borrowing policy, the household's
Euler equation and complementary slackness conditions are satis ed. From the private household's
Euler equation (5), we have
                                    µt = uT (t ) -  R Et uT (t + 1).

From the planner's Euler equation (12), we also have

                    µt = uT (t ) -  R Et uT (t + 1) -  R Et t +1 µ t +1 + µt [t (1 -  )].

Using the fact that consumption allocations are the same, we can combine the last two equations to
obtain
                         µt =  R Et t (1 -  )µ t +1 + µt [1 - t (1 -  )]  0,
                                                                                             N N
where the last inequality follows from Assumption 1. Since µt  0 and bt +1 /R = t ( T t + pt     ),
the private household's complementary slackness condition is satis ed. erefore, under the pro-
posed policy, all household optimality conditions and market clearing conditions are satis ed with
consumption coinciding with its value in the constrained-e cient allocation.



       e reserve accumulation policy described above implements the same level of tradable con-
sumption as in the constrained-e cient allocation. Because non-tradable consumption is equal to
the endowment in both cases, it follows that this policy achieves the same level of welfare. is pol-
icy achieves the same consumption allocations by e ectively pushing private agents against their
credit constraint whenever consumption in the laissez-faire economy would be above its level in
the constrained-e cient allocation, absent any policy. As households a empt to maintain their de-


                                                       13
sired current consumption, they try to o set the increase in foreign assets by the government by
borrowing, up to the point where their credit constraint binds.
    Under this implementation, the borrowing constraint holds with equality at all times with foreign
reserve intervention. It binds strictly, however, only when there is a strictly positive probability of
a binding credit constraint in the subsequent period.12 Finally, notice that if the credit constraint
is binding in the constrained-e cient allocation, no reserves are carried forward (i.e., the reserve
stock gets fully depleted). In the appendix, we also provide a dual result by which the optimal
accumulation of international reserves yields the constrained-e cient allocations. Moreover, we
show that this policy is time consistent.


Simple illustration. To shed further light on the mechanics of this implementation, it is useful
to consider a one-time intervention at date t starting from the laissez-faire economy.  e private
sector's response to a one-time reserve accumulation At +1  0 by the government is given by

                                          At +1 - R At - bt + cT
                                                               t -
                                                                            T         for At +1 < A
                                                                                                  ¯t +1
                                          
                                                                            t
                                          
                       Bt +1 (At +1 ) =
                                          
                                                      At +1 1 T 1-
                                                 1-
                                                           +    -   (-b   +A  t)
                                           -Rt
                                                       R      t         t                        ¯t +1 ,
                                                                                      for At +1  A
                                                           (R -t  )
                                                                1-



      ¯t +1  R (At - bt ) + R - t 1- c           Tl f                 T            Tl f
where A                                t                - (R + t )    t   and ct          denote the consumption choice of
households absent the intervention.
    To satisfy their private Euler equation, households want to achieve a given amount of current
                           Tl f
tradable consumption ct , so for small levels of reserve accumulation by the government, they react
to the negative transfer (expected to be o set by a positive future transfer) by a one-to-one increase
in debt, following a Ricardian equivalence type of logic. But for o cial reserve accumulations above
a threshold A ¯t +1 , the private debt level required to o set the negative transfer is so large that it
violates the credit constraint (3). In fact, above the threshold, more reserves contract the borrowing
capacity of the economy and lead to less private debt rather than more private debt.
    On the other hand, to achieve the level of consumption prevailing in the constrained-e cient
                  Tl f
allocation c T
             t < ct , the government needs to implement a level of net foreign assets of bt +1 going
forward. erefore, one can think of its best response to the private sector's borrowing choice bt +1
  12 In a state in which the credit constraint is not expected to bind next period under the constrained-e
                                                                                                        cient allocation,
we can show that implementing this allocation can be guaranteed by following any policy satisfying At +1  AR     t +1 . e
logic is that in those states the anticipation that the constrained-e cient consumption will be implemented in the future
leads to a current consumption equal to the constrained-e cient even without intervention




                                                              14
as the level of o cial reserves given by13

                                              At +1 (bt +1 ) = bt +1 - bt +1 .

In other words, the government increases reserve accumulation one to one with increases in private
indebtedness.
       e constrained-e cient outcome is achieved in period t when both the private sector and the
government play their best response, taken as given the choice of the other player. is scenario is
illustrated in Figure 5. e solid line represents the private sector's best response Bt +1 (At +1 ), and
the dashed line represents the government's best response At +1 (bt +1 ). e equilibrium is reached at
                                                                                        T
point AR          R
          t +1 , bt +1 , where private households accept a tradable consumption level c t only because
they are forced to do so by the government's transfer policy and their binding credit constraint. At
that point, o cial reserves are positive and private indebtedness is higher than in the laissez-faire,
but the economy's net foreign asset position has improved relative to the laissez-faire.

                             bt +1
                                     Household unconstrained        Household constrained
                                                                                  At +1 (bt +1 )



                             btr+1

                                                                                  Bt +1 (At +1 )



                                     45°
                              lf
                             bt +1
                                     45°
                             bt +1
                                                                 r                           At +1
                                                          At +1 At +1



Figure 5: Implementation when private households are unconstrained in the absence of reserve
accumulation

    When, in contrast, the planner's Euler equation binds at date t , privately and socially optimal
consumption coincides, and the constrained-e cient consumption allocation is implemented with
full reserve depletion (At +1 = 0). In that case, positive reserve accumulation would result in even
lower, and thus suboptimal, consumption. is case is illustrated in Figure 6.
  13 Tobe precise, this policy represents the government's best response under the conjecture that the constrained-
e cient allocation is also implemented from date t + 1 onward. However, this does not alter the logic behind the
implementation.

                                                               15
                                           bt +1
                                                         Household constrained
                                                               At +1 (bt +1 )




                                                   45°
                        lf
                       bt +1   = bt +1 =   btr+1




                                                                                bt +1 (At +1 )
                                                                                                 At +1



Figure 6: Implementation when private households are constrained in the absence of reserve accu-
mulation

4             antitative analysis

4.1         Calibration

We calibrate the model using data for Mexico, a common choice in studies of reserve accumulation
(e.g., Bianchi et al., 2018). In our calibration strategy, we assume that Mexico was in the ergodic
distribution of our laissez-faire economy in the rst part of the sample (1970­2000). is time period
is used to calibrate the country parameters by matching steady state averages to the relevant macro
moments from the data. We then study how the increase in debt and reserves we witnessed in the
second half of the sample (2001­2015) can be interpreted as the result of a transition to the ergodic
distribution of an economy with an optimal foreign reserve intervention.
       e time period is one year. A rst subset of parameters is set using standard values from the
literature:  = 2, r = 0.04, 1/( + 1) = 0.83; and the endowment process is estimated using the
Hodrick-Presco ltered cyclical component of tradable GDP for Mexico.14 We assume a rst-order
autoregressive process for the cyclical component: ln T            T
                                                       t =  ln t -1 + t with t  N (0,  ), and
estimate values of  = 0.46 and  = 0.032.
      e value of  is set so as to replicate the share of non-tradable GDP in the data, which is 55
                                                        ¯ = 32 percent of GDP to be calibrated below,
percent. In a steady state with a mean value of debt of b
    14 We
       de ne tradable GDP as industrial value added in the World Development Indicators database for Mexico for the
1965­2017 time period.



                                                         16
                                         p
                                         ¯    N N
                                                                                    ¯
                                                                                 T -br
we have that the value of  is given by p
                                       ¯N N + T = 0.55 where p
                                                              ¯N = 1-
                                                                                  N      . Normalizing the
average tradable and non-tradable endowments to one, we obtain  = 0.45.
    We assume that the process for t follows an autoregressive (AR) (1) process with mean          ¯ and
volatility  . e parameters {  ,  ¯ ,  } are set so that the economy without government intervention
matches key moments of the Mexican data from 1970 to 2000. e three moments we target are the
average net foreign asset position, the probability of a nancial crisis, and the standard deviation
of the current account-to-GDP ratio. In both the model and the data, nancial crises are de ned
as episodes in which the current account increases by more than two standard deviations above
its mean.     e model equivalent of the current account as a percentage of GDP is pb   t -bt +1
                                                                                               T .     is
                                                                                      t t + t
                                                                                      N N

calibration yields  = 0.93, ¯ = 0.35, and  = 0.033. e calibration is summarized in Table 2.

                                      Table 2: Parameter Values

                                 Value               Source/Targets
 Interest Rate              r = 0.04         Standard value
 Risk Aversion               =2              Standard value
 Elasticity of Substitution 1/(1 +  ) = 0.83 Standard value
 Weight on Tradables in CES  = 0.45          Share of tradable output = 45%
 Discount Factor                  = 0.93             Average NFA-GDP ratio = -32.0%
 Financial Shock Mean            ¯ = 0.35            Frequency of crises = 5.1%
 Financial Shock Variance         = 0.033            Standard deviation of the current account = 0.023



4.2    Reserves and gross debt

We start by describing the workings of the model through an analysis of the policy functions for
reserve accumulation and debt. We will argue that the policy intervention with reserves di ers
drastically from the tax-based intervention that is the focus in the literature. We also show that the
reserve intervention results in substantial changes in private debt accumulation, highlighting the
importance of examining gross positions.


Policy function for reserves. Figure 7 presents the optimal reserve accumulation policy as a
function of the shocks the economy faces and the current value of debt. In panel (a), the amount
of reserves is shown as a fraction of the tradable endowment, for the mean value of  and for two
possible values of beginning-of-period debt. In panel (b), the amount of reserves is shown as a
function of the nancial shock, for the mean value of T , again for two possible values of debt. In
both cases, reserves are reported as a function of average GDP. (Unless otherwise noted, we do this
for both reserves and debt throughout the paper.)

                                                    17
    Figure 7 shows that the government nds it optimal to hold more reserves in good times, that is,
when income is high or when nancial conditions are less stringent. e intuition for these results
is that when the amount that households can borrow rises (because of either higher T or higher
 ), the government needs to accumulate more reserves to close the gap between the net amount
of borrowing desired by the planner and the borrowing capacity of households. Similarly, when
beginning-of-period debt is lower, households are further away from the constraint--they want to
borrow less and they have more spare borrowing capacity--and the government accumulates more
reserves.
                              (a) As a function of income                                                  (b) As a function of t
                      0.5                                                                     0.5

                     0.45                                                                    0.45

                      0.4                                                                     0.4

                     0.35                                                                    0.35

                      0.3                                                                     0.3
          Reserves




                                                                                  Reserves
                     0.25                                                                    0.25

                      0.2                                                                     0.2

                     0.15                                                                    0.15

                      0.1                                                                     0.1

                     0.05                                                                    0.05

                       0                                                                       0
                       0.85    0.9   0.95      1        1.05   1.1   1.15                           0.15   0.2   0.25   0.3    0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5   0.55
                                     Endownment of tradables                                                            Financial shock



                                                         Figure 7: Policy function for reserves



Comparison with taxes on debt. An important fact that motivated our analysis was that coun-
tries with fewer restrictions on capital accounts appear to hold larger amounts of reserves (fact 4).
In the model, a government that uses nancial regulation with the nancial stability goal of making
agents internalize the pecuniary externality has no need for reserve accumulation. Likewise, a gov-
ernment that accumulates reserves does not need to impose nancial regulation. Our model hence
predicts that reserves and taxes on debt are substitutes, in line with the data, where countries that
impose more restrictions on capital mobility are found to accumulate fewer reserves than countries
that impose few restrictions on the capital account.15
    It is interesting to contrast the properties of the reserve intervention with those of an alternative
  nancial regulation-based policy to implement the constrained-e cient allocations. Figure 8 again
displays policy functions for reserves, but this time together with policy functions for the optimal tax
on debt.16 While both respond to a macroprudential motive and are passive when the constraint is
already binding (both taxes on debt and reserve holdings are zero in this case), they di er markedly
in terms of their cyclical properties. While reserves tend to increase with output, the tax on debt
  15 In    the model, this relationship is of course too stark, as we abstract from other reasons to accumulate reserves.
  16 We     apply the optimal borrowing tax formula of Bianchi (2011).


                                                                            18
tends to decrease with output.       e reason for the la er is that when output is low, agents have
stronger incentives to borrow, leading to a higher probability of a binding borrowing constraint in
the future; a higher tax on debt is thus required when output is low.17
                                          (a) Tax on debt and output                                                                      (b) Tax on debt and nancial shock
                            3.5                                                 0.08                                                                                                                0.25
                                                                                                                                 2

                             3                                                  0.07                                            1.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                0.06                                            1.6
                            2.5
   Tax on debt in percent




                                                                                                       Tax on debt in percent
                                                                                                                                1.4
                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.15




                                                                                       Reserves




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Reserves
                             2                                                                                                  1.2
                                                                                0.04
                                                                                                                                 1
                            1.5
                                                                                                                                0.8                                                                 0.1
                                                                                0.03

                             1                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                0.02
                                                                                                                                0.4                                                                 0.05
                            0.5                                                 0.01
                                                                                                                                0.2

                             0                                                   0                                               0                                                                   0
                             0.85   0.9       0.95      1        1.05   1.1   1.15                                                0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5   0.55   0.6
                                              Endownment of tradables                                                                                       Financial shock



                                                     Figure 8: Reserve accumulation vs. nancial regulation



Policy functions for gross private debt. We now show how the pro le of private debt depends
critically on the government intervention. Figure 9 shows the law of motion for b and its ergodic
distribution for three economies: (i) laissez-faire, (ii) constrained-e cient and (iii) foreign reserve
intervention.18 Panel (a) shows that when current debt is high enough, the borrowing constraint
binds and all three econmies have the same end-of-period debt. For low debt levels, however, debt
choices di er: the constrained-e cient economy is the one in which the least amount of debt is accu-
mulated, followed by the laissez-faire economy and the economy with foreign reserve intervention.
In line with these results, panel (b) shows that the ergodic distribution of gross private indebtedness
is shi ed to the right in the economy with foreign reserve intervention compared with the other
two economies.
    A nding that stands out is that gross indebtedness is higher under the foreign reserve inter-
vention than in the laissez-faire economy.19 Interestingly, this result emerges even though the
laissez-faire economy features overborrowing with respect to the constrained-e cient allocation.
   e answer to this apparent puzzle is that the increase in gross indebtedness in the economy with
the optimal foreign reserve intervention is more than o set by the larger stock of reserves accumu-
  17     e result that taxes have a negative correlation with output is emphasized in Schmi -Groh´  e and Uribe (2017) and
Bianchi and Mendoza (2018). Flemming, L'Huillier and Piguillem (2019) show that persistent shocks to income growth
can alter the sign of the cyclicality.
   18 By "constrained-e cient," we mean the solution to the problem described in (9)­(11), while by "foreign reserve

intervention," we mean the implementation of the constrained-e cient allocation presented in Section 3.5.
   19 In the state space, this occurs technically for all values of debt except those at which the borrowing constraint is

binding under laissez-faire but not under constrained-e ciency.


                                                                                                  19
lated by the government. at is, the laissez-faire economy still displays a lower net foreign asset
position than the economy with the optimal reserve intervention. is "underborrowing" result is
thus di erent from the one highlighted by Benigno et al. (2013). In that paper, the laissez-faire econ-
omy also issues too li le debt, but critically, it has a higher net foreign asset position relative to an
economy in which the government has access to ex post policies.
                                (a) Policy function for debt                                                                  (b) Ergodic distribution of debt
                     0.4                                                                                        6
                              45 degree                                                                                                                  Laissez-faire economy
                              Laissez-faire economy                                                                                                      Constrained-efficient economy
                    0.38      Constrained-efficient economy                                                     5                                        Foreign reserve intervention
                              Foreign reserve intervention


                    0.36                                                                                        4




                                                                                          Probability (10-5 )
 Next period debt




                    0.34                                                                                        3



                    0.32                                                                                        2



                     0.3                                                                                        1



                    0.28                                                                                        0
                       0.28   0.3         0.32         0.34      0.36   0.38   0.4                               0.1   0.15    0.2   0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45    0.5     0.55      0.6
                                                  Current debt                                                                                    Debt


                                               Figure 9: Debt: policy functions and ergodic distributions
                     Note: In panel (a), the current exogenous states correspond to mean values for output and the nancial shock.

    Figure 10 further shows how the optimal reserve intervention changes the cyclical properties of
private borrowing: panel (a) shows the policy function with respect to income and panel (b) with
respect to nancial conditions. When income is low, borrowing is increasing in income for both the
laissez-faire economy and the economy with the optimal reserve intervention.         e reason is that
when income is low, the borrowing constraint is binding and higher income helps to relax it. When
income is high, however, the two economies di er in the cyclical properties of borrowing: while
borrowing is countercyclical under laissez-faire, it is procyclical under the optimal reserve inter-
vention. Under laissez-faire, when the credit constraint does not bind, the economy borrows less
when income is high, following a permanent income logic. Under the optimal foreign reserve inter-
vention, in contrast, since the excess borrowing capacity is procyclical in the constrained-e cient
allocations, the government accumulates more reserves when output is high, inducing households
to take on more debt. On the other hand, panel (b) shows that private borrowing is quite naturally
procyclical with respect to nancial conditions in both economies.
    Our nding that optimal foreign reserve interventions may lead to higher private indebtedness
has implications for empirical studies on credit booms and nancial crises. In particular, it stresses
the importance of taking o cial reserve dynamics into consideration when determining the role of
private credit in predicting nancial crises. In our model, the optimal foreign reserve intervention
results in higher private indebtedness, yet a lower exposure to nancial crises.

                                                                                     20
                                       (a) Debt as a function of income                                          (b) Debt as a function of nancial shock
                              0.4                                                                                0.6

                             0.39                                                                               0.55

                             0.38                                                                                0.5

                             0.37                                                                               0.45
          Next period debt




                                                                                             Next period debt
                             0.36                                                                                0.4

                             0.35                                                                               0.35

                             0.34                                                                                0.3

                             0.33                                                                               0.25

                             0.32                                                                                0.2

                             0.31                                                                               0.15

                              0.3                                                                                0.1
                                 0.9         0.95          1            1.05   1.1                                     0.15   0.2   0.25   0.3    0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5   0.55
                                                    Endowment of tradables                                                                 Financial shock



                                                               Figure 10: Equilibrium policy function for debt
      Note:     e initial states correspond to an average debt position. In the le (right) panel, the nancial
      (output) shock is set to its mean value.


4.3               Accounting for the stylized facts

We now assess the model's ability to account for the facts 1­3 outlined in Section 2.20 To do so,
we simulate the model to generate arti cial data comparable with the data used in our empirical
analysis of Section 2.
    First, we show that the macroprudential motive to accumulate reserves uncovered in the model
helps to account for the recent increase in reserves, while being consistent with the simultaneous
rise in private external debt observed in the data (fact 1). Using our calibration for Mexico and
starting the simulations in 2001, we feed the observed income shocks into the economy and, in
addition, calibrate the nancial shocks to match the sequence of net foreign assets (NFA) excluding
reserves observed in the data. Panel (a) of Figure 11 shows that this exercise makes the model
predict a signi cant increase in reserves, consistent with the increase observed in the data. While
the model predicts more volatility in the path of reserves than in the data, its ability to account for
the magnitude of the overall increase is quite remarkable. e model is hence able to jointly explain
the increase in debt and reserves. Notably, while the debt path was targeted in our simulation (see
panel b), the path of reserves was not.
    Next, we argue that our model is also consistent with the positive cross-sectional association be-
tween reserves and private external debt observed in the data (fact 2). To examine this fact through
the lens of our model, we construct 10,000 samples of simulations of 30 years each, and compute
averages of reserves and private debt over the last four periods of each sample. en, following a
procedure analogous to that of Figure 2, we compute the di erence between this end-of-sample av-
erage and the beginning-of-period value. Figure 12 shows a sca er plot in which each dot represents
a sample, with the x -axis and y -axis respectively measuring changes in debt and reserves over the
  20 As       we discussed above, a key implication of the theoretical analysis is that the model is consistent with fact 4.

                                                                                     21
                                                       (a) Reserves                                                                                              (b) Debt
                                    25                                                                                                    65
                                           Data                                                                                                   Data
                                           Model                                                                                                  Model
                                                                                                                                          60
                                    20
  Reserves as a percent of output




                                                                                                            Debt as a percent of output
                                                                                                                                          55

                                    15
                                                                                                                                          50


                                                                                                                                          45
                                    10

                                                                                                                                          40

                                    5
                                                                                                                                          35


                                    0                                                                                                     30
                                    2000             2005                         2010         2015                                        2000           2005               2010   2015



                                                   Figure 11: Evolution of reserves and debt, 2001­2015: data and model

Note: Model simulation obtained by feeding observed income shocks and calibrating nancial shocks to match sequence
of NFA (excluding reserves) observed in the data.




                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                       110

                                                                       0.15                                                                                            100

                                                                                                                                                                       90
                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                                                       80
                                                                       0.05                                                                                            70
                                                            Reserves




                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                                       -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                       40

                                                                        -0.1                                                                                           30

                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                       -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                       10

                                                                        -0.2
                                                                           -0.2     -0.1   0          0.1                                   0.2    0.3      0.4
                                                                                                  Debt



                                                                           Figure 12: Increase in reserves and private debt

Note: e increase is computed as end of transition minus beginning of transition. Based on 10,000 samples of sim-
ulations of 30 years each, with each dot representing a sample. x -axis measures di erence between average over last
four periods and beginning of period value for private debt. y -axis measures di erence between average over last four
periods and beginning of period value for reserves.



                                                                                                       22
                         (a) Reserves and output                                                                               (b) Private debt and output
      1                                                                                                        1

     0.9                                                                                                   0.9

     0.8                                                                                                   0.8

     0.7                                                                                                   0.7

     0.6                                                                                                   0.6

     0.5                                                                                                   0.5

     0.4                                                                                                   0.4

     0.3                                                                                                   0.3

     0.2                                                                                                   0.2

     0.1                                                                                                   0.1

      0                                                                                                        0
           0   1000   2000   3000   4000   5000   6000       7000    8000    9000 10000                            0   1000   2000   3000   4000   5000   6000   7000   8000   9000 10000




                                                                            (c) Reserves and private debt
                                                         1

                                                     0.9

                                                     0.8

                                                     0.7

                                                     0.6

                                                     0.5

                                                     0.4

                                                     0.3

                                                     0.2

                                                     0.1

                                                         0
                                                             0      1000    2000   3000   4000   5000   6000   7000    8000   9000 10000




Figure 13: Correlations between changes in reserves and output (panel a), changes in private debt
and output (panel b), and changes in reserves and private debt (panel c).
   Note: Based on 10,00 samples of simulations of 30 years each, with each vertical bar measuring the correlation
   between two variables in a given sample. In all samples, we compute reserves, private debt and output. A er
   taking the log of the private debt and ouptut series, we compute rst di erences. We then calculate and plot the
   correlations between these changes in reserves, output and private debt.


sample. e gure shows that samples displaying signi cant increases in reserves also display large
increases in private external debt, consistent with fact 2.
    Finally, our model generates time-series correlations between the changes in reserves, private
external debt, and output in line with those emphasized in our fact 3. For each of our 10,000 samples,
we compute time series of rst di erences of reserves, private debt and output.21 We then calculate
the correlation between the reserves and output series, between the private debt and output series,
and between the reserve and private debt series for each sample. Lastly, we sort these correlations
from the lowest to the highest. Figure 13 displays the correlation between the reserve and output
  21 We log the private debt and output series, but not the reserve series since there are several occurrences of zero
reserves in the samples.

                                                                                                 23
series (panel a), between the private debt and output series (panel b), and between the reserve and
private debt series (panel c) for all simulated samples. Panels (a) and (b) suggest that both reserves
and private debt appear to be procyclical in the simulated samples. Likewise, panel (c) indicates a
positive correlation between reserve and private debt accumulation. ese time-series correlation
pa erns are consistent with pa erns observed in the data classi ed under fact 3.



5    Conclusions
   is paper articulates a novel rationale for reserve accumulation based on a macroprudential mo-
tive. In the theory, reserve accumulation is used to correct a pecuniary externality that generates
overborrowing and an excessive exposure to nancial crises. We present a simple model that shows
that this motive for reserve accumulation is qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with both
the time-series and cross-sectional pa erns of reserve and private external debt accumulation for
middle-income countries.
       ere are several interesting avenues for future research. One would be to apply and further
investigate the lessons of our theory for the use of reserve accumulation in models of nancial
crises that combine aggregate demand externalities and pecuniary externalities. Another would be
to extend our theory to allow for frictions in the government's nancing of reserve accumulation. We
have, in e ect, assumed that the central bank can nance reserve accumulation through government
transfers. An alternative would be to consider distortionary taxes. A nal avenue for future research
would be to depart from the assumption of deep-pocket international investors. In this scenario,
reserve accumulation would introduce arbitrage losses for the small open economy (Amador et al.,
2017; Fanelli and Straub, 2017), and the government would balance these costs against the nancial
stability bene ts uncovered in this paper.




                                                 24
References
Aizenman, Joshua and Jaewoo Lee, "International Reserves: Precautionary Versus Mercantilist
  Views, eory and Evidence," Open Economies Review, 2007, 18(2), 191­214.

Amador, Manuel, Javier Bianchi, Luigi Bocola, and Fabrizio Perri, "Exchange Rate Policies at
 the Zero Lower Bound," 2017. NBER Working Paper No. 23266.

Bacchetta, Philippe, Kenza Benhima, and Yannick Kalantzis, "Capital Controls with Inter-
  national Reserve Accumulation: Can is Be Optimal?," American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 2013, 5 (3), 229­62.

Bengui, Julien and Javier Bianchi, "Macroprudential Policy with Leakages," 2018. NBER Working
  Paper 25048.

Benigno, G. and L. Fornaro, "Reserve Accumulation, Growth and Financial Crisis," 2012. Mimeo,
  Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.

Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric R.
  Young, "Financial Crises and Macro-Prudential Policies," Journal of International Economics, 2013,
  89 (2), 453­470.

Bianchi, Javier, "Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3400­3426.

   and Cesar Sosa-Padilla, "Reserve Accumulation, Macroeconomic Stabilization and Sovereign
  Risk," 2018. Mimeo, Minneapolis Fed.

   and Enrique G Mendoza, "Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential policy," Journal of Politi-
  cal Economy, 2018, 126 (2), 588­634.

  , Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez, "International reserves and rollover risk,"
  American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (9), 2629­2670.

Bocola, Luigi and Guido Lorenzoni, "Financial Crises, Dollarization, and Lending of Last Resort
  in Open Economies," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erce, and Sergio L Schmukler, "Gross Capital Flows:
  Dynamics and Crises," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60(1), 113­133.

Bussiere, Matthieu, Gong Cheng, Menzie Chinn, and No¨      emie Lisack, "Capital Controls and
  Foreign Reserve Accumulation: Substitutes or Complements in the Global Financial Crisis?," 2013.
  Mimeo, Bank of France.

                                                25
Caballero, R. and S. Panageas, "Hedging Sudden Stops and Precautionary Contractions," Journal
  of Development Economics, 2008, 85(1-2), 28­57.

Calvo, Guillermo A, "Monetary Policy Challenges in Emerging Markets: Sudden Stop, Liability
  Dollarization, and Lender of Last Resort," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2006.

Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Rudy Loo-Kung, "Optimal Holdings of Inter-
  national Reserves: Self-Insurance Against Sudden Stop," Monetaria (English Edition), 2013, 1(1),
  1­35.

Cavallino, Paolo, "Capital Flows and Foreign Exchange Intervention," 2018. IMF Working Paper.

Chinn, Menzie D and Hiro Ito, "A New Measure of Financial Openness," Journal of comparative
 policy analysis, 2008, 10 (3), 309­322.

Clark, Peter Barton, "Optimum International Reserves and the Speed of Adjustment," Journal of
  Political Economy, 1970, 78 (2), 356­376.

Clower, Robert and Richard Lipsey, " e Present State of International Liquidity          eory," Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 1968, 58 (2), 586­595.

Durdu, Ceyhun Bora, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Marco E. Terrones, "Precautionary Demand
 for Foreign Assets in Sudden Stop Economies: An Assessment of the New Mercantilism," Journal
 of Development Economics, 2009, 89(2), 194­209.

Edwards, Sebastian, " e Demand for International Reserves and Exchange Rate Adjustments:            e
  Case of LDCs 1964-1972," Economica, 1983, 50 (199), 269­280.

Fanelli, Sebastian and Ludwig Straub, "Foreign Exchange Interventions and Exchange Rate Man-
  agement," 2017. Mimeo, MIT.

Flemming, Jean, Jean-Paul L'Huillier, and Facundo Piguillem, "Macro-Prudential taxation in
  good times," Journal of International Economics, 2019.

Frankel, Je rey and George Saravelos, "Can Leading Indicators Assess Country Vulnerability?
  Evidence from the 2008­09 Global Financial Crisis," Journal of International Economics, 2012, 87(2),
  216­231.

Gabaix, Xavier and Matteo Maggiori, "International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"
    arterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (3), 1369­1420.

Heller, Heinz Robert, "Optimal International Reserves," Economic Journal, 1966, 76 (302), 296­311.

                                                 26
Hur, Sewon and Illenin Kondo, "A eory of Sudden Stops, Foreign Reserves, and Rollover Risk
 in Emerging Economies," Journal of International Economics, 2016, 103, 44­63.

Jeanne, Olivier, "Capital Account Policies and the Real Exchange Rate," NBER International Seminar
  on Macroeconomics, 2012, 9 (1), 7­42.

   and Anton Korinek, "Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 2018.

  and Damiano Sandri, "Global nancial cycle and liquidity management," 2017. Mimeo.

  and Romain Ranci´ ere, " e Optimal Level of Reserves for Emerging Market Countries: A New
  Formula and Some Applications," Economic Journal, 2011, 121(555), 905­930.

Kelly, Michael G., "   e Demand for International Reserves," American Economic Review, 1970, 60
  (4), 655­667.

Kenen, Peter B. and Elinor B. Yudin, " e Demand for International Reserves," Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 1965, 47 (3), 242­250.

Lorenzoni, Guido, "Ine cient Credit Booms," Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (3), 809­833.

Mendoza, Enrique G., "Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop," in S. Ed-
 wards and J. Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, University of Chicago
 Press, 2002.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C Shambaugh, and Alan M Taylor, "Financial Stability, the Trilemma,
 and International Reserves," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (2), 57­94.

Rodrik, Dani, " e Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth," Brookings Paper on Economic Ac-
 tivity, 2008, 39 (2), 769­797.

Schmitt-Groh´  e, Stephanie and Mart´  in Uribe, "Multiple Equilibria in Open Economy Models
  with Collateral Constraints: Overborrowing Revisited," 2016. NBER Working Paper No. 22264.

   and , "Is Optimal Capital Control Policy Countercyclical in Open Economy Models with Col-
  lateral Constraints?," IMF Economic Review, 2017, 65 (3), 498­527.




                                               27
A     Appendix: optimal reserve accumulation policy
Consider the problem of the government that chooses a state-contingent sequence {At +1 , Tt }t=0 to
maximize welfare:


                                                                             
                                        T
                               V (b ,       , ) =          max                       t u (c (cT
                                                                                              t ,
                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                        ))                (14)
                                                    bt +1 ,cT
                                                            t ,At +1 ,µ t  0 t =0

                                                    subject to
                                                                     bt +1 - At +1
                                   bt + cT
                                         t =
                                                      T
                                                          + At +                                                          (15)
                                                                           R
                                                                                        +1
                                        bt +1              T     1 -  cT
                                                                       t                       N
                                                           t   +       N
                                                                                                                          (16)
                                         R                         

                          uT c (cT
                                 t ,
                                        N
                                             ) =  RuT (c (cT
                                                           t +1 ,
                                                                            N
                                                                                )) + µt                                   (17)
                                                                                                          +1
                                                          bt +1              T     1 -  cT
                                                                                         t                     N
                                             0 = µt             -                +       N
                                                                                                                          (18)
                                                           R                         
                                             µt  0,                                                                       (19)

Proposition 1. e optimal allocation implemented with {At +1 , Tt }t  =0 achieves the same utility as the
constrained-e cient allocations. Moreover, the optimal policy is time consistent.



Proof.   e key is to show rst that the last three constraints in the government's problem are slack.
Once we do this, it is straightforward to see that since At +1  0, the problem of the government is
e ectively reduced to the same as in the constrained-e cient problem (9) and is time consistent.
   Ignoring the last three constraints and deriving the rst-order condition with respect to bt +1 , we
obtain
                          uT (t ) =  R Et (uT (t + 1) + µ
                                                        ^ t +1 t +1 ) + µ
                                                                        ^ t (1 - t ),

where we use µ
             ^ t to denote the Lagrange multiplier on the borrowing constraint for the government
problem and distinguish it from the Lagrange multiplier on the household problem.
    Under Assumption 1, we have t < 1. Since µ
                                             ^ t +1  0 and t +1  0, we have

                               uT c (cT
                                      t ,
                                               N
                                                   ) -  R Et (uT (c (cT
                                                                      t +1 ,
                                                                                        N
                                                                                            ))  µ
                                                                                                ^ t +1 t +1 .


    Set µt = uT c (cT
                    t ,
                          N)    -  R Et (uT (c (cT
                                                 t +1 ,
                                                               N )).   It follows then that (17) and (19) are satis ed.


                                                                     28
   We are le to show that the complementary slackness condition (19) is satis ed. To see this,
notice that if (bt +1 , At +1 ) solve (14) subject to (15)­(16), we have that (bt +1 + , At +1 + ) also achieve
                                                                               cT    +1
                                                    bt +1         T       1-              N
the same utility and are feasible as long as         R      -         +    
                                                                                t
                                                                                N              0. Without loss of
                                    bt +1       T       1- T
generality, we can therefore set     R      -       +     ct     = 0, and hence (19) is satis ed.




                                                            29
