                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 LOCAL EFFECTS OF LAND GRANT COLLEGES ON AGRICULTURAL INNOVATION
                           AND OUTPUT

                                      Michael J. Andrews

                                      Working Paper 26235
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26235


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




I thank the NBER for financial support. I am very grateful to participants at the NBER conference
"The Economics of Research and Innovation in Agriculture," especially to my discussant Bhaven
Sampat, as well as to Jeff Furman and Nicolas Ziebarth for thoughtful comments. All errors are
my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Michael J. Andrews. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Local Effects of Land Grant Colleges on Agricultural Innovation and Output
Michael J. Andrews
NBER Working Paper No. 26235
September 2019
JEL No. N0,N5,O13,O3,Q1,Q16

                                          ABSTRACT

To estimate the local effect of establishing land grant colleges, I compare locations that receive a
land grant college to "runner-up" counties that were in contention to receive the land grant but
did not for as-good-as-random reasons. I find that establishing a land grant college causes an
increase in local invention, including in particular agricultural inventions, in college counties
relative to the runner-up counties. But land grant college counties see only small and imprecisely
estimated improvements in agricultural performance, measured by yield and output, relative to
runner-up counties. I discuss several alternative interpretations of these findings. By comparing
the establishment of land grant colleges to non-land grant colleges, I show that land grants appear
to cause smaller increases in local invention, population, and agricultural output, but larger
increases in agricultural yields and new crop varieties. The effect of land grant colleges on local
innovations is largest, even relative to non-land grant colleges, following the passage of
legislation that increases funding to agricultural research.


Michael J. Andrews
NBER
75 Lexington St.
#3
Belmont, MA 02478
mandrews@nber.org
I    Introduction

The U.S. land grant college system is frequently hailed as a major success of agricultural

innovation policy (Wright, 2012). To be sure, agriculture in both the U.S. and around the

world has become massively more productive over the last 150 years. Moreover, many land

grant college towns are now innovative hubs (Harrington and Sauter, 2018) and frequently

top lists of best places to live (Im, 2019). But to what extent are these facts caused by the

presence of a land grant college, and how much is due to innate location fundamentals?

    This questions is typically difficult to answer. Simply comparing places with land grant

colleges to places without is unlikely to give the true causal effect of a college. Even more

frustrating for researchers is that it is not clear in which direction this naive comparison is

biased. On one hand, land grant colleges were likely established in up-and-coming regions,

likely with access to natural amenities such as rivers to improve transportation and facilitate

the diffusion of new ideas, suggesting that estimates of the effect of colleges is biased upwards.

On the other hand, land grants' focus on agriculture might have induced states to locate their

colleges close to farmers and far from the major cities that would allow for the exploitation

of agglomeration economies, implying a downward bias. Indeed, I show below that both

of these factors were important when states were deciding where to locate their land grant

colleges.

    To overcome these challenges, I identify cases in which the location of colleges was deter-

mined essentially at random. This randomization ensures that estimates of the local effect

of land grant colleges represent the true causal effect of the college. More specifically, I use

the natural experiments introduced in Andrews (2019b), identifying "runner-up" counties


                                                2
that were strongly considered to become the site of a new college but were ultimately not

selected for reasons that are as good as random assignment. The first contribution of this

paper is to elaborate on these selection processes, providing detailed narrative evidence that

the decisions were indeed essentially random for a number of land grant colleges.

       Using the runner-up counties as counterfactuals for locations that received land grant

colleges, I present a number of results. First, I show that establishing a land grant college

causes more local innovation. Much of the research on the local effects of colleges on innova-

tion, including Andrews (2019b), uses patenting to proxy for innovation.1 While I show that

patenting does indeed increase near land grant colleges, this measure is less likely to serve

as an effective proxy for innovations in agriculture since many agricultural improvements

are not patentable.2 I make some progress on this issue by using data on the location of

origin of new U.S. wheat varieties introduced before 1920 (Clark, Martin, and Ball, 1922).

While the data are much sparser than those for patents, even here I find that innovation

increases in counties that receive land grant colleges relative to the runner-up counties. I

find no evidence that land grant college counties increase their specialization in agricultural

invention, measured by the share of county patents belonging to an agriculture class. While

not precisely estimated, land grant colleges appear to cause an increase in county population

as well, a factor that is likely to positively affect innovation but may dilute the focus on

agriculture.

       While land grant college counties cause sizable increases in local innovations relative to
   1
    See also Jaffe (1989), Kantor and Whalley (2014), and Hausman (2017), for a few exemplary cases.
   2
    While asexually reproduced plants became eligible for protection under a plant patent in 1930, and
both asexually and sexually reproduced plants became utility patent-eligible in the late 1980s, none of these
methods were available at the time land grant colleges were established. See Moser and Rhode (2012) and
Moscona (2019) for studies on the effects of patent protection laws for plants.



                                                     3
the runner-up counties, they have modest and imprecisely estimated effects on agricultural

outcomes, including agricultural yields, total agricultural output, crop output, and livestock

production. This overall finding, that land grant colleges cause sizable increases in local agri-

cultural innovation but little increase in local agricultural output, could be interpreted either

as evidence that innovations developed at land grant colleges are diffusing to the areas that

will use them, or that the innovations developed at land grant colleges are irrelevant for agri-

culture within the state. More study is needed to distinguish between these interpretations

and rule out alternative explanations.

   To determine whether these observed outcomes are specific to land grant colleges, I

compare my sample of land grant colleges to a sample of non-land grant colleges for which I

am also able to identify runner-up locations. While measured imprecisely, land grant colleges

appear to cause a smaller increase in local patenting, population, and urbanization than do

other types of colleges. In terms of agricultural outcomes, the story is less clear: land grant

colleges appear to cause a larger increase in local agricultural productivity relative to other

types of colleges, but smaller increases in local agricultural output, and in most cases the

magnitudes are small. In short, it is difficult to definitively conclude that land grant colleges

play a unique role in promoting local agricultural innovation or output.

   Finally, I attempt to get a sense of what drives the observed effectiveness of land grant

colleges. Several pieces of legislation have been passed since the land grant college system

was first established in 1862, each of which has affected land grant colleges and their role in

agricultural innovation in different ways. I show that the difference in innovation between

college and runner-up counties is largest following pieces of legislation that are explicitly

targeted towards agricultural research, namely the 1887 Hatch Act and post-World War II

                                               4
federal funding programs, providing suggestive evidence that these laws had their intended

effect. This finding is true even when comparing land grant colleges to non-land grant

colleges to rule out college life-cycle effects. In sum, these historical natural experiments

paint a picture in which explicit funding of agricultural research had large positive effects

on the amount of measured agricultural innovation, but there is less clarity regarding how

useful these innovations were or how widely they diffused.

     This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a rich description of the land

grant college site selection experiments and describes the sample of colleges used in this

paper. Section III presents the results and Section IV concludes.




II      Land Grant College Site Selection Experiments

The main difficulty with attempting to estimate the causal effect of establishing an institution

of higher education, including a land grant college, is that these institutions are not located

at random. For instance, colleges were often located in up-and-coming areas that were

more productive and innovative than other areas in the same state, and so comparing places

that get colleges to these other locations will overstate the effect of a college. At the same

time, many land grant colleges were located away from productive population centers with

the belief that proximity to urban areas would distract students' from their learning. On

a similar note, state officials frequently wanted to locate public universities close to the

geographic center of the state so that they could be equally accessible to all; these concerns

often trumped desires to locate colleges in more productive areas. Indeed, many land grant

colleges appear to have been located so as to be, as one university president put it, "equally


                                               5
inaccessible from all parts" of the state (Dunaway, 1946, p. 14-15). Hence, it is ex ante

unclear whether college location decisions are likely to bias estimates of the effects of colleges

upwards or downwards.

       To overcome this challenge, I use the data and estimation strategy from Andrews (2019b).

More specifically, I examine the historical record to find locations that were finalists to

become the site of a new college, similar to the technique used to identify counterfactual

locations for large manufacturing plants in Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010). I

further restrict attention to cases in which the choice of the winning finalist site is as good

as random assignment. I refer to the losing finalists as "runner-up" sites. Andrews (2019b)

examines colleges of various types, while in this paper my primary goal is understanding the

role of land grant colleges.3

       Andrews (2019b) provides a detailed overview of these natural experiments, including

showing that college and runner-up sites are observationally similar prior to establishing

the college; showing that college and runner-up sites evolve along parallel trends prior to

establishing the college; conducting numerous placebo tests; and describing qualitatively

the site selection process, arguing that these decisions were fraught with randomness and

unpredictability (see especially the Historical Appendix, Andrews (2019a)). I therefore take

the opportunity here to describe several of these college site selection experiments in more

detail than is possible in this other work, providing a deeper understanding of the kinds of

historical contingencies at work while referring the reader to Andrews (2019b) for technical

details.
   3
    For the purposes of this paper, I do not consider historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)
funded under the Second Morrill Act of 1890 as land grants. Reclassifying them as land grant colleges does
not qualitatively alter the results.



                                                    6
       I begin with a description of the college site selection process in North Dakota, where

the state legislature literally randomly assigned the location of its land grant college, North

Dakota State University (NDSU).4 In an effort to get northern towns to support the move of

the Dakota Territory's capital to the south, Territorial Governor Nehemiah Ordway promised

other state institutions, including the agricultural college and the state university, to towns

in the north. (This push to move the capital would eventually result in the Dakotas splitting

into North and South in 1889.) Representatives from the towns of Fargo, Grand Forks,

Jamestown, and Bismarck all wanted one of the educational institutions, and despite fu-

rious negotiations, they could not be made to agree. Finally, in 1883, with a legislative

deadline approaching, the representatives agreed in exasperation to draw lots to allocate the

institutions. Fargo won the agricultural college. Seven years later, the school was formally

established as the state land grant university (Geiger, 1958, p. 13-27). In the empirical anal-

ysis below, I compare Fargo to Jamestown and Bismarck, the runner-up sites, to estimate

the effect of the college.5 One point worth emphasizing is that Jamestown and Bismarck

looked very similar to Fargo prior to the establishment of NDSU and, as far as one can

ascertain from the historical data, all had the climate, infrastructure, and temperament to

successfully support a school. The point is not that the location of NDSU was random, but

rather that it was random among the set of finalist locations. Thus, comparing Fargo to

only the runner-up sites ensures that the comparison locations are good counterfactuals for

Fargo.
   4
      The location of the University of North Dakota was also assigned randomly at the same time and in the
same manner; see Section II.A below.
    5
      I do not consider Grand Forks as a runner-up site because it received an institution of higher education
of its own. Including the few cases in which the "losing" sites receive a college does not meaningfully alter
any results.



                                                      7
       Of course, literal random assignment of college sites is rather rare. More common are

cases in which states set out a number of criteria that any prospective site must meet,

and then painstakingly surveyed areas for their suitability. Many "wannabe" locations were

eliminated at this stage. Among the remaining candidate locations, a board of trustees or site

selection committee would typically meet and debate. Finally, the decision would then come

to a vote. These votes were often quite contentious. I consider a candidate location to be as

good as randomly assigned if, following this process in which less suitable sites are eliminated,

the vote between the winner and the loser is very close. This occurred, for instance, in the

cases of the University of Maine (Smith, 1979), the University of Nevada (Doten, 1924),

Clemson University (Reel, 2011), and the University of Tennessee (Montgomery, Folmsbee,

and Greene, 1984).

       The University of California Davis provides an example of a typical site selection process.

Berkeley was originally the location of California's only land grant college, but from the very

beginning critics complained that Berkeley was not climatically representative of the rest

of the state and so was a poor site for agricultural research.6 In 1905, the California state

legislature voted to establish a model farm operated independently of the Berkeley campus.

The site selection commission was overwhelmed by more 70 offers from around the state.

When narrowing down the sites, the commission set the following criteria:


         The farm site should lie within the central portion of the state, in close proximity

         to a main railroad line, with easy access to good service; its soils should consist

         largely of medium loam not subject to flooding or under a level; an irrigation
   6
    The original location of California's land grant college was selected because it was close to San Francisco
but far enough away to avoid distractions. The trustees settled on Berkeley only after planned land purchases
in neighboring counties fell through (Ferrier, 1930, p. 157-214).


                                                      8
      system should already be in place; and the proposed property should be situated

      within the vicinity of a clean and progressive town. Additionally, [the commis-

      sion] thought the site ought optimally to represent the state's "typical" rainfall

      and general agriculture (i.e., irrigated crops) and avoid extreme heat or other

      insalubrious conditions. (Scheuring, 2001, p. 18)


As this quote demonstrates, representative climatic conditions and infrastructure to support

farming were often explicit criteria when deciding land grant locations, providing confidence

that winning and runner-up sites are likely similar in terms of their suitability for agriculture.

Given the parameters of this refined search, the California commission was left with four

finalist locations in Davis, Walnut Creek, Suisun, and Woodland. Although final votes

among these finalists are not known, the final meeting to select among these sites dragged

on for hours, highlighting just how contentious the decision was. Davis was selected only

after speculators tripled the price of land at the commission's first choice. The farm was

officially established in 1906 and would become an full-fledged agricultural college in 1921.

   The other way in which land grant college sites were often selected was through an

auction-like process. Based on the prevailing interpretation of the 1862 Morrill Act, states

could use their land grant endowment to fund the operating expenses of agricultural colleges,

but could not use them for purchasing land or erecting buildings. If a state wanted to

create a new agricultural college from scratch, they often solicited bids from localities in the

state. I consider the college site to be as-good-as-randomly assigned if candidates' bids are

known and the winning bid is very similar to that of losing candidates. These close bidding

processes are typically also followed by a contentious vote among a site selection committee.



                                                9
These auction-type processes occur for schools such as the University of Arkansas (Reynolds

and Thomas, 1910), the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (Turner (1932), Solberg

(1968)), Iowa State University (Ross, 1958), the Missouri University of Science & Technology

(Roberts, 1946), and the University of Missouri (Rees and Walsworth (1989), Burnes (2014)).

   In many cases, the decision of where to locate a college was not only contentious among

a site selection committee, but among the residents of the state as well. The University of

Florida provides such an example. In 1905, the state of Florida had eight small institutions of

higher education scattered across the state. In an effort to consolidate, the legislature passed

the Buckman Act, which closed the existing institutions, re-evaluated the best locations, and

then re-established the college at a potentially new site. Gainesville and Lake City quickly

emerged as the clear frontrunners to become the new site of the college. Lake City had

the added distinction of being the site of the previous Florida Agricultural College. Both

Gainesville and Lake City submitted bids of similar amounts, and when it came time for

the Board of Control of the university system to vote on the matter, Gainesville won over

Lake City, six to four, following a contentious debate. But as acrimonious as the vote was, it

paled in comparison to the views of the citizens of Lake City: as materials from the former

agricultural college were being packed to move to their new home in Gainesville, they were

done so under an armed guard for fear of rioting (Proctor and Langley, 1986, 18-26).

   In still other cases, unusual "fluky" events proved decisive in determining the location of

land grant colleges. The establishment of Cornell University (New York's land grant college

and the only private land grant institution) provides such an example. What would become

Cornell University was originally intended to be located at the People's College in Havana,

New York, but the state senator sponsoring the bill suffered an ill-timed stroke, delaying the

                                              10
decision. Later, the legislature was strongly considering placing the college in Ovid when a

well-known advocate for the compassionate treatment of the insane died mid-speech before

the state assembly in Albany. State senators Andrew White and Ezra Cornell were able to

use the death to convince the legislature that Ovid should receive an insane asylum instead

of a college. Satisfied with the arrangement, Ovid's representatives then decided to support

whatever location White and Cornell decided to endorse, creating a dominant legislative

coalition (Bishop (1962), Kammen (2003)). Even then, the decision was not settled: White

and Cornell each wanted to place the college in their hometowns, with White being from

Syracuse and Cornell from Ithaca. But Cornell adamantly refused to allow the college to

be located in Syracuse, because as a young man he had been "robbed [there] not once but

twice" (Kammen, 2003, p. 2003); White and Cornell settled on Ithaca instead.

   Other colleges provide further examples of serendipity determining a school's location.

Louisiana State University moved to Baton Rouge after its prior location burned down, and

only a few sites in the state had the infrastructure to take on the school on short notice

(Fleming, 1936). There are even accounts (possibly apocryphal) that the location of Texas

Agricultural and Mechanical University was decided by a poker game (Dethloff, 1975, p. 18)!

   Even acts of God intervened to determine college location. In 1885, Arizona's famous (or

infamous) "Thieving Thirteenth" legislature met to divvy up the territory's state institutions.

The citizens of Tucson had their hearts set on obtaining the state insane asylum when they

set off for the legislative assembly in Prescott. But flooding on the Salt River delayed the

Tucson delegates, and when they arrived in Prescott the insane asylum had already been

spoken for. The people of Tucson were stuck with the state's land grant college, which

became the University of Arizona (Martin (1960, p. 21-25), Wagoner (1970, p. 194-222),

                                              11
Cline (1983, p. 2-4)).

   As these examples illustrate, the narrative historical record contains rich details about

both the locations that received land grant colleges and those that were strongly considered

but ultimately did not. Some of these details suggest variation that may be useful for

additional analysis. For example, in the case of North Dakota State and the University of

Arizona, the "losing towns" that did not receive the land grant college received another type

of institution instead. Likewise, in the case of Cornell University, Ovid received an insane

asylum in lieu of the land grant college. Syracuse, another runner-up for Cornell University,

did not receive any other institution at the time Cornell was established, but did receive a

university of its own within a few decades. In this paper, I abstract from these issues, but

I discuss them in some detail in Andrews (2019b). Analysis of other types of heterogeneity,

such as exploring more finely differences across types of institutions, geography, or other

local conditions, may be of interest for future work. All of this is possible using the details

available in the narrative record.



II.A     Non-Land Grant Colleges

Similar strategies can be used to determine runner-up locations for non-land grant colleges as

well. As mentioned above, North Dakota drew lots to determine the location of its flagship

public university, the University of North Dakota, as well as its land grant college. In the

case of the Georgia Institute of Technology, 24 rounds of balloting were required before

Atlanta was selected over Macon (McMath Jr., Bayor, Brittain, Foster, Giebelhaus, and

Reed, 1985, p. 24-32). For Southern Arkansas University, eight rounds of balloting were



                                              12
required (Willis, 2009, p. 21-43), and the University of Mississippi took seven (Sansing,

1999, p. 1-24).7 Auction-like processes and other "fluky" events are likewise common for

the non-land grant colleges.

       In this paper, I use non-land grant colleges as a set of "control institutions" to gain a

sense of whether or not the effects I observe from establishing land grant colleges are caused

by policies specifically related to land grants or whether they are common to all institutions

of higher education. Appendix A lists more details about the sample of non-land grant

colleges used in this paper.



II.B        The Sample of Colleges

In total, there are 29 cases in which the site selection decision for a land grant college was

as-good-as random, representing 55% of the 53 non-HBCU U.S. land grant institutions. As

in Andrews (2019b), all results in this paper are robust to dropping individual colleges or

types of site selection decisions. Table 1 list each of these 29 colleges, the winning county of

each, the runner-up counties, and the year in which the college is established.

       Table 2 presents summary statistics of the land grant college site selection experiments.

The median land grant college had one runner-up county, with the mean having about

1.5 runner-up counties. The median runner-up site is about 110 km from the college site,

although there is considerable heterogeneity, with the mean runner-up 150 km away, the

farthest runner-up 550 km away, and the closest runner-up being only 30 km away.

       Throughout this paper, I define the year in which a college is established to be the year
   7
     Southern Arkansas University actually began as an agricultural school, although it was not a land grant
college. The results in this paper are insensitive to dropping schools like Southern Arkansas or reclassifying
them as "land grants."



                                                     13
in which the college site is selected as described in the college site selection experiments

above. In some cases, this date is not the same as the date in which an institution was

formally founded, nor need it coincide with the date at which the college opened its doors.

Results are unchanged when using the first year when students attended or the first year

students graduated as the establishment year. In Section III.B, I investigate the importance

of other dates in a college's life, such as the year colleges began receiving reliable federal

research funding. Most of the sample colleges selected their sites and opened their doors in

the first decade and a half after the Morrill Land Grant Act was passed. Two schools were

established before the act and obtained land grant status later. Western states typically

established their land grant colleges around the same time they obtained statehood, with

several states doing so in the 1880s and 1890s. Southern states could not take advantage

of the Morrill Act while in rebellion against the U.S. government during the Civil War, so

all southern schools in the sample established their colleges in 1869 or later. There is thus

substantial temporal variation in the establishment of land grant colleges.




III     Results

Figure 1 plots four different outcome variables for the land grant and runner-up counties over

time. Year 0 is normalized to be the year in which each land grant college is established. In

Panel (a), I plot logged patenting, in Panel (b) logged county population, Panel (c) logged

agricultural yield (that is, log( V alueAgr.Output
                                     F armAcres
                                                   )), and Panel (d) the logged value of all agri-

cultural output. Throughout, all U.S. patenting data come from the dataset assembled in

Berkes (2018); population data come from the National Historical Geographic Information


                                               14
System (Manson, Schroeder, Riper, and Ruggles, 2018); and all agricultural data comes from

agricultural censuses, cleaned and compiled by Haines, Fishback, and Rhode (2018). For the

population and agricultural data that comes from federal census data, I linearly interpo-

late values for all between-census years; unless otherwise noted, results are not sensitive to

alternative interpolation approaches or to only using data from census years.

   These four pictures tell the main story of this chapter: counties that receive a land grant

college see a measurable increase in local invention, especially after about five decades. There

is weak and noisy evidence that land grant colleges also cause increases in population, a major

driver of local invention for the larger sample of colleges considered in Andrews (2019b). But

the counties that receive land grant colleges see no clear increase in agricultural productivity

or output relative to the runners-up; while the agricultural measures fluctuate over time,

these fluctuations are typically common to both the college and runner-up counties.

   Table 3 confirms these results in a regression framework. I estimate the simple differences-

in-differences model:



           Yit =1 LandGrantCountyi × P ostLandGrantit + 2 P ostLandGrantit

                + Countyi + Y eart +    it .                                                (1)



LandGrantCountyi is an indicator variable equal to one for the counties that receive land

grant colleges. P ostLandGrantit is an indicator variable equal to one in years t after the

establishment of the college for which county i was either the winner or runner-up. Countyi

is a county fixed effect, Y eart is a year effect, and   it   an idiosyncratic error term. The

estimation sample is made up of the college and runner-up counties for all years for which


                                               15
data is available; not all variables are available for all years. In all regressions that follow, I

cluster standard errors at the county level.

       I estimate effects of establishing a land grant college for a larger battery of outcome

variables than I present in Figure 1. Panel (a) of Table 3 shows results for innovation and

population outcomes. Column 1 confirms the results from Panel (a) of Figure 1: establishing

a land grant college causes about 54 log points more patents per year relative to the runner-up

counties. Column 2 specifically examines patents classified as agricultural according to the

NBER patent classification system (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2001). While the estimated

coefficient is positive, it is imprecisely estimated and much smaller in magnitude than overall

patenting, at a roughly nine log point increase in agricultural patents per year. Column 3

shows that there is no significant change in the fraction of agricultural patents in land grant

college counties after establishing a new college.8

       One challenge with measuring agricultural innovation is that many important break-

throughs, particularly the development of new and improved crop varieties, are not patented

(Olmstead and Rhode, 2008).9 To provide some insight into the location of non-patented

agricultural invention, I consult a USDA technical report (Clark et al., 1922) that attempts

to classify every variety of wheat grown in the United States as of 1920. Crucially, and

exceedingly rare among agricultural studies, the authors also provide histories of each wheat

variety, including how, when, and where each variety was developed and/or introduced to the
   8
     This variable is constructed as the number of agricultural patents divided by the number of patents with
a known patent class (Marco, Carley, Jackson, and Myers, 2015). Patent class information is still missing
for some patents, particularly older patents. This measure is undefined when the class is unknown for all
patents in a county in a given year.
   9
     This is not to say that patent data is irrelevant to an understanding of agricultural innovation, only
that patent data alone paints an incomplete picture. Improvements in farm implements and mechanized
equipment, often highlighted as vital contributors to American agricultural development (Cochrane (1979),
Hayami and Ruttan (1985)) were patentable.



                                                     16
United States. This allows me to investigate the extent to which land grant colleges directly

contributed to innovation in the wheat sector.10 Because individual counties are extremely

unlikely to develop more than one variety in a given year, in Column 4 I present estimates

from a regression in which the outcome variable is an indicator that is equal to one if a

county develops a new variety in that year and zero otherwise.11 Establishing a land grant

college causes a small but statistically significant increase in the likelihood of introducing a

new crop variety, on the order of 2%.

       Consistent with Panel (b) of Figure 1, Column 5 shows that establishing a land grant

college causes a positive but statistically insignificant increase in total population of about

ten log points. The fraction of the county population living in urban areas, shown in Column

6, is also positive but statistically insignificant, and is close to zero in magnitude.

       In Panel (b) of Table 3, I show results for various agricultural outcomes. In Column 1,

I show that establishing a new college has no statistically significant effect on agricultural

yields, although the coefficient is positive and non-trivial in magnitude, equal to a roughly

ten log point increase in agricultural productivity relative to the runner-up counties. One

issue with yields as an outcome variable is that it is defined as the value of agricultural

output divided by agricultural land, and establishing a new college may affect both the

numerator and the denominator. In particular, a successful land grant college may induce

more marginal land to come into agricultural production, decreasing yields while increasing

output. In columns 2-4, I estimate the effect of establishing a land grant college on several
  10
     In ongoing work, I attempt to transcribe more recent USDA reports that contain histories of crop
varieties developed in later years, as well as to gather data on yields or other measures of quality for the
different varieties. I thank Paul Heisey for pointing out the existence of these later reports and discussing
their potential usefulness for research on the geography of invention.
  11
     Because the USDA report (Clark et al., 1922) was based on data collected in 1919 and 1920, the outcome
variable is unavailable for years after 1920.


                                                     17
output measures: the total value of agricultural output, the value of crop output, and the

value of livestock produced. In all cases, establishing a land grant college has statistically

insignificant effects, although in the effect is positive and sizable in magnitude for agricultural

output and crop output.12 This suggests that the land grant counties are increasing the

amount of agricultural land relative to the runner-up counties, consistent with untabulated

results on the amount of improved farm acreage.

       I repeat this exercise in Appendix B with a larger, although likely less randomly located,

sample of colleges and find similar effects of establishing a college on innovation outcomes but

smaller or even negative effects on agricultural outcomes. The sensitivity of the agricultural

productivity and output results to the exact sample of data used highlights how noisy the

agricultural outcomes are across time and location, and the agricultural results should be

treated with caution.

       Even setting aside data concerns, the large positive coefficients for local innovation out-

comes and small-in-magnitude and statistically insignificant coefficients for agricultural out-

comes lend themselves to several possible interpretations. One interpretation is that the

agricultural innovations documented in Panel (a) of Table 3 successfully diffuse throughout

the land grant college's state, so the county from which these innovations originated saw

little benefit from them relative to the otherwise similar runner-up counties. Alternatively,

the results could be interpreted as evidence that the innovations developed in land grant

college counties are irrelevant to agricultural production in the state, or that the agricul-

tural outcome measures are mismeasuring true agricultural productivity. Much more work
  12
    The agricultural results here present one case in which interpolation meaningfully alters point estimates.
When using only data from agricultural census years, the coefficients for agricultural productivity, agri-
cultural output, and crop output are all smaller in magnitude, and the coefficient on agricultural output
becomes negative. These results are available upon request.


                                                     18
is needed to conclusively determine which of these interpretations is most correct.



III.A         Comparing Land Grant Colleges to Other Types of Colleges

Is there something "special" about the land grant college program, or would the observed

positive effects on innovation be observed anytime an institution of higher education is

established? To answer this question, I use data from all college site selection experiments,

not just the land grants.

       Figure 2 plots the difference between college and runner-up counties separately for land

grant and non-land grant colleges for the same four outcome variables as in Figure 1. Both

types of colleges had small and largely constant differences prior to the colleges being es-

tablished.13 Both types of colleges exhibit an increase in patenting and population after

establishment, although at different rates. In particular, while the non-land grant college

counties see almost immediate increases in local population relative to their runner-up coun-

ties, the land grant college counties see large increases in population only after about seven

decades. The pictures for agricultural productivity and output are less clear, with particu-

larly large fluctuations for land grant colleges but no obvious trend.

       I next test the difference between the types of colleges more formally in a triple differences
  13
    In all cases, I fail to reject the null hypothesis of parallel pre-trends for both the land grant and non-land
grant colleges; results are available upon request. The plotted figures can be misleading in the earliest years
since data is not available for all colleges three decades before the college establishment date.




                                                       19
framework. I estimate



                      Yit =1 CollegeCountyi × P ostCollegeit × LandGranti

                            + 2 CollegeCountyi × P ostCollegeit

                            + 3 LandGranti × P ostCollegeit

                            + 4 P ostCollegeit + Countyi + Y eart +            it ,                        (2)



where CollegeCountyi is a dummy equal to one if county i ever receives a college of any

type, P ostCollegeit is a dummy equal to one in years t after the establishment of the college

for which county i was either the winner or runner-up, and LandGranti is a dummy equal

to one if i was either the winner or runner-up for a land grant college.

       I present results in Table 4, for the same outcome variables as measured in Table 3.14

The variable of interest, CollegeCountyi × P ostCollegeit × LandGranti , is rarely statistically

significant, which is not surprising given the relatively small number of college experiments.

Nevertheless, the coefficients suggest an interesting pattern. Land grant colleges appear to

cause about nine log points less of an increases in local patenting than do the non-land grant

colleges. Land grant colleges also appear to cause less of an increase in agricultural patenting,

although the coefficient is close to zero in magnitude. But when focusing on non-patent-

based agricultural innovations, land grant colleges do have a larger effect than the non-land

grants: land grant colleges cause a 2% increase in the likelihood of introducing new wheat

varieties relative to the non-land grant colleges, an effect statistically significant at the 10%
  14
     Results comparing land grant to non-land grant colleges are similar when restricting the sample of non-
land grants to include only public colleges (typically flagship state universities that are not also land grant
colleges, such as the University of North Dakota), although the smaller sample of colleges results in less
precise estimates; these results are available upon request.


                                                      20
level. Land grant colleges also cause cause less population growth and urbanization than do

the non-land grant colleges. Agricultural productivity appears to increase more in counties

that receive a land grant college than in counties that receive other types of colleges, but

if anything land grant colleges cause worse outcomes in terms of total agricultural output,

crop output, and livestock.

   The coefficient on CollegeCountyi × P ostCollegeit measures the effect of establishing

non-land grant colleges and shows that these other types of institutions also generate sizable

increases in local patenting and agricultural patenting, as well as creating positive but statis-

tically insignificant and small in magnitude increases in agricultural output. Unlike the land

grant colleges, the non-land grant colleges create large increases in local population and sta-

tistically significant increases in urbanization. The coefficient on LandGranti ×P ostCollegeit

measures how the land grant runner-up counties perform after establishing a land grant col-

lege relative to the non-land grant runners-up after establishing a non-land grant college,

and is thus a plausible measure of spillovers from land grants. The coefficient is negative

for agricultural productivity, agricultural output, and crop output, although it is positive

for all measures of innovation. This calls into question whether the land grant colleges were

more effective at generating innovations that diffused throughout their states than were other

types of colleges. Conclusions about spillovers and diffusion should be made with caution,

however, since the non-land grant runner-up counties may be exposed to innovations from

a nearby land grant college, and vice versa. A full exploration of these issues is beyond the

scope of this paper.




                                               21
III.B      What Pieces of Land Grant Legislation Were Most Effec-

           tive?

The current land grant college system is the result of several pieces of legislation, from the

1862 Morrill Act to the most recent farm bill, each of which affected the local innovation

ecosystem in different ways. To speak of "the effect" of land grant colleges is therefore to

obscure many distinctions that may be important for policymakers. As a first pass at under-

standing which pieces of legislation had the largest local effect, I repeat the basic differences-

in-differences analysis from above, but define multiple "post-period" dummy variables that

are equal to one during time periods that denote given legislative epochs. I examine the

difference between land grant college counties and runner-up counties following the initial

establishment of land grant colleges under the Morrill Act of 1862, the establishment of

agricultural experiment stations following the Hatch Act of 1887, and the post-World War II

era in which the federal government became much more directly involved in research fund-

ing, exemplified by the 1946 Research and Marketing Act.15 Each of these dates marks a

commonly-recognized turning point in the funding of higher education, particularly in re-

lation to agricultural research. Numerous studies highlight the pioneering role of the 1862

Morrill Act in establishing institutions dedicated to agricultural education and research, in-

cluding several full-length histories (Edmond (1978), Cross (1999, p. 77-94), Geiger and
   15
      Many other important pieces of legislation could be studied as well, such as the Second Morrill Act of
1890 that established additional land grant colleges, especially for African Americans; the 1906 Adams Act
that provided additional federal funding for scientific research; the 1925 Purnell Act that provided federal
funding for applied research to aid the local agricultural sector; or the 1935 Bankhead-Jones Act, which
introduced formula funding and federal and state matching grants for basic agricultural research. Alston and
Pardey (1996) provide a useful summary of major legislation related to agricultural research. In additional
untabulated analysis, I consider the effects of these other pieces of legislation as well. Unfortunately, many
of the acts occurred within a decade or two of one another, making it extremely difficult to determine the
effects of particular laws. I therefore focus on what I consider the most important changes in legislation,
with the caveat that more additional research is needed to conclusively determine the effects of each policy.


                                                     22
Sorber (2013), Sorber (2018)). A sizable literature also examines the effects of the 1887

Hatch Act, which established state agricultural experiment stations and provided federal

funding to conduct research at those stations, marking the beginning of direct federal fund-

ing of agricultural research activities (Kerr (1987), Ferleger (1990), Hillison (1996), Kantor

and Whalley (2019)). The 1946 Research and Marketing Act, which dramatically increased

federal spending on state agricultural experiment stations and reorganized the administra-

tion of federal agricultural research support, has been the least examined by historians of

agriculture or education, although it has not been completely ignored (Bowers (1946), Al-

ston and Pardey (1996)). More broadly, the 1946 Act exemplifies the federal government's

changing approach in the postwar world, with the end of World War II widely recognized

as a watershed moment in the federal government's support for university research (Geiger

(1993), Rosenberg and Nelson (1994), Mowery and Rosenberg (1998), Mowery and Sampat

(2001)).

       I estimate the following model:



Yit =1 LandGrantCountyi × P ostM orrillActit + 2 LandGrantCountyi × P ostHatchActit

         + 3 LandGrantCountyi × P ostW orldW arIIit + Countyi + Y eart +                it .           (3)



where P ostM orrilAct equals one for 1862  t < 1887, P ostHatchAct equals one for 1887 

t < 1946, and P ostW orldW arII equals one for 1946  t.16 I focus on the first cohort of

land grant colleges, established between 1862 and 1870, to see how a constant set of colleges

changes over the lifecycle.
  16
    Results are similar when replacing the year fixed effects with the much coarser time period dummies for
P ostM orrilAct, P ostHatchAct, and P ostW orldW arII .


                                                    23
       I present results in Table 5. When splitting up the patenting results into four time

periods (the pre-period before 1862 Morrill Act, which is the base time, and the time periods

corresponding to each of the three interaction terms), individual coefficients are typically not

statistically significant. It appears that the college counties only begin to see larger levels of

patenting relative to the runners-up after the passage of the Hatch Act, with an even larger

increase observed after World War II. Agricultural patenting, however, exhibits a different

pattern, with the increase in the level of agricultural patents increasing in college counties

relative to runners-up immediately following the passage of the Morrill Act while falling to

almost zero following the Hatch Act and finally rebounding after World War II. The fraction

of agricultural patents appears to increase in land grant college counties relative to the

runners-up after the Morrill and Hatch Acts, but decreases after World War II, although the

post-World War II magnitude is small.17 Population and urbanization exhibit increases in

college counties relative to the runners-up that are large in magnitude following World War

II: total population increases by a statistically significant 54 log points, with urbanization

increases by nine log points. Total population shows a sizable eleven log point increase

following the Hatch Act as well. For agricultural productivity, agricultural output, and crop

output, the land grant college counties see a decrease relative to the runner-up counties

following the Morrill and Hatch Acts before seeing increases after World War II, although

most of these coefficients are fairly small in magnitude, with magnitudes between two and

thirteen log points. Livestock products actually exhibit the largest increase in college counties

relative to the runners-up in the years following the Morrill Act, making it difficult to tell a
  17
    Because the data on the introduction of new wheat varieties is from a 1922 report (Clark et al., 1922),
no post-World War II observations are available and so I do not examine that outcome variable in Table 5.




                                                    24
consistent story about the role of each piece of legislation on local agricultural outcomes.

   While suggestive, interpreting the results in Table 5 is difficult. New colleges began as

very small institutions that then grew over time, raising the possibility that larger differences

between the college and runner-up counties after 1887 or 1946 are driven by the "natural"

growth of these colleges rather than by specific policies. To attempt to account for this, I

compare the effect of the 1862-1870 land grant colleges to the effect of other types of colleges

that were established between 1860 and 1870.

   Figure 4 shows the difference in patenting between college and runner-up counties for

this cohort of colleges, where calendar years are plotted on the x-axis and the passage of

the Morrill, Hatch, and Research and Marketing Acts are indicated. The land grant college

counties see sizable increases in the number of patents relative to the runner-up counties

beginning in the early 1900s, while a similar takeoff for the non-land grant college counties




                                               25
does not begin until about 1960.18 To formalize these findings, I estimate



   Yit =1 CollegeCountyi × P ostM orrillActit × LandGranti

           + 2 CollegeCountyi × P ostHatchActit × LandGranti

           + 3 CollegeCountyi × P ostW orldW arIIit × LandGranti

           + 4 CollegeCountyi × P ostM orrillActit + 5 CollegeCountyi × P ostHatchActit

           + 6 CollegeCountyi × P ostW orldW arIIit + 7 LandGranti × P ostM orrillActit

           + 8 LandGranti × P ostHatchActit + 9 LandGranti × P ostW orldW arIIit

           + Countyi + Y eart +       it .                                                                  (4)



The triple interaction terms 1 -3 show the effect of establishing a land grant college relative

to the effect of establishing other types of colleges in each time period. The interaction terms

4 -6 show the average effect of establishing non-land grant colleges in each time period, while

the interaction terms 7 -9 show the difference between all counties under consideration to

receive a land grant college and all counties under consideration for other types of colleges in

each time period. The assumption needed to identify the triple interactions terms of interest

is that, without the research-related legislation, land grant and non-land grant colleges of

the same age would have similar effects on the local economy at every point in time.

       Results are presented in Table 6. For readability, I only present coefficient estimates for

the triple interactions terms, 1 -3 ; full results are available upon request. All coefficients

of interest are, again not surprisingly, not statistically significant, but many are large in
  18
    The differences in the relative dynamics of patenting between Figures 4 and 2 is due to the fact that
the figures are plotting patenting for a different sample of colleges, with Figure 4 containing only the schools
established between 1860 and 1870.


                                                      26
magnitude. After the Morrill Act, land grant colleges appear to cause roughly 15 log points

less of an increase in local patenting than the non-land grant colleges. This reverses after

the Hatch Act, with land grant colleges increases local patenting relative to their runner-up

counties by 46 log points more than the non-land grant colleges after the Hatch Act and 37

log points more after World War II. Land grant colleges cause larger increases in the level

of agricultural patenting than do the non-land grant patents for all three periods, although

in all periods the land grant colleges cause a decline in the share of agricultural patents

relative to the non-land grant colleges, with the largest decline in the share of seven log

points occurring after the passage of the Hatch Act.

   The land grant colleges cause less of an increase in population after the Morrill and Hatch

Acts than do the non-land grant colleges, although following World War II the land grant

colleges have cause a roughly 25 log points larger increase in population than do the non-land

grant colleges. In all three periods, the land grant colleges appear to cause a larger increase

in urbanization (or, at least, less of a decrease), although the magnitudes are very small until

after World War II. Land grant colleges cause a larger increase in agricultural productivity

only after World War II, although they cause an increase in agricultural output and crop

output following the Hatch Act as well, and an increase in the value of livestock products

sold in all three periods. If anything, land grant colleges cause a decline in agricultural

productivity, agricultural output, and crop output relative to the non-land grant colleges

in the initial decades following the passage of the Morrill Act. I stress again that these

differences are all statistically insignificant and should be interpreted with caution.

   Facilitating comparisons of different types of institutions over distinct epochs of fed-

eral involvement in agricultural research opens the door to many interesting lines of study.

                                              27
Changes that occur in the postwar period are particularly interesting because, while legisla-

tion such as the 1946 Research and Marketing Act specifically targeted agricultural research

that was largely conducted at land grant colleges, postwar federal involvement in science and

research occurred in nearly all sectors, not merely agriculture.19 The fact that land grant

colleges had a long-established history of supporting applied research may have made land

grant colleges a particularly attractive destination of federal funding in the postwar era; I

leave a deeper exploration of this issue to future work.




IV         Conclusion

In this paper, I provide detailed descriptions of the processes through which states decided

where to locate their land grant colleges. Serendipity frequently played a role in determining

college location, and I exploit this fact to identify runner-up sites that would have received

land grant colleges but for as-good-as-random reasons.

       Using these runner-up sites as counterfactuals for locations that receive a land grant

college, I show that establishing a land grant college causes more local agricultural innova-

tion, measured both by patents and new crop varieties. While land grant colleges cause an

increase in innovation, they cause small and imprecisely estimated improvements in agri-

cultural performance relative to the runner-up counties. These results lend themselves to

several interpretations. One interpretation is that innovations developed at land grant col-

leges diffuse effectively, but it could also be the case that land grant college innovations
  19
     One may worry that only a few federal institutions dominated postwar federal funding, and that these
institutions are missing from my sample. O'Mara (2005), for example, documents how skewed federal funding
was across institutions. While MIT and Stanford are not in my sample, Georgia Tech (which would increase
its share of federal funding in the 1960s and 1970s) is included as a non-land grant college.



                                                   28
have limited relevance to farmers working within the same state. Additional research is

needed to determine how the diffusion process for land grant innovations operates. Kantor

and Whalley (2019) provide a promising first step in this direction, focusing on the role of

geographic proximity and communications technologies in explaining the diffusion from land

grant colleges, but much work remains to be done.

   More work is also needed to understand exactly what types of policies led to the success

of the land grant program, and which of these policies can be replicated in other contexts

or with other types of institutions. In this paper I present suggestive evidence that the

Hatch Act and post-World War II federal funding, both of which provided direct federal

support for agricultural research, were particularly effective in promoting local invention.

Limited variation in the implementation of similar large scale policies makes these types of

questions difficult to answer today. While the historical evidence presented in this paper is

not conclusive, my hope is that the data and methodology presented here will prove to be

of continuing utility in addressing important questions for agricultural innovation policy.


References
Alston, J. M. and P. G. Pardey (1996). Making science pay: the economics of agricultural
     R&D policy. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute Press.
Andrews, M. J. (2019a). Historical appendix: How do institutions of higher education affect
     local invention? Evidence from the establishment of U.S. colleges. Unpublished, NBER.
Andrews, M. J. (2019b). How do institutions of higher education affect local invention?
     Evidence from the establishment of U.S. colleges. Unpublished, NBER.
Berkes, E. (2018). Comprehensive universe of U.S. patents (CUSP): data and facts. Unpub-
     lished, Ohio State University.
Bishop, M. (1962). A history of Cornell. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Drawings by
     Alison Mason Kingsbury.
Bowers, D. E. (1946, January). The Research and Marketing Act of 1946 and its effects on
     agricultural marketing research. Agricultural History 56 (1), 249­263.
Burnes, B. (2014). Missou175: the remarkable story of Missouri's flagship university from
     1839 to 2014. Kansas City, MO: Rockhill Books.


                                             29
Clark, J. A., J. H. Martin, and C. R. Ball (1922). Classification of American wheat varieties.
      Bulletin 1074, Washington.
Cline, P. (1983). Mountain campus: the story of Northern Arizona University. Flagstaff,
      AZ: Northland Press.
Cochrane, W. W. (1979). The development of American agriculture: a historical analysis.
      Minneapolis: Univeristy of Minnesota Press.
Cross, C. F. (1999). Justin Smith Morrill: father of the land-grant colleges. East Lansing,
      MI: Michigan State University Press.
Dethloff, H. C. (1975). A centennial history of Texas A&M University, 1876-1976, Vol. I.
      College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press.
Doten, S. B. (1924). An illustrated history of the University of Nevada. The University of
      Nevada.
Dunaway, W. F. (1946). History of the Pennsylvania State College. Lancaster, PA: Lancaster
      Press, Inc.
Edmond, J. B. (1978). Magnificent charter: the origin and role of the Morrill land-grant
      colleges and universities. New York: Exposition Press.
Ferleger, L. (1990, Spring). Uplifting American agriculture: experiment station scientists and
      the Office of Experiment Stations in the early years after the Hatch Act. Agricultural
      History 64 (2), 5­23.
Ferrier, W. W. (1930). Origin and development of the University of California. Berkeley,
      CA: The Sather Gate Book Shop.
Fleming, W. L. (1936). Louisiana State University: 1860-1896. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana
      State University Press.
Geiger, L. G. (1958). University of the northern plains: a history of the University of North
      Dakota, 1883-1958. Grand Forks, ND: The University of North Dakota Press.
Geiger, R. L. (1993). Research and relevant knowledge: American research universities since
      World War II. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Geiger, R. L. and N. M. Sorber (Eds.) (2013). The land-grant colleges and the reshaping of
      American higher education. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Greenstone, M., R. Hornbeck, and E. Moretti (2010, June). Identifying agglomeration
      spillovers: evidence from winners and losers of large plant openings. Journal of Political
      Economy 118 (3), 536­598.
Haines, M., P. Fishback, and P. Rhode (2018). United States agricultural data, 1840-2012
      (ICPSR 35206). https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/35206/
      publications, accessed May 12, 2019.
Hall, B. H., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2001). The NBER patent citation data file:
      lessons, insights and methodological tools. NBER Working Paper.
Harrington, J. and M. B. Sauter (2018, November 14). The 25 most innovative cities in US
      share affinity for technology. USA Today . https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/
      2018/11/14/top-cities-entrepreneurs-tech-25-most-innovative-places-us/
      38330651/.
Hausman, N. (2017). University innovation and local economic growth. Unpublished, Hebrew
      University.
Hayami, Y. and V. W. Ruttan (1985). Agricultural development: an international perspective.
      Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

                                              30
Hillison, J. (1996). The origins of agriscience: or where did all that scientific agriculture
       come from? Journal of Agricultural Education 37 (4), 8­13.
Im, J. (2019, April 29). These are the 10 best places to live in the US in 2019.
       CNBC . https://www.cnbc.com/2019/04/15/us-news-world-report-best-places
       -to-live-in-the-us-in-2019.html.
Jaffe, A. B. (1989, Dec). Real effects of academic research. American Economic Review 79 (5),
       957­970.
Kammen, C. (2003). Cornell: glorious to view. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Library.
Kantor, S. and A. Whalley (2014, March). Knowledge spillovers from research universities:
       evidence from endowment value shocks. Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (1),
       171­188.
Kantor, S. and A. Whalley (2019, April). Research proximity and productivity: long-term
       evidence from agriculture. Journal of Political Economy 127 (2), 819­854.
Kerr, N. A. (1987). The legacy: a centennial history of the state agricultural experiment
       stations, 1887-1987. Columbia, MO: Missouri Agricultural Experiment Station, Uni-
       versity of Missouri.
Manson, S., J. Schroeder, D. V. Riper, and S. Ruggles (2018). IPUMS national historical
       geographic information system: version 13.0. http://doi.org/10.18128/D050.V13
       .0.
Marco, A. C., M. Carley, S. Jackson, and A. F. Myers (2015, June). The USPTO historical
       patent data files: two centuries of invention. Unpublished, USPTO Economic Working
       Paper No. 2015-1.
Martin, D. D. (1960). The lamp in the desert: the story of the University of Arizona. Tucson,
       AZ: The University of Arizona Press.
McMath Jr., R. C., R. H. Bayor, J. E. Brittain, L. Foster, A. W. Giebelhaus, and G. M.
       Reed (1985). Engineering the new south: Georgia Tech, 1885-1985. Athens, GA: The
       University of Georgia Press.
Montgomery, J. R., S. J. Folmsbee, and L. S. Greene (1984). To foster knowledge: a history
       of the University of Tennessee, 1794-1970. Knoxville, TN: The University of Tennessee
       Press.
Moscona, J. (2019). Downstream effects of research incentives: evidence from agricultural
       innovation. Unpublished, MIT.
Moser, P. and P. W. Rhode (2012). Did plant patents create the American rose? In
       J. Lerner and S. Stern (Eds.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity Revisited,
       pp. 413­438. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mowery, D. C. and N. Rosenberg (1998). Paths of innovation: technological change in 20th-
       century American. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mowery, D. C. and B. N. Sampat (2001, August). University patents and patent policy
       debates in the USA, 1925-1980. Industrial and Corporate Change 10 (3), 781­814.
Olmstead, A. L. and P. W. Rhode (2008). Creating abundance: biological innovation and
       American agricultural development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
O'Mara, M. P. (2005). Cities of knowledge: Cold War science and the search for the next
       Silicon Valley. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Proctor, S. and W. Langley (1986). Gator history: a pictorial history of the University of
       Florida. Gainesville, FL: South Star Publishing Company.

                                             31
Reel, J. V. (2011). The high seminary: a history of the Clemson Agricultural College of South
      Carolina, 1889-1964, Volume 1. Clemson, SC: Clemson University Digital Press.
Rees, D. and A. Walsworth (1989). The University of Missouri: 150 years. Marceline, MO:
      Walsworth Publishing Company.
Reynolds, J. H. and D. Y. Thomas (1910). History of the University of Arkansas. Fayetteville,
      AR: University of Arkansas.
Roberts, C. N. (1946). History of the University of Missouri School of Mines and Metallurgy,
      1871-1946.
Rosenberg, N. and R. R. Nelson (1994, May). American universities and technical advance
      in industry. Research Policy 23 (3), 323­348.
Ross, E. D. (1958). The land-grant idea at Iowa State College: a centennial trial balance,
      1858-1958. Ames, IA: The Iowa State College Press.
Sansing, D. G. (1999). The University of Mississippi: a sesquicentenniel history. Oxford,
      MS: University Press of Mississippi.
Scheuring, A. F. (2001). Abundant harvest: the history of the University of California, Davis.
      Davis, CA: UC Davis History Project.
Smith, D. C. (1979). The first century: a history of the University of Maine, 1865-1965.
      Orono, ME: University of Maine at Orono Press.
Solberg, W. U. (1968). The University of Illinois: 1867-1894: an intellectual and cultural
      history. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Sorber, N. M. (2018). Land-grant colleges and popular revolt: the origins of the Morrill Act
      and the reform of higher education. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Turner, F. H. (1932). Misconceptions concerning the early history of the University of Illi-
      nois. In Transactions for the Year 1932: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting, Papers
      Presented at that Time, Contributions to State History, Volume 39. Illinois State His-
      torical Library.
Wagoner, J. J. (1970). Arizona Territory, 1863-1912: a political history. University of
      Arizona Press.
Willis, J. F. (2009). Southern Arkansas University: the mulerider school's centennial history,
      1909-2009. Bloomington, IN: Xlibris Corporation.
Wright, B. D. (2012, December). Grand missions of agricultural innovation. Research Pol-
      icy 41 (10), 1716­1728.




                                             32
Graphs

                                                               Figure 1: Land Grant College and Runner-Up Counties
                 3




                                                                                                                               11.5
                                                                                                                                  11
      log(Patents + 1)
                     2




                                                                                                                  log(Total Pop.)
                                                                                                                        10.5
      1




                                                                                                                10             9.5
                 0




                                   -30   -20   -10   0    10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100                                        -30   -20   -10   0     10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100
                                                               Years Since Experiment                                                                                             Years Since Experiment

                                                               College            Runner-Up                                                                                       College            Runner-Up



                                                     (a) log(P atents + 1)                                                                                                 (b) log(P opulation)

                                                                                                                               16
                 3




                                                                                                                log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)
      log(Ag. Land Productivity)




                                                                                                                                           15
                        2.5




                                                                                                                                14
             2




                                                                                                                     13
                 1.5




                                                                                                                               12




                                   -30   -20   -10   0    10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100                                        -30   -20   -10   0     10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100
                                                               Years Since Experiment                                                                                             Years Since Experiment

                                                               College            Runner-Up                                                                                       College            Runner-Up



                                                         (c) log(Ag.Y ields)                                                                                               (d) log(Ag.Output)

Notes: Plots of various outcome variables in land grant college (green solid lines) and runner-up (gold dashed
lines) counties. The x-axis shows the number of years since the land grant college experiment. The year of
the college experiment is normalized to year 0.




                                                                                                            33
                                                               Figure 2: Land Grant College and Runner-Up Counties




                                                                                                                                 .8
                 1




                                                                                                                                 .6
      log(Patents + 1)




                                                                                                                log(Total Pop.)
                   .5




                                                                                                                  .2       .4
      0




                                                                                                                                 0
                 -.5




                                   -30   -20   -10   0    10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100                    -.2                     -30   -20   -10   0     10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100
                                                               Years Since Experiment                                                                                                 Years Since Experiment

                                                          Land Grant             Non-Land Grant                                                                                 Land Grant              Non-Land Grant



                                                     (a) log(P atents + 1)                                                                                                     (b) log(P opulation)
                 .4




                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)
      log(Ag. Land Productivity)
                              .2




                                                                                                                                   .5      1
                    0




                                                                                                                           0
          -.2




                                                                                                                  -.5
                 -.4




                                                                                                                                 -1




                                   -30   -20   -10   0    10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100                                            -30   -20   -10   0     10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100
                                                               Years Since Experiment                                                                                                 Years Since Experiment

                                                          Land Grant             Non-Land Grant                                                                                 Land Grant              Non-Land Grant



                                                         (c) log(Ag.Y ields)                                                                                                   (d) log(Ag.Output)

Notes: Plots of the difference between college and runner-up counties for various outcome variables for land
grant colleges (green solid lines) and non-land grant colleges (gold dashed lines). The x-axis shows the
number of years since the land grant college experiment. The year of the college experiment is normalized
to year 0.




                                                                                                            34
                               Figure 3: Land Grant College and Runner-Up Counties
         2
  log(Patents + 1)
  0      -1      1




                     1840   1860     1880       1900       1920       1940       1960       1980   2000
                                                           Year

                                            Land Grant                     Non-Land Grant


                                             Figure 4: log(P atents + 1)

Notes: Plot of the difference in logged patenting between college and runner-up counties for land grant
colleges (green solid lines) and non-land grant colleges (gold dashed lines) established between 1860 and
1870. The x-axis shows calendar years.




                                                         35
Tables
                               Table 1: List of Land Grant College Experiments

                 College                  County               State         Runner-Up Counties        Year Established

 1     Pennsylvania State University         Centre       Pennsylvania                Blair                  1855
 2    University of California Berkeley     Alameda        California        Contra Costa; Napa              1857
 3        Kansas State University             Riley          Kansas                 Shawnee                  1863
 4           Cornell University             Tompkins       New York       Onondaga; Seneca; Schuyler         1865
 5          University of Maine             Penobscot         Maine                Sagadahoc                 1866
 6        University of Wisconsin             Dane         Wisconsin              Fond du Lac                1866
 7          University of Illinois         Champaign          Illinois     Morgan; McLean; Logan             1867
 8        West Virginia University         Monongalia     West Virginia      Greenbrier; Kanawha             1867
 9        Oregon State University            Benton          Oregon                  Marion                  1868
 10          Purdue University             Tippecanoe        Indiana       Monroe; Hancock; Marion           1869
 11       University of Tennessee             Knox         Tennessee               Rutherford                1869
 12      Louisiana State University     East Baton Rouge    Louisiana      East Feliciana; Bienville         1870
 13      Texas A and M University            Brazos            Texas            Austin; Grimes               1871
 14       University of Arkansas           Washington       Arkansas             Independence                1871
 15         Auburn University                  Lee          Alabama         Tuscaloosa; Lauderdale           1872
 16    Virginia Polytechnic Institute     Montgomery         Virginia       Albemarle; Rockbridge            1872
 17    North Dakota State University          Cass        North Dakota        Stutsman; Burleigh             1883
 18        University of Arizona              Pima           Arizona                  Pinal                  1885
 19        University of Nevada              Washoe          Nevada               Carson City                1885
 20   North Carolina State University         Wake       North Carolina      Lenoir; Mecklenburg             1886
 21       University of Wyoming              Albany         Wyoming             Laramie; Uinta               1886
 22        Utah State University              Cache            Utah                  Weber                   1888
 23         Clemson University               Pickens     South Carolina             Richland                 1889
 24    New Mexico State University          Dona Ana      New Mexico               San Miguel                1889
 25         University of Idaho               Latah            Idaho               Bonneville                1889
 26    University of New Hampshire          Strafford    New Hampshire              Belknap                  1891
 27     Washington State University         Whitman        Washington                Yakima                  1891
 28        University of Florida             Alachua         Florida                Columbia                 1905
 29    University of California Davis          Yolo        California        Contra Costa; Solano            1906

Notes: List of land grant college experiments in the sample, along with the winning county and state, the
runner-up counties, and the year in which the site selection decision took place.



                      Table 2: Summary Statistics of Land Grant College Experiments


                                           N       Mean         S.D.       Min        Median           Max

         # Runner-Up Counties 29   1.55                         0.69  1.00             1.00          3.00
         Distance to College  45 150.38                        111.88 30.31           109.28        553.35
         Year Established     29 1877.28                       13.28 1855.00          1872.00      1906.00


Notes: Number of runner-up counties, average distance from the runner-up counties to the college site, and
experiment year for the land grant college experiments in the sample.




                                                          36
Table 3: Differences-in-Differences Results Comparing Land Grant College Counties to Runner-Up Counties

                                                      (a) Innovation and Population Outcomes

                                      log(Patents + 1) log(Ag. Patents + 1)    Frac. Ag. Patents     New Wheat Variety log(Total Pop.)    log(Frac. Urban)
     CollegeCounty * PostCollege          0.539                 0.0857                0.00246             0.0168             0.0966           0.00319
                                          (0.193)              (0.0624)               (0.0196)           (0.00605)           (0.199)          (0.0304)

     PostCollege                          0.0970                0.105                  0.0228            -0.00711             0.287            0.0264
                                          (0.172)              (0.0627)               (0.0147)           (0.00282)           (0.157)          (0.0232)
     Num. Counties × Years                 13141                13141                    9745               6639              12449             9477
     Adj. r-Sqr.                           0.721                0.314                   0.0461            0.00778             0.799             0.702

     Standard errors in parentheses
     
       p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
                                                                (b) Agricultural Outcomes

                                  log(Ag. Land Productivity)    log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)    log(Value Crops + 1)   log(Value Livestock Products + 1)
  CollegeCounty * PostCollege               0.0998                             0.156                         0.127                        -0.0419
                                            (0.118)                           (0.286)                       (0.331)                       (0.385)

  PostCollege                               -0.177                             0.314                         0.189                         0.628
                                           (0.0837)                           (0.222)                       (0.280)                       (0.355)
  Num. Counties × Years                     11780                             12190                          12190                        12190
  Adj. r-Sqr.                               0.914                             0.923                          0.956                        0.938

  Standard errors in parentheses
  
    p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001

Notes: Differences-in-differences regression results comparing land grant college counties to runner-up coun-
ties before and after establishing each college. Panel (a) uses innovation and population outcomes as the
dependent variables. Panel (b) uses agricultural yield and output as the dependent variables. All regressions
include county and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                                               37
         Table 4: Triple Differences Results Comparing the Land Grant to Non-Land Grant Colleges

                                                         (a) Innovation and Population Outcomes

                                            log(Patents + 1)   log(Ag. Patents + 1) Frac. Ag. Patents       New Wheat Variety log(Total Pop.) log(Frac. Urban)
     College * Post-College * Land Grant        -0.0934               -0.00639               0.00930             0.0157              -0.385           -0.0616
                                                (0.263)               (0.0757)               (0.0257)           (0.00640)           (0.262)          (0.0433)

     CollegeCounty * PostCollege                0.634                 0.0926                 -0.00842            0.00118            0.487            0.0649
                                                (0.183)               (0.0426)               (0.0170)           (0.00206)           (0.164)          (0.0310)

     Post-College * Land Grant                   0.209                 0.0798                 0.0129            -0.000826            0.216            0.0438
                                                (0.182)               (0.0570)               (0.0172)           (0.00164)           (0.182)          (0.0267)

     PostCollege                                 -0.126               -0.00841               0.00906             -0.00103           0.00980          -0.00970
                                                (0.107)               (0.0333)               (0.0116)           (0.00168)           (0.0966)         (0.0164)
     Num. Counties × Years                       34911                 34911                  24115               17760              33541             25601
     Adj. r-Sqr.                                 0.724                 0.297                  0.0527             0.00408             0.803             0.734

     Standard errors in parentheses
     
       p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
                                                                 (b) Agricultural Outcomes

                                         log(Ag. Land Productivity)    log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)    log(Value Crops + 1)   log(Value Livestock Products + 1)
  College * Post-College * Land Grant             0.0538                            -0.0462                        -0.0544                        -0.146
                                                  (0.144)                           (0.366)                        (0.432)                       (0.472)

  CollegeCounty * PostCollege                      0.0337                            0.203                          0.182                         0.123
                                                  (0.0985)                          (0.219)                        (0.275)                       (0.265)

  Post-College * Land Grant                        -0.177                           -0.0331                        -0.0922                        0.497
                                                  (0.0751)                          (0.199)                        (0.245)                       (0.265)

  PostCollege                                      0.108                             0.227                          0.157                        0.0103
                                                  (0.0555)                          (0.0953)                       (0.121)                       (0.119)
  Num. Counties × Years                            32092                             33312                          33312                        33312
  Adj. r-Sqr.                                      0.918                             0.926                          0.966                        0.947

  Standard errors in parentheses
  
    p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001

Notes: Triple differences regression results comparing college counties to runner-up counties before and after
establishing each college for land grant and non-land grant colleges. Panel (a) uses innovation and population
outcomes as the dependent variables. Panel (b) uses agricultural yield and output as the dependent variables.
All regressions include county and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                                                  38
Table 5: Comparing Land Grant College Counties to Runner-Up Counties following Several Pieces of
Legislation

                                                         (a) Innovation and Population Outcomes

                                                  log(Patents + 1)   log(Ag. Patents + 1)   Frac. Ag. Patents log(Total Pop.)      log(Frac. Urban)
                 College * Post-Morrill Act             -0.0165              0.108               0.0643               -0.0151           -0.0202
                                                        (0.255)             (0.152)             (0.0453)              (0.210)          (0.0330)

                 College * Post-Hatch Act                0.466              0.0238               0.0389                0.112            0.0182
                                                        (0.340)            (0.0914)             (0.0305)              (0.289)          (0.0420)

                 College * Post-World War II             0.646              0.179               -0.00594              0.538             0.0911
                                                        (0.332)            (0.0914)             (0.0100)              (0.156)          (0.0587)
                 Num. Counties × Years                  4451                4451                  3526                 4378             3538
                 Adj. r-Sqr.                            0.747               0.304                0.0582                0.846            0.744

                 Standard errors in parentheses
                 
                   p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
                                                                  (b) Agricultural Outcomes

                                  log(Ag. Land Productivity)      log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)   log(Value Crops + 1)     log(Value Livestock Products + 1)
  College * Post-Morrill Act                 -0.0765                            -0.128                        -0.107                          0.228
                                            (0.0810)                           (0.302)                       (0.264)                         (0.423)

  College * Post-Hatch Act                    -0.0280                          -0.0222                       -0.0692                          -0.161
                                              (0.137)                          (0.357)                       (0.376)                         (0.324)

  College * Post-World War II                0.0459                            0.0971                         0.106                          0.0909
                                            (0.0800)                           (0.261)                       (0.426)                         (0.238)
  Num. Counties × Years                       4188                              4398                          4398                              4398
  Adj. r-Sqr.                                 0.951                             0.947                         0.973                             0.950

  Standard errors in parentheses
  
    p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001

Notes: Triple differences regression results comparing college counties to runner-up counties before and after
several major land grant-related pieces of legislation for the cohort of land grant and non-land grant colleges
established between 1860 and 1870. Panel (a) uses innovation and population outcomes as the dependent
variables. Panel (b) uses agricultural yield and output as the dependent variables. All regressions include
county and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                                                 39
Table 6: Comparing the Land Grant to Non-Land Grant Colleges following Several Pieces of Legislation

                                                            (a) Innovation and Population Outcomes

                                                                log(Patents + 1) log(Ag. Patents + 1)   Frac. Ag. Patents     log(Total Pop.)    log(Frac. Urban)
                  College * Post-Morrill Act * Land Grant              -0.149            0.149               -0.0372                 -0.276          0.00831
                                                                      (0.347)           (0.146)             (0.0797)                (0.213)          (0.0398)

                  College * Post-Hatch Act * Land Grant                0.456            0.0250               -0.0696                 -0.148           0.0193
                                                                      (0.441)          (0.0932)             (0.0759)                (0.317)          (0.0662)

                  College * Post-World War II * Land Grant             0.365             0.165               -0.0131                 0.246            0.0460
                                                                      (0.407)           (0.107)             (0.0524)                (0.218)          (0.0846)
                  Num. Counties × Years                               7248              7248                  5253                    7227            5817
                  Adj. r-Sqr.                                         0.750             0.289                0.0454                   0.868           0.771

                  Standard errors in parentheses
                  
                    p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
                                                                       (b) Agricultural Outcomes

                                                  log(Ag. Land Productivity) log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)   log(Value Crops + 1)        log(Value Livestock Products + 1)
   College * Post-Morrill Act * Land Grant                  -0.0598                        -0.0179                           -0.152                         0.179
                                                            (0.162)                        (0.481)                          (0.398)                        (0.692)

   College * Post-Hatch Act * Land Grant                    -0.0199                         0.153                            0.126                         0.0783
                                                            (0.144)                        (0.480)                          (0.505)                        (0.462)

   College * Post-World War II * Land Grant                 0.0941                          0.302                            0.388                          0.145
                                                           (0.0953)                        (0.344)                          (0.679)                        (0.289)
   Num. Counties × Years                                    6947                            7267                            7267                              7267
   Adj. r-Sqr.                                              0.956                           0.957                           0.976                             0.956

   Standard errors in parentheses
   
     p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001

Notes: Differences-in-differences regression results comparing land grant college counties to runner-up coun-
ties before and after several major land grant-related pieces of legislation for the cohort of colleges established
before 1870. Panel (a) uses innovation and population outcomes as the dependent variables. Panel (b) uses
agricultural yield and output as the dependent variables. All regressions include county and year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                                                      40
A        The Non-Land Grant College Sample

                                                                   Table A1

                        College                        County         State                   Runner-Up Counties                 Year Established

 1              University of Mississippi             Lafayette     Mississippi Attala; Monroe; Winston; Harrison; Montgomery;        1841
                                                                                                     Rankin
 2            Eastern Michigan University            Washtenaw     Michigan                          Jackson                          1849
 3             The College of New Jersey               Mercer     New Jersey              Essex; Burlington; Middlesex                1855
 4            University of South Dakota                 Clay    South Dakota                Yankton; Bon Homme                       1862
 5                University of Kansas                 Douglas      Kansas                          Shawnee                           1863
 6                Lincoln College (IL)                  Logan        Illinois                Macon; Warrick; Edgar                    1864
 7            Southern Illinois University             Jackson       Illinois    Jefferson; Washington; Perry; Clinton; Marion        1869
 8                 Mercer University                     Bibb       Georgia                         Spalding                          1870
 9   Missouri University of Science and Technology     Phelps       Missouri                           Iron                           1870
 10               University of Oregon                   Lane       Oregon                   Linn; Polk; Washington                   1872
 11              University of Colorado                Boulder     Colorado                         Fremont                           1874
 12            University of Texas Austin               Travis        Texas                           Smith                           1881
 13       University of Texas Medical Branch          Galveston       Texas                           Harris                          1881
 14           University of North Dakota             Grand Forks North Dakota                  Stutsman; Burleigh                     1883
 15             Arizona State University              Maricopa      Arizona                           Pinal                           1885
 16         Georgia Institute of Technology             Fulton      Georgia              Bibb; Greene; Baldwin; Clarke                1886
 17            Kentucky State University              Franklin     Kentucky        Daviess; Christian; Warren; Boyle; Fayette         1886
 18                New Mexico Tech                     Socorro    New Mexico                       San Miguel                         1889
 19            University of New Mexico               Bernalillo  New Mexico                       San Miguel                         1889
 20 Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University    Madison      Alabama                        Montgomery                          1891
 21       North Carolina A and T University           Guilford   North Carolina    Forsyth; Durham; New Hanover; Alamance             1892
 22           Northern Illinois University             DeKalb        Illinois                      Winnebago                          1895
 23            Western Illinois University           McDonough       Illinois      Hancock; Adams; Mercer; Warren; Schuyler           1899
 24       University of Nebraska at Kearney            Buffalo     Nebraska                      Valley; Custer                       1903
 25          Western Michigan University             Kalamazoo     Michigan                      Allegan; Barry                       1903
 26            Georgia Southern College                Bulloch      Georgia                     Tattnall; Emanuel                     1906
 27             East Carolina University                 Pitt    North Carolina           Beaufort; Lenoir; Edgecombe                 1907
 28       Middle Tennessee State University          Rutherford    Tennessee                      Montgomery                          1909
 29       Western State Colorado University           Gunnison     Colorado                      Mesa; Garfield                       1909
 30            Arkansas Tech University                  Pope      Arkansas               Franklin; Conway; Sebastian                 1910
 31        Bowling Green State University               Wood          Ohio                 Henry; Van Wert; Sandusky                  1910
 32              Kent State University                 Portage        Ohio                          Trumbull                          1910
 33          Southern Arkansas University             Columbia     Arkansas                Hempstead; Ouachita; Polk                  1910
 34         Southern Mississippi University            Forrest    Mississippi                     Hinds; Jones                        1910
 35            Texas Christian University              Tarrant        Texas                           Dallas                          1910
 36         Southern Methodist University               Dallas        Texas                          Tarrant                          1911
 37              High Point University                Guilford   North Carolina                     Alamance                          1921
 38                   Texas Tech                      Lubbock         Texas                       Scurry; Nolan                       1923
 39            Maine Maritime Academy                 Hancock        Maine                         Sagadahoc                          1941
 40         US Merchant Marine Academy                 Nassau      New York                          Bristol                          1941
 41              US Air Force Academy                  El Paso     Colorado                    Madison; Walworth                      1954

Notes: List of non-land grant college experiments in the sample, along with the winning county and state,
the runner-up counties, and the year in which the site selection decision took place.




                                                                         41
                                               Table A2


                                     N     Mean         S.D.      Min      Median        Max

       # Runner-Up Counties 41   2.12                  1.38  1.00            2.00        6.00
       Distance to College  87 139.57                 202.22 30.61          84.77      1,413.28
       Year Established     41 1893.51                24.99 1841.00        1892.00     1954.00


Notes: Number of runner-up counties, average distance from the runner-up counties to the college site, and
experiment year for the non-land grant college experiments in the sample.



B      Results with Both "High" and "Low" Quality Col-

       lege Site Selection Experiments

In all of the examples described above, I argue that which finalist county receives the college

is as good as random assignment. I refer to these cases as "high quality college site selection

experiments." Of course, this is not true for all land grant colleges. In many other cases, I

am able to identify a set of finalist counties, but I am less confident that the winning county

is randomly assigned. I refer to these as "low quality college site selection experiments." To

give concrete examples, I am able to locate runner-up counties for Ohio State University, the

University of Wisconsin, and the University of Minnesota, but in all of these cases, a review

of the historical narrative literature makes clear that these colleges' locations were selected

so that the college could be near the state capitol. These same characteristics that drove the

site selection decision are likely to be correlated with other outcome variables under study.

    Andrews (2019b), using a larger sample that includes both land grant and non-land

grant colleges, shows that failing to restrict attention to the high quality site selection ex-

periments overstates the local effect of establishing a new college on local invention. In this


                                                   42
paper, because my baseline sample consists of only land grant colleges, results are slightly

underpowered when restricting attention to the high quality experiments. In this section,

I therefore include both the high and low quality site selection experiments to obtain more

precise, although possibly inconsistent, estimates. The results are typically qualitatively

similar to those in the body of the paper.

     Figure A1: Land Grant College and Runner-Up Counties, Including Low Quality Experiments




                                                                                                                               12
                 3




                                                                                                                               11.5
                 2.5
      log(Patents + 1)




                                                                                                                log(Total Pop.)
                                                                                                                           11
                 2




                                                                                                                 10.5
         1.5     1




                                                                                                                               10
                 .5




                                                                                                                               9.5




                                   -30   -20   -10   0    10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100                                        -30   -20   -10   0     10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100
                                                               Years Since Experiment                                                                                             Years Since Experiment

                                                               College            Runner-Up                                                                                       College            Runner-Up



                                                     (a) log(P atents + 1)                                                                                                 (b) log(P opulation)
                                                                                                                               16
                 3




                                                                                                                log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)
      log(Ag. Land Productivity)




                                                                                                                                           15
                            2.5




                                                                                                                                 14
                  2




                                                                                                                      13
       1.5




                                                                                                                               12
                 1




                                   -30   -20   -10   0    10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100                                        -30   -20   -10   0     10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100
                                                               Years Since Experiment                                                                                             Years Since Experiment

                                                               College            Runner-Up                                                                                       College            Runner-Up



                                                         (c) log(Ag.Y ields)                                                                                               (d) log(Ag.Output)

Notes: Plots of various outcome variables in land grant college (green solid lines) and runner-up (gold dashed
lines) counties. The x-axis shows the number of years since the land grant college experiment. The year
of the college experiment is normalized to year 0. All outcome variables are smoothed via local polynomial
regression.




                                                                                                            43
     Figure A2: Land Grant College and Runner-Up Counties, Including Low Quality Experiments
                   .8




                                                                                                                                   .6
                       .6




                                                                                                                                   .4
      log(Patents + 1)




                                                                                                                   log(Total Pop.)
                .4




                                                                                                                        .2
         .2




                                                                                                                                   0
                   0
                   -.2




                                      -30   -20   -10   0    10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100                   -.2                    -30   -20   -10   0     10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100
                                                                  Years Since Experiment                                                                                               Years Since Experiment

                                                             Land Grant             Non-Land Grant                                                                               Land Grant              Non-Land Grant



                                                        (a) log(P atents + 1)                                                                                                   (b) log(P opulation)
                   .6




                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                   log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)
                                 .4
        log(Ag. Land Productivity)




                                                                                                                                            .5
                        .2




                                                                                                                                  0
                0




                                                                                                                       -.5
      -.2          -.4




                                                                                                                                   -1




                                      -30   -20   -10   0    10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100                                          -30   -20   -10   0     10    20    30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100
                                                                  Years Since Experiment                                                                                               Years Since Experiment

                                                             Land Grant             Non-Land Grant                                                                               Land Grant              Non-Land Grant



                                                            (c) log(Ag.Y ields)                                                                                                 (d) log(Ag.Output)

Notes: Plots of the difference between college and runner-up counties for various outcome variables for land
grant colleges (green solid lines) and non-land grant colleges (gold dashed lines). The x-axis shows the
number of years since the land grant college experiment. The year of the college experiment is normalized
to year 0. All outcome variables are smoothed via local polynomial regression.




                                                                                                               44
         Figure A3: Land Grant College and Runner-Up Counties, Including Low Quality Experiments
         2
         1.5
  log(Patents + 1)
     .5  0
         -.5  1




                     1840   1860   1880       1900       1920      1940    1960       1980        2000
                                                         Year

                                          Land Grant                 Non-Land Grant


                                          Figure A4: log(P atents + 1)

Notes: Plot of the difference in logged patenting between college and runner-up counties for land grant
colleges (green solid lines) and non-land grant colleges (gold dashed lines) established between 1860 and
1870. The x-axis shows calendar years. The outcome variable is smoothed via local polynomial regression.




                                                       45
            Table A3: List of Land Grant College Experiments, Including Low Quality Experiments

                   College                      County              State                     Runner-Up Counties                   Year Established

 1         University of Minnesota             Ramsey            Minnesota                           Hennepin                           1851
 2        Michigan State University            Ingham            Michigan       Clinton; St. Clair; Newaygo; Ontonagon; Eaton;          1855
                                                                                                    Montcalm
 3       Pennsylvania State University            Centre        Pennsylvania     Franklin; Perry; Allegheny; Blair; Huntingdon;         1855
                                                                                                       Erie
 4     University of California Berkeley         Alameda          California            Contra Costa; Santa Clara; Napa                 1857
 5          University of Maryland           Prince George's      Maryland                         Montgomery                           1858
 6          Kansas State University                Riley           Kansas                    Leavenworth; Shawnee                       1863
 7    University of Massachusetts Amherst      Hampshire       Massachusetts                  Hampden; Middlesex                        1864
 8             Cornell University               Tompkins          New York                 Schuyler; Onondaga; Seneca                   1865
 9       Pennsylvania State University            Centre        Pennsylvania   Philadelphia; Union; Crawford; Allegheny; Adams          1865
 10         University of Kentucky                Fayette         Kentucky                            Mercer                            1865
 11          University of Vermont             Chittenden         Vermont                     Addison; Washington                       1865
 12            University of Maine              Penobscot           Maine                           Sagadahoc                           1866
 13         University of Wisconsin                Dane           Wisconsin                        Fond du Lac                          1866
 14           University of Illinois           Champaign            Illinois        DuPage; McLean; Morgan; Logan; Cook                 1867
 15         West Virginia University           Monongalia       West Virginia Kanawha; Barbour; Jackson; Brooke; Ritchie; Roane;        1867
                                                                               Ohio; Doddridge; Lewis; Mason; Taylor; Marshall;
                                                                                                    Greenbrier
 16         Oregon State University               Benton           Oregon                      Multnomah; Marion                        1868
 17         University of Minnesota              Ramsey           Minnesota                    Hennepin; McLeod                         1868
 18            Purdue University               Tippecanoe          Indiana                  Marion; Hancock; Monroe                     1869
 19         University of Tennessee                Knox           Tennessee                         Rutherford                          1869
 20        Louisiana State University      East Baton Rouge       Louisiana             East Feliciana; Rapides; Bienville              1870
 21          Ohio State University               Franklin             Ohio                  Athens; Hamilton; Butler                    1870
 22          University of Missouri               Boone           Missouri                       Greene; Jackson                        1870
 23        Texas A and M University               Brazos             Texas      Grimes; Austin; Limestone; Hays; Travis; Bexar;         1871
                                                                                                    McLennan
 24          University of Arkansas            Washington         Arkansas                        Independence                          1871
 25            Auburn University                    Lee           Alabama              Talladega; Tuscaloosa; Lauderdale                1872
 26      Virginia Polytechnic Institute       Montgomery           Virginia      Fredericksburg City; Rockbridge; Chesterfield;         1872
                                                                               Washington; Prince Edward; Albemarle; Hanover;
                                                                                              Roanoke; Shenandoah
 27        Colorado State University             Larimer          Colorado                             Weld                             1874
 28       Mississippi State University         Oktibbeha         Mississippi                    Clay; Lauderdale                        1878
 29     South Dakota State University           Brookings       South Dakota                        Minnehaha                           1881
 30     North Dakota State University              Cass         North Dakota                   Burleigh; Stutsman                       1883
 31          University of Arizona                 Pima            Arizona                         Yuma; Pinal                          1885
 32           University of Nevada               Washoe            Nevada                          Carson City                          1885
 33     North Carolina State University            Wake        North Carolina                 Lenoir; Mecklenburg                       1886
 34         University of Wyoming                 Albany          Wyoming                        Uinta; Laramie                         1886
 35          Utah State University                 Cache             Utah                          Utah; Weber                          1888
 36            Clemson University                 Pickens      South Carolina                        Richland                           1889
 37      New Mexico State University           Dona Ana          New Mexico                         San Miguel                          1889
 38            University of Idaho                 Latah             Idaho                    Bonneville; Nez Perce                     1889
 39       Oklahoma State University                Payne          Oklahoma                    Oklahoma; Canadian                        1890
 40      University of New Hampshire             Strafford     New Hampshire                    Belknap; Grafton                        1891
 41      Washington State University            Whitman          Washington                           Yakima                            1891
 42        Montana State University              Gallatin         Montana                            Cascade                            1893
 43        University of Connecticutt             Tolland        Connecticut                       New Haven                            1893
 44       University of Rhode Island           Washington       Rhode Island                        Providence                          1894
 45    University of California San Diego       San Diego         California                       Los Angeles                          1905
 46           University of Florida              Alachua           Florida      Pinellas; Leon; Polk; Suwannee; Walton; Marion;         1905
                                                                                       Osceola; Nassau; Duval; Columbia
 47      University of California Davis             Yolo          California       Stanislaus; Butte; San Joaquin; Monterey;            1906
                                                                                  Contra Costa; Santa Cruz; Fresno; Merced;
                                                                                 Santa Clara; Solano; Sonoma; Glenn; Alameda
 48           University of Hawaii              Honolulu           Hawaii                         Maui; Hawaii                          1907
 49     University of Alaska Fairbanks    Fairbanks North Star      Alaska       Valdez-Cordova Census Area; Kenai Peninsula;           1917
                                                                               Kodiak Island; Sitka; Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area
 50      University of California Irvine          Orange          California                       Los Angeles                          1960
 51   University of California Santa Cruz      Santa Cruz         California                       Santa Clara                          1961

Notes: List of land grant college experiments in the sample, along with the winning county and state, the
runner-up counties, and the year in which the site selection decision took place.




                                                                            46
Table A4: Summary Statistics of Land Grant College Experiments, Including Low Quality Experiments


                                                         N          Mean                S.D.            Min           Median              Max

         # Runner-Up Counties                           53           2.85              2.86            1.00            2.00              13.00
         Distance to College                           146          160.90            141.22          22.70           122.55            1,036.50
         Year Established                              53          1880.08             22.24         1851.00          1872.00           1961.00


Notes: Number of runner-up counties, average distance from the runner-up counties to the college site, and
experiment year for the land grant college experiments in the sample.




Table A5: Differences-in-Differences Results Comparing Land Grant College Counties to Runner-Up Coun-
ties, Including Low Quality Experiments

                                                      (a) Innovation and Population Outcomes

                                      log(Patents + 1) log(Ag. Patents + 1)    Frac. Ag. Patents     New Wheat Variety log(Total Pop.)    log(Frac. Urban)
     CollegeCounty * PostCollege          0.527                 0.0846                -0.00460           0.0157              0.0233            0.0288
                                          (0.183)              (0.0683)               (0.0114)           (0.00432)           (0.169)          (0.0203)

     PostCollege                          0.205                 0.126                0.0120               -0.00187           0.520            0.0406
                                         (0.0961)              (0.0400)             (0.00871)            (0.00141)           (0.0843)         (0.0135)
     Num. Counties × Years                 33560                33560                   24709              17178              31430             23903
     Adj. r-Sqr.                           0.785                0.487                   0.0527            0.00872             0.843             0.777

     Standard errors in parentheses
     
       p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
                                                                (b) Agricultural Outcomes

                                  log(Ag. Land Productivity)    log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)    log(Value Crops + 1)   log(Value Livestock Products + 1)
  CollegeCounty * PostCollege               -0.0330                           0.0445                        0.00622                        -0.161
                                            (0.100)                           (0.216)                       (0.268)                       (0.267)

  PostCollege                               0.0962                            0.467                         0.637                        0.730
                                           (0.0547)                           (0.123)                       (0.190)                      (0.187)
  Num. Counties × Years                     27818                             28808                          28808                        28808
  Adj. r-Sqr.                               0.906                             0.903                          0.947                        0.933

  Standard errors in parentheses
  
    p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001

Notes: Differences-in-differences regression results comparing land grant college counties to runner-up coun-
ties before and after establishing each college. Panel (a) uses innovation and population outcomes as the
dependent variables. Panel (b) uses agricultural yield and output as the dependent variables. All regressions
include county and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                                               47
Table A6: Triple Differences Results Comparing the Land Grant to Non-Land Grant Colleges, Including
Low Quality Experiments

                                                       (a) Innovation and Population Outcomes

                                            log(Patents + 1)   log(Ag. Patents + 1) Frac. Ag. Patents       New Wheat Variety log(Total Pop.) log(Frac. Urban)
     College * Post-College * Land Grant        -0.0648               -0.0149             0.000614               0.0147              -0.352           -0.0223
                                                (0.267)               (0.102)             (0.0152)              (0.00452)           (0.230)          (0.0273)

     CollegeCounty * PostCollege                0.588                 0.0977               -0.00584              0.00101            0.380            0.0515
                                                (0.144)               (0.0491)            (0.00827)             (0.00129)           (0.118)          (0.0166)

     Post-College * Land Grant                  0.264                  0.100               0.00810              0.0000740           0.329            0.0324
                                                (0.121)               (0.0438)            (0.00802)             (0.000952)          (0.102)          (0.0142)

     PostCollege                                 -0.0469               0.0144              0.00430               -0.000391           0.0576           0.00176
                                                (0.0614)              (0.0198)            (0.00449)             (0.000710)          (0.0517)         (0.00819)
     Num. Counties × Years                      121745                121745                  82945               62076             113133             85563
     Adj. r-Sqr.                                 0.784                 0.467                  0.0537             0.00881             0.848             0.780

     Standard errors in parentheses
     
       p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
                                                                 (b) Agricultural Outcomes

                                         log(Ag. Land Productivity)    log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)    log(Value Crops + 1)   log(Value Livestock Products + 1)
  College * Post-College * Land Grant             0.0229                             0.379                           0.337                        0.205
                                                  (0.127)                           (0.275)                         (0.348)                      (0.324)

  CollegeCounty * PostCollege                      -0.0564                          -0.338                           -0.333                      -0.363
                                                  (0.0657)                          (0.154)                         (0.186)                      (0.172)

  Post-College * Land Grant                       0.00906                            -0.117                         -0.0667                       0.229
                                                  (0.0527)                          (0.138)                         (0.187)                      (0.156)

  PostCollege                                     0.117                             0.468                          0.413                        0.364
                                                  (0.0272)                          (0.0812)                       (0.0912)                     (0.0923)
  Num. Counties × Years                           104525                            108738                          108738                       108738
  Adj. r-Sqr.                                      0.912                             0.872                           0.939                        0.922

  Standard errors in parentheses
  
    p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001

Notes: Triple differences regression results comparing college counties to runner-up counties before and after
establishing each college for land grant and non-land grant colleges. Panel (a) uses innovation and population
outcomes as the dependent variables. Panel (b) uses agricultural yield and output as the dependent variables.
All regressions include county and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                                                  48
Table A7: Comparing Land Grant College Counties to Runner-Up Counties following Several Pieces of
Legislation, Including Low Quality Experiments

                                                        (a) Innovation and Population Outcomes

                                                 log(Patents + 1)   log(Ag. Patents + 1)   Frac. Ag. Patents log(Total Pop.)      log(Frac. Urban)
                                                                                                      
                 College * Post-Morrill Act             0.316               0.158              0.0624                -0.0796           0.0238
                                                       (0.212)             (0.122)             (0.0295)              (0.131)          (0.0221)

                 College * Post-Hatch Act              0.616                0.113               0.0192               0.0160            0.0477
                                                       (0.307)             (0.125)             (0.0188)              (0.205)          (0.0285)

                 College * Post-World War II           0.788               0.0894               -0.00530          0.556               0.0811
                                                       (0.196)            (0.0654)             (0.00706)          (0.101)             (0.0364)
                 Num. Counties × Years                 10802               10802                 8284                10629             8591
                 Adj. r-Sqr.                           0.838               0.546                0.0678               0.898             0.835

                 Standard errors in parentheses
                 
                   p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
                                                                 (b) Agricultural Outcomes

                                  log(Ag. Land Productivity)     log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)   log(Value Crops + 1)     log(Value Livestock Products + 1)
  College * Post-Morrill Act                 -0.0406                          0.00465                       -0.0640                         0.0674
                                            (0.0526)                          (0.182)                       (0.173)                         (0.223)

  College * Post-Hatch Act                   -0.0185                          0.0523                        0.0172                          -0.0567
                                            (0.0844)                          (0.227)                       (0.240)                         (0.232)

  College * Post-World War II                0.101                             0.312                         0.523                           0.257
                                            (0.0557)                          (0.170)                       (0.283)                         (0.236)
  Num. Counties × Years                       9242                             9692                          9692                              9692
  Adj. r-Sqr.                                 0.943                            0.958                         0.974                             0.965

  Standard errors in parentheses
  
    p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001

Notes: Triple differences regression results comparing college counties to runner-up counties before and after
several major land grant-related pieces of legislation for the cohort of land grant and non-land grant colleges
established between 1860 and 1870. Panel (a) uses innovation and population outcomes as the dependent
variables. Panel (b) uses agricultural yield and output as the dependent variables. All regressions include
county and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                                                49
Table A8: Comparing the Land Grant to Non-Land Grant Colleges following Several Pieces of Legislation,
Including Low Quality Experiments

                                                            (a) Innovation and Population Outcomes

                                                                log(Patents + 1) log(Ag. Patents + 1)   Frac. Ag. Patents     log(Total Pop.)   log(Frac. Urban)
                  College * Post-Morrill Act * Land Grant              0.154             0.109               0.0329                -0.121            0.0155
                                                                      (0.286)           (0.152)             (0.0419)              (0.276)           (0.0398)

                  College * Post-Hatch Act * Land Grant                0.142            0.0725              -0.00782               -0.312           -0.00278
                                                                      (0.468)           (0.142)             (0.0387)              (0.299)           (0.0581)

                  College * Post-World War II * Land Grant             0.547            0.0215              -0.00815               0.292             0.0208
                                                                      (0.302)           (0.124)             (0.0189)              (0.194)           (0.0575)
                  Num. Counties × Years                               19637             19637                14552                  19444            15659
                  Adj. r-Sqr.                                         0.813             0.482                0.0545                 0.874            0.801

                  Standard errors in parentheses
                  
                    p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
                                                                       (b) Agricultural Outcomes

                                                  log(Ag. Land Productivity) log(Value Agricultural Output + 1)   log(Value Crops + 1)      log(Value Livestock Products + 1)
   College * Post-Morrill Act * Land Grant                  0.0172                          0.136                            0.101                         0.225
                                                            (0.105)                        (0.335)                          (0.308)                       (0.405)

   College * Post-Hatch Act * Land Grant                    -0.0788                        0.0163                           0.0526                        -0.0948
                                                            (0.101)                        (0.352)                          (0.380)                       (0.400)

   College * Post-World War II * Land Grant                 0.0468                          0.325                            0.340                         0.189
                                                           (0.0804)                        (0.236)                          (0.392)                       (0.339)
   Num. Counties × Years                                    17455                           18235                           18235                         18235
   Adj. r-Sqr.                                              0.948                           0.954                           0.971                         0.962

   Standard errors in parentheses
   
     p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001

Notes: Triple differences regression results comparing college counties to runner-up counties before and after
several major land grant-related pieces of legislation for the cohort of land grant and non-land grant colleges
established between 1860 and 1870. Panel (a) uses innovation and population outcomes as the dependent
variables. Panel (b) uses agricultural yield and output as the dependent variables. All regressions include
county and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                                                      50
