                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


      EXPOSURE TO DAILY PRICE CHANGES AND INFLATION EXPECTATIONS

                                       Francesco D'Acunto
                                        Ulrike Malmendier
                                           Juan Ospina
                                         Michael Weber

                                       Working Paper 26237
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26237


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019


We thank Klaus Adam, Sumit Agarwal, George-Marios Angeletos, Rudi Bachmann, Olivier
Coibion, Stefano Eusepi, Andreas Fuster, Nicola Gennaioli, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Theresa
Kuchler, Emanuel Moench, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Chris Roth, Eric Sims, Johannes
Stroebel, David Thesmar, Giorgio Topa, Laura Veldkamp, Nate Vellekoop, Mirko
Wiederholt, Johannes Wohlfart, Basit Zafar, and conference and seminar participants at the
2017 AEA, the ECB Conference on "Understanding inflation: lessons from the past, lessons
for the future," the Ifo Conference on Macro and Survey Data, the 2019 SITE workshop, the
Cleveland Fed Conference on Inflation for valuable comments, and the University of Chicago.
We also thank Shannon Hazlett and Victoria Stevens at Nielsen for their assistance with the
collection of the PanelViews Survey. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business and the Fama­Miller Center to run our surveys.
Researchers' own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part on data from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided by the Kilts Center for Marketing
Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn
from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen, nor of
the National Bureau of Economic Research. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and
was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein. An earlier version of this
paper has circulated with the title "Salient Price Changes, Inflation Expectations, and
Household Behavior."

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Francesco D'Acunto, Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael Weber. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exposure to Daily Price Changes and Inflation Expectations
Francesco D'Acunto, Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 26237
September 2019
JEL No. C83,D14,D84,D9,E31,E52,E71,G11

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that, to form aggregate inflation expectations, consumers rely on the price changes they
face in their daily lives while grocery shopping. Specifically, the frequency and size of price
changes, rather than their expenditure share, matter for individuals' inflation expectations. To
document these facts, we collect novel micro data for a representative US sample that uniquely
match individual expectations, detailed information about consumption bundles, and item-level
prices. Our results suggest that the frequency and size of grocery-price changes to which
consumers are personally exposed should be incorporated in models of expectations formation.
Central banks' focus on core inflation---which excludes grocery prices---to design expectations-
based policies might lead to systematic mistakes.

Francesco D'Acunto                             Juan Ospina
Boston College                                 Banco de la Republica de Colombia
Carroll School of Management                   juan.jose.ospina@gmail.com
dacuntof@bc.edu
                                               Michael Weber
Ulrike Malmendier                              Booth School of Business
Department of Economics                        University of Chicago
549 Evans Hall # 3880                          5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
University of California, Berkeley             Chicago, IL 60637
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                        and NBER
and NBER                                       michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu
I    Introduction
In his seminal islands model, Lucas (1972, 1973) posited that agents use the prices they
directly observe in their daily lives to form expectations about aggregate inflation. As
he discusses in Lucas (1975), "[T]he history of prices [. . .], observed by an individual is
his source of information on the current state of the economy and of the market z in
which he currently finds himself; equivalently, this history is his source of information on
future price." Although Lucas did not aim to provide a literal description of reality, this
assumption triggered a debate about its logical consistency and realism. Critics argued
that consumers could easily access aggregate inflation statistics, and that no empirical
support for this assumption existed in field data. Yet, when we fielded a survey among a
representative sample of US consumers and asked how they form inflation expectations,
they cited the price changes observed while grocery shopping as the most important source
of information (see Figure 1).
    In this paper, we propose novel data on individual expectations, consumption
bundles, and item-level prices to document that consumers use grocery-price changes
they face in their daily lives to form expectations about aggregate inflation. Crucially,
our detailed data on household-specific consumption bundles allow us to make progress
on uncovering the underlying process of belief formation, which informs theories on how
to enrich the standard rational-inattention framework: Not only do consumers rely on
household-specific grocery-price changes, rather than representative bundles, but the price
changes of those goods that they purchase more frequently drive the association with
aggregate inflation expectations. Moreover, larger price changes have a stronger effect
on expectations, making infrequent shoppers, who tend to observe larger changes across
shopping trips, respond more to the grocery-price changes to which they are exposed.
    Tackling these questions had not been possible prior to this research because of the
lack of data linking the price changes consumers face in their own consumption bundles
across several shopping trips to their inflation expectations at the time they purchase
such bundles. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first that observes at
the same time both multiple consumption bundles at the household level over time and



                                             1
    Figure 1: Sources of Information for Individual Inflation Expectations




                             2.4
                             2
                             1.6
                             1.2
                             .8
                             .4
                             0

                                   g


                                                  s


                                                             o


                                                                        s


                                                                                   s


                                                                                                          a


                                                                                                          s



                                                                                                           r


                                                                                                                   er
                                                                                                        so
                                                  nd




                                                                     er


                                                                               ew




                                                                                                       ue
                                     n




                                                               i




                                                                                           i
                                                            ad




                                                                                        ed




                                                                                                               th
                                  pi




                                                                     ap




                                                                                                      vi
                                               rie




                                                                                                    ag




                                                                                                               O
                                                                               N
                               op




                                                        /R




                                                                                       M




                                                                                                   Ad
                                                                   sp
                                          &F




                                                                                                  le
                                                                               e
                                                       TV
                             Sh




                                                                                       al
                                                                            in




                                                                                               ol
                                                               ew




                                                                                               n.
                                                                                     ci
                                         ily




                                                                          nl




                                                                                             C


                                                                                            Fi
                          n




                                                                                   So
                                                              N


                                                                          O
                                     m
                         w


                                   Fa
                         O




  Notes. This figure shows the average ranks of information sources that survey respondents indicate
  they rely on when forming inflation expectations. Respondents have to select the three most
  relevant sources that come to their minds (from a list). The first source coming to mind is assigned
  a value of 3, the second a value of 2, the third a value of 1, and all other sources a value of 0.
  Respondents can list less than three (or no) sources.



beliefs for a large and representative sample of consumers. Alongside inflation, our data
also cover expectations of other aggregate outcomes, individual consumption, saving,
and investment plans, as well as detailed demographics, financial literacy, numeracy, and
risk aversion. We use this information to show that inflation expectations, in turn, affect
individual beliefs about wage and house-price inflation, and influence mortgage borrowing
and savings decisions.
    The combination of consumption and expectations data, and the evidence on
consumers' reliance on household-specific price changes, has economically sizable
implications because the cross-sectional variation in household-level inflation, and hence
in the price signals individuals observe, is substantial. Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl
(2017) document that households differ significantly in the grocery prices they pay
despite similar consumption bundles, generating an interquartile range of realized inflation
between 6.2% to 9.0% at the household level. In the language of Lucas, the price signals
consumers observe on their islands vary dramatically even though they eat the same
fruits. Our findings thus imply expectations should vary substantially in the cross-section.



                                                                               2
And, indeed, the average interquartile range in one-year-ahead expected inflation in the
Michigan Survey of Consumers is 3.8% since 1999, and many respondents report inflation
expectations as high as 50% and as low as -30% (Bachmann, Berg, and Sims (2015)).
       The influence of grocery shopping on expectation formation is particularly striking
because the inflation index on which US policy makers mainly focus, the Core Consumer
Price Index, excludes grocery prices.1 The rationale for the exclusion of food (and energy)
prices is that those categories are particularly volatile, reflect supply shocks that are
unrelated to trend changes in the economy's overall price level, and tend to reverse quickly.
An ongoing debate at least since Motley (1997) questions this rationale, arguing that
short-run movements contain useful information about incipient inflation. Our findings
suggest another reason why economists and policymakers should focus more on non-core
inflation: It offers insights into households' expectations-formation process. Our results
challenge the premises behind inflation targeting and expectations-management policies
as they are currently implemented in the US and abroad (Del Negro, Giannoni, and
Patterson (2012); D'Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2019)).2
       To analyze the role of household-specific price changes on beliefs, we combine
information about the quantity and prices of the non-durable consumption baskets of
more than 90,000 households in the Kilts Nielsen Consumer Panel (KNCP) with new
survey data on expectations that we elicited from all members of the Nielsen households.
We fielded two waves of the Chicago Booth Expectations and Attitudes Survey in June
2015 and July 2016. We use these unique data to construct measures of observed price
changes at the household level, match them with the inflation expectations of each survey
participant at the time they shopped for groceries, and perform tests to understand the
underlying mechanisms and inform models of rational inattention.
       Our first measure of observed price changes, the Household CPI, is constructed like
the Consumer Price Index (CPI) but for each household's non-durable consumption basket
   1
     See www.bls.gov/opub/hom/pdf/homch17.pdf for the Handbook of Methods, chapter 17, p. 103.
The categories "food at home" and "other food at home" are excluded from the Core CPI.
   2
     Some US policy makers have recognized that the extensive focus on core inflation of a representative
consumption bundle might produce substantial policy mistakes. For instance, according to Mr. J. Bullard
of the St. Louis Fed, "With trips to [...] the grocery store being some of the most frequent shopping
experiences for many Americans, it is hardly helpful for the Fed credibility to appear to exclude all those
prices from consideration in the formation of monetary policy."


                                                    3
             Figure 2: Inflation Expectations by Bins of Household CPI




                                            5
                         Average Inflation Expectations 12 months
                             4.4           4.6
                                            4.2          4.8




                                                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8


Notes. Inflation expectations are from the customized Chicago Booth Attitudes and Expectations survey in
6/2015 and 6/2016. Household CPI is constructed using micro data from the Nielsen homescan panel to
measure household-level grocery-bundle inflation, cf. Section II.C. We use the 12 months before the June of
the survey wave to measure price changes and the 12 months before that period as the base period.



instead of the representative consumption basket.3 We find that the Household CPI
is a significant predictor of 12-month-ahead inflation expectations. For example, when
we average expected inflation within eight equal-sized bins of Household CPI (Figure
2), the range from the lowest to the highest Household CPI bin is associated with a
0.5-percentage-point difference in expected inflation, which is economically sizable given
an inflation rate of around 1% during the same period.
       These results continue to hold when we condition on a rich set of demographics
including age, income, gender, marital status, household size, education level, employment
status, and risk tolerance. Moreover, within-individual analyses across the two survey
waves also confirm our baseline results, which suggests individual-level time-invariant
characteristics, such as cognitive abilities or sophistication, cannot explain our findings.
       Why do consumers make use of grocery-price changes when forming inflation
expectations? One possibility is that individuals face cognitive constraints when gathering
   3
      Specifically, we create a Laspeyres index for the first wave, using the expenditure shares in the period
from June 2013 to May 2014 and the price changes from June 2013 to May 2015, the month before the
first wave of our survey. We proceed similarly for the second wave of the survey.



                                                                                4
information about overall inflation. They rely on the price changes they observe in
their daily lives as the cheapest source of information.      An alternative explanation
is that individuals form beliefs relying on processes that differ from the standard
rational-inattention framework and hence call for enriching such a framework to explain
the set of facts we document. For instance, research in cognitive psychology such as
Watanabe et al. (2001) and Seitz and Watanabe (2005) documents that frequent stimuli
affect perceptual learning irrespective of individuals' attention to such stimuli. Specific
to our context, Georganas et al. (2014) provide laboratory evidence that when forming
expectations, individuals weigh more those price changes to which they are exposed
frequently.
    Motivated by this evidence, we construct a second, frequency-based measure of
personally experienced inflation, the household-level Frequency CPI. Here, we use the
frequency of purchases in the base period to weigh shopping price changes instead of
the expenditure shares as we do in the Household CPI. The positive association between
the Frequency CPI and inflation expectations is 20%-40% larger than the association
of the Household CPI. When we add both the Household CPI and the Frequency CPI
as independent variables in the same specification, the coefficient associated with the
Household CPI shrinks to zero and loses statistical significance, whereas the statistical
and economic significance of the Frequency CPI barely changes.
    All results are robust to different ways of framing the inflation-elicitation questions.
Our results are also similar if we focus on a sample in which perceptions of current
inflation and expectations differ, so that respondents do not simply anchor expectations
to the previously-reported perceptions. Individuals that report inflation expectations of
zero and any other rounded value do not drive our results. Finally, all results are robust
to sample splits by numerous characteristics previous research associates with inflation
expectations.
    After verifying that the positive association between the Frequency CPI and inflation
expectations is a robust feature of the data, we propose some heterogeneity tests to help
assess the extent to which the standard rational-inattention framework with information
rigidities might explain the results.


                                             5
    First, the rational-inattention framework suggests consumers rely similarly on the
signals about future inflation they obtain from grocery price changes, irrespective of the
size of such price changes. Instead, if the salience of grocery-price changes were important,
the association between the Frequency CPI and inflation expectations should be higher for
consumers who experience extreme price changes, irrespective of the sign of such changes.
    To assess these opposite predictions, we split the sample into the third who experience
the most negative price changes, the third who experience intermediate price changes,
and the third who experience the most positive price changes. We find the association
between grocery price changes and inflation expectations is positive and significant for
the two extreme groups, whereas it is indistinguishable from zero both economically and
statistically for the intermediate group.
    A second test to assess how the rational-inattention framework should be enriched
exploits variation in the frequency with which consumers grocery shop. In the rational-
inattention framework, agents rely on the price changes observed while grocery shopping,
because they can gather price signals during shopping trips more cheaply than other
signals about inflation. From this perspective, frequent shoppers gather more frequent
and hence more precise signals than infrequent shoppers, because they observe prices more
often.
    Contrary to this prediction, we find that infrequent shoppers, who observe larger price
changes across shopping trips (Eichenbaum, Jaimovich, and Rebelo (2011)), rely more
on the Frequency CPI than do frequent shoppers. This result holds when we consider
several proxies for the frequency of grocery shopping, including whether the respondent is
the primary grocery shopper for the household, whether the respondent grocery shops
at least once a week, as well as respondents' travel time to their primary shopping
outlet. Although these cross-group differences are not always statistically significant, the
economic magnitude of the estimated associations between Frequency CPI and inflation
expectations is systematically larger and highly significant for infrequent shoppers.
    At the same time, our empirical results do allow for a role of information frictions
in explaining consumers' reliance on grocery-price changes. For instance, the ease of
reading news about inflation in the media was at the core of the debate the Lucas islands


                                             6
model triggered. When we zoom into the subsample of consumers who rely on the media
to form expectations, the effect of the Frequency CPI becomes small and insignificant,
whereas the effect is four times as large and highly significant for the rest of the sample.
Instead, respondents who rely on their own shopping as a source of information about
inflation display a strong positive association between the Frequency CPI and inflation
expectations. Overall, both sides of the debate have merits. On the one hand, consumers
who read economic news do not rely on their household-specific grocery-price changes
when forming expectations. On the other hand, though, a large fraction of consumers
does not access the media or other sources of information about aggregate inflation, and
hence they rely substantially on the household-specific grocery-price changes they face
when forming expectations.
    In the final step, we show our outcome variable, the cross-sectional variation of
inflation expectations, is economically important in that it is associated with other
expectations and real outcomes in a way that is consistent with economic theory. Earlier
research has already shown this point for housing and mortgage choices (Malmendier and
Nagel (2015a); Armona et al. (2018)) and consumption and saving decisions (D'Acunto
et al. (2016)). We expand this evidence to other outcomes.
    First, we show that consumers whose inflation expectations are higher also have
higher wage and house-price inflation expectations.         Both are tied to important
economic decisions. Expectations about future wage growth drive labor-supply decisions
and determine firms' marginal costs of production through wage-level negotiations.
House-price expectations are important to households' investment choices--housing is
typically the largest asset US households own--as well as aggregate business-cycle patterns
(Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) and Glaeser and Nathanson (2017)).
    Second, we consider real outcome variables available in our data that relate to
households' inflation expectations. Consumers with higher inflation expectations hold
larger (fixed-rate) mortgages. Conditional on holding any investments, consumers with
higher inflation expectations also invest more in real assets such as real estate, whose
value is less affected by inflation. Based on the Euler-equation logic, consumers with
higher inflation expectations should also save less, which we confirm in the data.


                                             7
      An important implication of our results is the discrepancy between the processes
most consumers use to form inflation expectations and the consumer price inflation of a
representative consumption bundle policy makers commonly target. By construction,
a representative-bundle inflation rate abstracts from any heterogeneity in consumers'
perceived inflation. Moreover, as discussed above, the Core CPI on which US policymakers
mainly focus disregards grocery prices. Statistical agencies often exclude "extreme" values
when reporting average household expectations under the presumption that these values
are meaningless. Our results suggest that such "extreme" expectations in surveys are
not noise to disregard but to the contrary are meaningfully related to the information
households access and influence households' economic choices.

      Related Literature. Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. A
recent and growing body of work shows subjective expectations of macro variables deviate
substantially from the full-information rational-expectations benchmark. So far, most
researchers have focused on the expectations of experts, such as professional forecasters
(e.g., see Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012), Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015a), Fuhrer
(2017), and Bordalo et al. (2018)).
      For individual inflation expectations, the evidence shows a large degree of
disagreement across individuals. We study a setting in which the daily-life experiences
of consumers shape their economic expectations. For this endeavor, we build on Kuchler
and Zafar (2019), who show individuals extrapolate from local house-price changes they
observe in their counties to expectations about US-wide real estate inflation. We augment
their setting by observing directly the prices consumers pay and the price changes they
face in their consumption bundles, which allows us to test for the mechanisms through
which consumers use household-specific price changes to form aggregate expectations.
Related experimental research by de Bruin et al. (2011) shows that, when households
form expectations about aggregate variables, they tend to have the prices of specific
goods and services in mind and (over-)extrapolate from such prices.4
      Our paper also build on Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia (2017), who study
  4
     Also, Adam (2007) shows experimentally that individuals use "simple" forecast functions to form
inflation expectations that deviate from the rational forecasts.


                                                 8
the formation of inflation expectations in high- and low-inflation countries, and provide
evidence that both rational inattention and cognitive abilities are important determinants
of information frictions. The authors record one grocery bundle for a cohort of grocery
shoppers. They find that recall of prices shapes inflation expectations in a high-inflation
setting, and that individuals tend to have biased memory. We generalize this work along a
set of dimensions. First, we observe household-level shopping bundles for several years and
multiple shopping trips, which allows us to create several measures of realized inflation at
the household level. Second, we observe both the realized inflation and expected inflation
rate within individual over time, which allows us to abstract from time-invariant individual
characteristics when relating these two dimensions. Third, we observe the frequency of
purchase and other characteristics of the components of shopping bundles, which allows
us to investigate the channels through which household-level realized inflation relates to
individual inflation expectations.
    An important feature of our results is that the frequency and size of the stimuli
consumers observe is important for the effect of such stimuli on economic expectations.
To the best of our knowledge, this paper is one of the first to proposes a field test for
the effects of salient stimuli on economic beliefs, whereas most research to date has run
experimental tests in the laboratory (e.g., see Bordalo et al. (2016); D'Acunto (2018a);
D'Acunto (2018b); Frydman and Mormann (2018); Landier et al. (2017)). Our results
based on field data help inform theorists by providing evidence of which features of the
expectations-formation process are robust in a large, representative population and for
real-world choices.
    Empirically, we build on Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) and use the Nielsen
homescan data to construct inflation rates at the household level. Other recent papers
that use Nielsen data are Argente and Lee (2017), who study the cost of living inequality
during the recent Great Recession; Jaravel (2018), who studies the differences in inflation
that households experience due to product innovation; Stroebel and Vavra (2019) who
study the causal impact of local house-price changes to local retail prices; and Broda
and Weinstein (2010), who study the role of product creation and destruction on several
proxies for households' cost of living.


                                             9
     Recent work on the determinants of cross-sectional variation in inflation expectations
includes, among others, Malmendier and Nagel (2015a) find cohorts differ in their average
inflation expectations because they learn from their different lifetime inflation experiences
and react differently to the same macroeonomic shocks. D'Acunto, Malmendier, and
Weber (2018) show traditional gender roles help explain the systematic differences in
inflation expectations across genders. Carvalho and Nechio (2014) find most individuals
do not form expectations consistent with a tenet of monetary policy--the Taylor rule.
D'Acunto et al. (2019a,b,c) show cognitive abilities are strongly correlated with forecast
accuracy for inflation, uncertainty about future inflation, and the propensity to consume
and take out loans to changes in inflation expectations and nominal interest rates.
Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Weber (2018) show central-bank communication impacts
inflation expectations, which differ across demographic groups.
     Our paper also builds on the recent literature that uses micro-level data to
study the relationship between inflation expectations and households' readiness to
purchase consumption goods (Bachmann et al. (2015); Crump et al. (2018); D'Acunto,
Hoang, and Weber (2016); D'Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2018); Goldfayn-Frank and
Wohlfart (2019)). We also relate to papers that design surveys to elicit macroeconomic
expectations, and relate such expectations to actual choices.        Armantier, Bruine de
Bruin, Topa, Van Der Klaauw, and Zafar (2015) document individuals make financial
decisions in line with their inflation expectations reported in surveys. Roth and Wohlfart
(2019) study the causal link between macroeconomic expectations, consumption plans,
and stock investments. Ameriks, K´
                                 ezdi, Lee, and Shapiro (2019) and Maggiori, Stroebel,
Giglio, and Utkus (2019) elicit stock return expectations and relate them to portfolio
choice. Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2018) find the perception of house-price risk is an
important determinant of housing choices.



II     Survey and Consumption Data
The novel source of data we employ in this paper is the Chicago Booth Expectations
and Attitudes Survey, which we fielded online in two waves in June 2015 and June 2016.


                                             10
We invited participation by all household members of the Kilts-Nielsen Consumer Panel
(KNCP). We also rely on the KNCP for all the information related to households' non-
durable consumption baskets. Below, we describe the characteristics of these two data
sets with a focus on the new survey our paper introduces to the literature.


A.    Kilts-Nielsen Consumer Panel (KNCP)

The KNCP is a panel of about 40,000-60,000 households. These households report two
types of information to Nielsen. First is their static demographic characteristics, such
as household size, income, ZIP code of residence, and marital status. Panelists update
their demographic information at an annual frequency to reflect changes in household
composition or marital status. The second type of information panelists report is the
dynamic features of their purchases. These features include categorizations of the products
they purchase, information on the outlets at which the products are purchased, and
information about the per-unit price households pay for each item. To avoid measurement
and reporting errors, each panelist obtains an optical scanner at home that is similar to the
scanners grocery stores use to read barcodes. Households scan each item they purchase
after each trip to a grocery store as well as the items they purchased online.
     The sample period for which Nielsen has detailed purchase information from
households cover the years 2004-2017. Geographically, the sample spans through 52
major consumer markets and nine census divisions. Nielsen estimates the dataset covers
approximately 30% of overall household consumption in the US. Nielsen attempts to
balance the panel's demographics to make it representative of the US population along
nine dimensions: household size, income, age of the male and female household heads,
education level of the female household head, education level of the male household head,
presence of children, race, hispanic ethnicity, and occupation of the household head.
Nielsen recruits panelists online but balances the panel using traditional mailing methods.
Nielsen checks the sample characteristics on a weekly basis and performs adjustments to
guarantee balancing whenever deemed necessary. The KNCP has an annual retention
rate of more than 80%. The KNCP filters out households that do not report a minimum
amount of spending over the previous 12 months.

                                             11
     Nielsen provides respondents with several incentives to guarantee the accuracy and
completeness of the information respondents report. For instance, Nielsen organizes
monthly prize drawings, allows households to accumulate reward points for each instance
of data submission, and engages in ongoing communication with households. Panelists
can use the reward points they accumulated to purchase gifts from a Nielsen-specific
award catalog. Nielsen structures the incentives to not bias the shopping behavior of
their panelists, and validates the reported consumer spending with the scanner data of
retailers on a quarterly frequency to ensure high data quality.
     The KNCP dataset contains summary information for each shopping trip households
make, such as the date of the trip, the retailer code, the retailer ZIP code, and the overall
dollar amount spent. For each trip, the dataset also contains detailed information on the
individual goods purchased (12-digit Universal Product Code (UPC)), quantities, prices,
and the potential use of coupons and discounts that change the price the household pay
for the goods). Nielsen classifies products hierarchically into different categories with
finer granularities: department (10), product group (125), product module (1,075), and
UPC. For each UPC, the datasets contains information on package size, brand, and other
product characteristics. The KNCP contains 1.5 million unique products. The goods in
the datasets include groceries, drug products, small appliances, and electronics.
     After each shopping trip, panelists scan the goods they purchased. The system then
asks the panelist for the quantity. If the panelists purchased the good at a store for which
Nielsen has a point of sales information (POS), the system automatically uses the average
price for the UPC during the week of purchase to minimize the data-entry burden for the
panelist. If the panelist shopped at a store without POS information, the system asks for
the price of the goods before any discounts or coupons are applied. Lastly, the system
asks the panelist to indicate explicitly whether the good was purchased on discount and
the amount of the discount.


B.    Chicago Booth Expectations and Attitudes Survey

Nielsen runs short surveys on a monthly frequency on a subset of panelists of the
KNCP, the online panel, but also offers customized solutions to corporations and research

                                             12
institutions for designing longer ad hoc surveys.
    During the Spring of 2015, we designed a customized survey consisting of 44 questions
in cooperation with Nielsen--the Chicago Booth Expectations and Attitudes Survey. A
central feature of the survey is that we target all household members of the KNCP. The
survey consists of three sections, which build on the Michigan Survey of Consumers, the
New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations, the Panel on Household Finances at
the Deutsche Bundesbank, as well as the pioneering work of de Bruin et al. (2011) and
Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia (2017).
    Nielsen fielded the first wave of the survey in June 2015 and the second wave in
June 2016. The final overall survey sample included 92,511 households. In the first wave,
49,383 individuals completed the survey from 39,809 unique households, which amounts
to a response of 43%. The average response time was 14 minutes and 49 seconds, which
is close to our estimate of a response time of about 15 minutes. The second wave had
43,036 unique respondents from 36,758 unique households. The second wave included a
few additional questions and response times were consistently slightly longer ­ the average
response time was 18 minutes and 35 seconds.
    The first section of the survey asked a series of questions about respondents'
demographic characteristics, which were more detailed than the basic demographic
information the KNCP provides. We collected information on narrow college majors,
employment status, current occupation, income expectations, rent and mortgage, and
medical expenses, and we identified the primary shopper of the household among all the
responding members.
    The second section of the survey contains questions on respondents' expectations
about prices and inflation. We randomize between two sets of questions. The first
set follows the design of the Michigan Survey of Consumers (MSC), and asks survey
participants about the prices of things on which they typically spend money.          The
second set of questions uses a design inspired by the New York Fed Survey of Consumer
Expectations (SCE), and asks specifically about inflation.
    We first ask individuals about their perception of past inflation, that is, inflation
over the previous 12 months. We then ask them about their expectations for 12-month-


                                             13
ahead inflation. In addition to asking for point estimates of the expectations, we elicit a
full probability distribution of expectations by asking participants to assign probabilities
to different possible inflation rates or changes in prices, depending on the group. The
distribution also allows us to check that respondents do not merely anchor the value they
report for the point estimate of inflation expectations to the one they reported for the
point estimates of inflation perceptions. To further guarantee our results are not driven
by households thinking about perceived inflation and then anchoring all expectations to
the first one they reported, we show our results are robust to excluding respondents who
report the same values for perceptions and expectations of inflation.
     We start both blocks of questions with a short introduction: "In the next four
questions, we will ask for your opinion on a few topics. It is important to us that you
reply without any external influence. In particular, please do not search the internet or
other sources while going over the following questions."
     For all numerical questions that elicit a point estimate of inflation, such as the
perceived inflation rate and the expected inflation rate, we allow for answers from -100
to 100 and permit up to two decimal points. The question that elicits the distribution of
inflation expectations follows the design in the SCE and allows us to ensure that those
responding with extreme values to the point-estimate question do not drive any results.
     The third section of the questionnaire combines questions about the general economic
outlook, consumption, and savings with the elicitation of risk aversion and numeracy. The
economic-outlook questions center around expectations for GDP growth, unemployment,
and personal income expectations. We use this information to condition all our analyses
on households' macroeconomic expectations, because Bachmann et al. (2015) and Mian,
Sufi, and Khoshkhou (2015) document households' general sentiment about the state
of the economy is important for inflation expectations and consumption decisions. The
questions on risk aversion and numeracy follow the design in Lusardi and Mitchell (2007).


C.    Summary Statistics

We report a set of summary statistics and descriptives of our data in Table 1. To avoid
the possibility of severe outliers driving any of our results, we winsorize all continuous

                                            14
variables at the 1% and 99% levels. Across the two survey waves, we have a running
sample of 59,126 individuals for whom we observe complete data from both the KNCP
and survey responses for expected inflation, demographics, and economic expectations.
       The average age of the survey respondents is 61. About two thirds of the respondents
are women. Both statistics are consistent with the composition of the KNCP, which, as
discussed in earlier research, includes a higher proportion of women and retirees than in
the US population (e.g., see Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017)). To address the concern
that any specific subpopulations drive the facts we document in the paper, we will provide
evidence on the robustness of our baseline results by demographic groups.
       Five percent of respondents are unemployed, and almost three quarters of them own
a house. The average household size is 2.2 and almost half of the survey participants hold
a college degree. Survey participants expect, on average, stable household income over
the following 12 months. They are mildly positive about the economic outlook for the
US, and expect the economic situation of the household to stay the same. The median
income bracket is between USD 45,000 and USD 60,000. In terms of racial and ethnic
composition, 85% of the respondents are white, 8.5% are black, and 3.1% Asian.5
       Overall, our survey respondents appear to be more educated and wealthier than the
average US individual. These features of the survey population are important, because
researchers have criticized household surveys asking about inflation expectations on the
basis that too many households do not know or understand the concept of inflation. To
the extent that higher education is related to a higher understanding of concepts such as
inflation, our pool of respondents is less prone to this criticism.
       Moving on to the statics for inflation expectations, the participants expect, on
average, one-year-ahead inflation of 4.67%, which is slightly higher than the average
perceived inflation over the previous 12 months of 4.4%. Panel A of Figure 4 is a histogram
of the 12-month-ahead expected inflation rates. We see substantial mass between 0% and
5%, but also bunching at values that represent multiples of 5%. Previous research based
on the MSC has argued individuals that are uncertain about inflation report expectations
   5
    We use income-group fixed effects and race fixed effects in all our empirical analyses to absorb
time-invariant systematic differences in the consumption bundles and expectations across income groups
and racial groups.


                                                 15
for inflation at rounded thresholds (e.g., see Binder (2017)) and the respondents to our
survey seem to behave in a similar fashion. Lastly, consistent with evidence from the
MSC and SCE, we find large dispersion in expectations across individuals ranging from
-20% to +45%.



III        Conceptual Framework
Inflation expectations are central to the conduct of monetary policy and determine the
effectiveness of fiscal and monetary policy. Hence, we review the recent revival of the
interest in subjective expectations, discuss the current conduct of monetary policy and
the measurement of inflation expectations, and introduce our baseline measure of realized
inflation at the household level.


A.     Realized Inflation and Inflation Expectations

The relevance of subjective expectations for aggregate outcomes has been revived
recently in economics research. Bernanke (2007) motivates this agenda arguing inflation
expectations drive consumers' consumption, saving, and borrowing decisions, as well as
workers' wage bargaining with firms and managers' price-setting decisions, which in turn
determine the effectiveness of fiscal and monetary policy, among other outcomes. In
the words of Janet Yellen, "with nominal short-term interest rates at or close to their
effective lower bound [...], the broader question of how expectations are formed has taken
on heightened importance. [...] many central banks [...] [are] adopting policies that are
directly aimed at influencing expectations of future interest rates and inflation" (Yellen
(2016)).
      Figure 5 plots average one-year-ahead inflation expectations from the MSC together
with the 25th and 75th percentiles as well as the realized core inflation rate that is the
main focus of the Federal Reserve from January 2000 until December 2018. Core inflation
excludes volatile series such as food at home and groceries. We see that MSC expectations
are substantially higher and more volatile than the core inflation rate. Moreover, the
average MSC expectations mask large differences in forecasts across consumers. The

                                           16
average inflation forecast for the 75th percentile is 5.07%, whereas it is only 1.22% for the
25th percentile, implying an interquartile range of 3.85%.
    What might explain the difference in the time-series properties of inflation
expectations from realizations? Even more than 10 years after the financial crisis policy
interest rates remain low and realized inflation and inflation forecasts by the Federal
Reserve remain below the official definition of price stability. And yet households still
have inflation expectations that are substantially above 2%. Coibion and Gorodnichenko
(2015b) document a large rise in inflation expectations of households since 2009 relative
to the forecasts of professional forecasters, and argue the sharp rise in gas prices, which
are visible and salient (Hastings and Shapiro (2013)), appear to be a natural explanation
for this phenomenon. Shwayder (2012) estimates a reduced-form model of expectations
formation and finds evidence in line with an extrapolative-bias from gas price changes
to overall inflation expectations. Whereas large heterogeneity in gas prices exists across
counties in the US, little heterogeneity exists in local gas-price inflation, because the
movements in global oil prices determine almost exclusively the changes in gas prices.
Hence, gas-price inflation could be a viable candidate to explain parts of the large time
series variation in average expected inflation we observe in Figure 5 but seems unlikely
to help explain large parts of the differences in expected inflation across individuals.
Moreover, Binder (2018) notes that most of the literature studies the association between
the level of gas prices and inflation expectations. Studying jointly the expectations of
overall and gas-price inflation, she finds no evidence of a systematic bias in how average
expectations are formed.
    The large differences in expectations across consumers suggest consumers might make
vastly different consumption and savings decisions (D'Acunto et al. (2016)). Despite
recent theoretical attempts to rationalize variation in forecasts over time across different
demographic groups, we still have little knowledge on what drives these differences across
similar consumers at any given point in time.        Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017)
find substantial variation in household-level realized inflation rates. We build on this
framework to investigate if and how consumers might use the price changes they face
when forming aggregate inflation expectations.


                                             17
B.    Current Conduct of Monetary Policy and Measurement of
      Inflation Expectations

A long debate exists on which price series central banks should target. A conventional
reason for why most inflation-targeting central banks focus on core inflation that excludes
food and energy prices is their high volatility, the temporary nature of price changes, and
the conviction that central banks have few tools to directly stabilize these prices.
     Goodfriend and King (1997) and King and Wolman (1999) support this view and
argue that an inflation-targeting central bank with perfect credibility should define its
policy target with respect to core inflation. Cavallo (2008) and Harris et al. (2009) instead
argue that policy makers should include these volatile price series in the definition of price
stability to the extent that decision markers, households and firms, respond excessively to
these price series in their inflation expectations. Excessive in this context means putting
more weight on the price change than the weight in the representative consumption basket.
     Recently, policy makers have realized the possible concerns for central-bank
credibility and policy effectiveness when decision-makers focus on salient price changes in
the formation of inflation expectations. St. Louis Fed President James Bullard (2011)
argues, "With trips to [...] the grocery store being some of the most frequent shopping
experiences for many Americans, it is hardly helpful for the Fed credibility to appear
to exclude all those prices from consideration in the formation of monetary policy."
Yet, not all policymakers share this view. The President of the Chicago Fed, Charles
Evans, together with the Director of Macroeconomic Research, Jonas Fisher, study
empirically the implications of rising commodity prices for inflation and monetary policy,
and conclude, "If commodity and energy prices were to lead to a general expectation of
a broader increase in inflation, more substantial policy rate increases would be justified.
But assuming there is a generally high degree of central-bank credibility, there is no reason
for such expectations to develop" (Evans and Fisher (2011).
     Not only policymakers target specific price indexes that exclude extreme price
movements; even officially released measures of consumer inflation expectations only
report median estimates instead of average inflation expectations, because the latter tend



                                             18
to be more volatile and are substantially higher. For the MSC, the average expected
inflation rate is 4.4% for a sample from January 1978 until May of 2019, which is 0.8
percentage points higher than the median expected inflation rate. Yet, only the median
expected inflation rate is prominently displayed on the survey web page and widely
distributed via the Federal Reserve Economic Data data page of the St. Louis Fed.
Similarly, the New York Fed only covers the median inflation expectations over time, which
averages to 2.85%, whereas D'Acunto et al. (2018) find an average expected inflation rate
of 5.68% for a sample period between June 2013 until April 2018.
    The higher average expected inflation rate in the SCE compared to the MSC can
be explained by several survey design features of the Michigan Survey. First, the survey
truncates all responses larger than 95% in absolute value when transcribing the responses.
Second, the survey truncates reported expectations at -10% and +50% when reporting
mean inflation expectations. Finally, the interviewer probes each survey participant
that reports a one-year-ahead expected inflation rate of more than 5%, but not other
respondents with "Let me make sure I have that correct. You said that you expect prices
to go (up/down) during the next 12 months by (X) percent. Is that correct?"
    Possibly even more worrisome is the current code of conduct in the EU. The
Directorate General for Economic and Financial Affairs of the European Commission
conducts regular harmonized consumer surveys also eliciting questions on changes in prices
since 1985. Until recently, however, the European Commission only published qualitative
inflation expectations and not the quantitative expectations, because of concerns that the
high average level of expected inflation would indicate unanchored inflation expectations
and would be a sign of little central-bank credibility. For the overall EU, the average
expected inflation rate was 6.6% for a sample between the first quarter of 2004 and the
second quarter of 2019, the median expected inflation rate was 4.4%, but the average
perception of current inflation over the same period was 9.2%.
    Taken together, the current conduct of monetary policy excludes volatile price
series and statistical agencies and offices exclude "extreme" inflation expectations, either
because they consider these expectations outliers or because they would undermine the
credibility of central banks. In the paper, we find that consumers base their "extreme"


                                            19
             Figure 3: Timeline of Inflation Measurement and Surveys
                                                              Survey 1                   Survey 2
June                     May June                       May June                   May June
2013                     2014 2014                      2015 2015                  2016 2016
       Base period 1           Measurement period 1               Measurement period 2
       qn,j,0 & pn,j,0           = Base period 2                      qn,j,2 & pn,j,2
                                   qn,j,1 & pn,j,1



inflation forecasts on meaningful variation in prices to which they are exposed. We also
show they make economic decisions based on such expectations. Thus, central banks'
focus on core inflation might result in large policy mistakes and the current convention of
statistical offices to truncate extreme observations or not even release the data might be
misguided.


C.     Household-level Observed Inflation: Household CPI

We use the information on the prices and quantities in the KNCP households' consumption
baskets to compute measures of household-level inflation. For the first wave of our data,
we use price changes from the period between June 2013 and May 2014 to the period
between June 2014 and May 2015, which is the month before we fielded the first wave
of our survey. The timing varies accordingly for the second wave, which we ran in June
2016. Figure 3 summarizes the timing.
     We define Household CPI, a measure of household-level consumer price inflation, as
the weighted average of the log price changes that households face in their consumption
bundles:

                                           N
                                           n=1   pn,j,t × n,j
                              CP Ij,t =           N
                                                                 ,                          (1)
                                                  n=1   i,j

where pn,j,t is the log price change of good n faced by household j at time t, and n,j is
the weight of good n in the inflation rate for household j .
     Household CPI mimics the actual CPI that national statistical offices build all over



                                            20
the world. The typical CPI uses the consumption basket of a representative household
in the economy. We define the Household CPI, instead, as a Laspeyres price index that
uses the expenditure shares for each item in the Nielsen data purchased by the individual
household in the base period as the weights:


                                           n,j = pn,j,0 × qn,j,0 ,


where qn,j,0 is the amount of good n household j purchased in the base period. In our
case, we use all goods a household purchased in the base period, that is, June 2013 to
May 2014 for the first wave of the survey, to construct the expenditure shares.
       Defining the expenditure shares and the relevant base period at the household
level poses a set of conceptual and empirical challenges that do not arise in a
representative-bundle setting. First, household consumption spending is highly seasonal
and households purchase certain goods throughout the year, and other goods only rarely.
To deal with these issues, we first calculate volume-weighted average prices during both
the base year, pn,j,0 , and the year over which we measure inflation, pn,j,1 , following Kaplan
and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017).
       Another issue in defining a CPI at the household level is that individual households
might decide to stop purchasing certain products over time, an issue that does not arise
at a high frequency when the CPI is based on a representative consumption bundle. In
the case of discontinuity in purchases, we impute the prices households would have paid
had they purchased the good. To impute prices, we first look for the price of the good
in the county in which the household resides. If the good was not sold in the county, we
look for it in the state of residence. If the UPC was not sold in the state, we look for the
average US price. If we still can't find the price, we assume a zero price change.6 All the
results are virtually identical if we assume a missing price or do not do any imputations.
For the second wave, we move the base period forward by one year. For individuals that
stay in the survey, we can thus interpret the Household CPI as a chained Laspeyres index.
  6
      The last two steps virtually never arise in our setting.




                                                      21
IV       Grocery-Price Changes and Inflation Expecta-
         tions
In this section, we study the systematic association between the inflation individuals face
in their households' shopping bundles and individual expected inflation.


A.     Household CPI and Inflation Expectations

In our baseline analysis, we study the association between the measures of household-level
inflation and households' expectations regarding general inflation in the subsequent 12
months. We estimate the following linear specification by ordinary least squares:


             E i,tt+1 =  +  × i,t-1t + Xi  + Ei  + w + q + i + I + i ,                                 (2)


where E i,tt+1 is the numerical inflation rate individual i expects for the following 12
months and is measured in percentage points; i,t-1t is the Household CPI computed
based on household shopping bundles over the previous 12 months;7 Xi is a vector of
characteristics of individual i, which include age, the square of age, sex, employment
status, home-ownership status, marital status, household size, college dummy, race
dummies, and risk tolerance as elicited through survey questions; Ei is a vector of
individual qualitative expectations about household income, the aggregate economic
outlook, and the personal financial outlook for the following 12 months; w is a
survey-wave fixed effect to allow for systematic differences in levels of expected and
realized inflation between June 2015 and June 2016; q is an inflation-question fixed effect
to allow for systematic differences in the means of inflation expectations for the case in
which we ask individuals about inflation or about changes in prices; i is an individual
fixed effect that we include in some specifications to absorb any systematic time-invariant
differences across individuals; and I is a set of 16 income dummies we obtain from
Nielsen.8 We cluster standard errors at the household level to allow for correlation of
   7
     We assign the same value of the Household CPI to all survey participants i within each household j
and explore heterogeneity by shopping frequency below.
   8
     We do not observe the exact level of labor income as a continuous variable but rather income brackets.



                                                    22
unknown form of the residuals across respondents in the same household, for all of whom
the measures of household-level inflation are the same.
     Columns (1)-(3) of Table 2 report the results for estimating equation (2) using
the Household CPI as the main explanatory variable of interest. In column (1), we
only absorb the question-design and survey-wave fixed effects. We find a positive and
statistically significant correlation between expected inflation and the Household CPI. A
one-standard-deviation increase in the Household CPI is associated with a 0.17% increase
in expected inflation. Column (2) shows the association barely changes when we partial
out a rich set of demographics, individual expectations, and county fixed effects. In
column (3), we restrict the variation in inflation expectations and Household CPI within
individual and over time. In this specification, the baseline coefficient is only identified
by those individuals that respond to both waves of the survey. The within-individual
association is slightly higher than the estimate when allowing for systematic cross-sectional
variation when estimating the specification. This result is assuring because it suggests that
unobserved characteristics that vary systematically across individuals and might shape,
for instance, both the types of goods individuals purchase and their inflation expectations,
are unlikely to explain our findings.


B.    Overweighing Goods Purchased Frequently: Frequency CPI

As we discussed in the introduction, research in cognitive psychology suggests more
frequent stimuli have a larger influence on individual perceptions of signals relative to
less frequent stimuli, irrespective of the attention individuals pay to such stimuli (e.g.,
Watanabe et al. (2001) and Seitz and Watanabe (2005)). Moreover, individuals might face
cognitive constraints and use signals they observe in their daily lives to form expectations
about overall inflation. Individuals might perceive more frequently observed price changes
as being more precise, and optimally put a larger weight on these price changes when
forming expectations (see Angeletos and Lian (2016) for an overview). We might thus
expect the price changes of the goods consumers purchase more frequently to have a larger
impact on individuals' inflation expectations, either because they are more representative
and more likely to come to mind than the price changes of other goods, or because

                                             23
individuals think these price changes have a higher signal-to-noise ratio.
    The Household CPI we used above assigns weights according to goods' expenditure
shares in the base period. To test our conjecture, we now propose a second measure
of household-level inflation, the Frequency CPI. The Frequency CPI uses the number of
times household j purchased good i in the base period as the weight of observed price
changes in the household's consumption basket (see equation (1)):


                                        i,j = fi,j,01 ,


where fi,j,01 is the frequency of purchase, that is, the number of times the household
purchases the good throughout the 12-month base period.
    We find, indeed, that the cross-sectional variation captured by the Frequency CPI
differs from the one captured by the Household CPI. In Panel B of Figure 4, we see for
both measures large mass around 0, with slightly more mass concentrated in this area for
the Frequency CPI. At the same time, there is also mass in the tails ­ more in the right
than in the left. The tails are fatter for the Household CPI than for the Frequency CPI,
although this slight difference is not detectable statistically.
    Moreover, Panel C of Figure 4 sorts survey respondents across bins by their realized
Household CPI and Frequency CPI. The y-axis reports the average expected inflation
rate within each bin. Individuals with the lowest realized Household CPI expect an
average inflation rate of 4.4%. Average expected inflation increases monotonically as the
Household CPI increases and reaches an average expected inflation rate of slightly more
than 4.9%. The range between the expected inflation rates of the highest and lowest levels
of the Household CPI is 0.5 percentage points, which is about 11% of the average expected
inflation rate and about 33% of the representative-bundle realized inflation rate in the
period we consider. For the Frequency CPI, we see similar patterns, but the spread in
average expected inflation rates between low and high realized Frequency CPI is magnified
to more than 0.7 percentage points, which suggests the dispersion in expected inflation
the Frequency CPI predicts is higher than the dispersion the Household CPI predicts.
    After showing the two measures might capture different sources of variation in our



                                              24
sample, we replicate the baseline analysis discussed above considering the Frequency CPI
as the covariate of interest, which overweighs the price changes consumers observe for
the goods they purchase more often. Columns (4)-(6) of Table 2 show the estimated
associations with inflation expectations are between 20% and 50% larger for the Frequency
CPI than for the Household CPI.
     In columns (7)-(9) of Table 2, we compare the extent to which our two measures of
household-level observed inflation contain independent information that helps explain
inflation expectations. On the one hand, individuals might focus more on the price
changes of the goods on which they spend relatively more money when making inferences
about general inflation. On the other hand, consistent with the cognitive psychology
literature and possibly new models with information rigidities, individuals might focus
on the price changes of the goods they purchase frequently. Across the specifications in
columns (7)-(9), we see the coefficient on the Household CPI shrinks towards 0 and is no
longer statistically significant. The point estimate on the Frequency CPI, instead, barely
changes compared to the corresponding specifications in columns (4)-(6), and remains
highly statistically significant in all cases. Taken together, individuals appear to use the
price changes they observe during their shopping trips to form inflation expectations and
this pattern is especially strong for goods households purchase frequently. The latter
finding hints at a role for memory, salience, and attention in explaining this phenomenon.
     In the rest of the paper, we only report results for the Frequency CPI because the
results are similar for the Household CPI. Armed with the Frequency CPI, we want to
dissect the features of our baseline results and dig deeper into the channels that might
help explain them.


C.    Assessing the Economic Magnitudes

To better understand whether experienced inflation in the shopping bundle is an
economically relevant predictor of individuals' inflation expectations, we now compare
the sizes of the association between household-level inflation and inflation expectations to
the sizes of the associations between relevant demographics and inflation expectations.
     Individuals whose Frequency CPI is above the median of the distribution have, on

                                            25
average, inflation expectations that are 0.3 percentage points higher than individuals
below the median of the distribution. Malmendier and Nagel (2015b) document lifetime
inflation experiences matter for individuals' inflation expectations. In our survey, the
oldest 50% of survey participants have inflation expectations that are, on average, 0.075
percentage points higher than the inflation expectations of the youngest 50%. The smaller
difference by age is not inconsistent with the findings in Malmendier and Nagel (2015b),
who mainly focus on how inflation expectations differ across cohorts over time based on
lifetime-experienced inflation and how different cohorts react to the same inflationary
shocks. In fact, learning from experiences predicts small differences in expected inflation
in the low and stable realized inflation environment of the last decades. In related work,
Goldfayn-Frank and Wohlfart (2019) find East Germans expect 0.4% higher inflation than
West Germans decades after the reunification because of the inflationary shock that only
occurred in former Eastern Germany after the reunification.
    Gender is one of the strongest demographic predictors of inflation expectations. We
find in our survey that women have inflation expectations that are, on average, 0.54
percentage points higher than the inflation expectations of men. D'Acunto et al. (2018)
document that differences in shopping behavior can explain in large part the gender
differences in inflation expectations.
    Das et al. (2018) document that income and socioeconomic status help predict
individuals' macroeconomic expectations such as business conditions, the national
unemployment rate, and stock returns. As for inflation expectations, we find unemployed
survey participants have inflation expectations that are 1.15 percentage points higher
than the inflation expectations of employed individuals. High-income individuals have
inflation expectations that are, on average, 0.85 percentage points lower than the
expectations of the participants in the bottom 50% of the income distribution. Income
and employment status are conceivably correlated with consumption bundles and hence
the prices individuals who differ along these dimension see during their shopping trips
(see Argente and Lee (2017) and Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) for differences in
experienced inflation by income).
    Household size only predicts differences in expected inflation of 0.15 percentage


                                            26
points, and college-educated survey participants have average inflation expectations that
are 0.38 percentage points lower than survey participants without a college degree.
     Taken together, shopping experiences predict differences in inflation expectations that
are sizable and of comparable magnitudes to other possible demographic determinants. To
ensure none of these alternative determinants of inflation expectations drive our findings,
we always condition on a rich set of observables.


D.     Robustness

We run specifications excluding individuals that expect exactly zero inflation for the
following 12 months. In the first three columns of Table A.1, the correlation between the
Frequency CPI and expected inflation is similar in magnitude to the baseline associations,
both unconditionally as well as conditional on a rich set of demographics and after
absorbing individual fixed effects.
     Inspired by the work at the New York Fed, we elicited probability distributions
of expected inflation in addition to point estimates.      Given the question design for
the probability distributions requires us to include a finite number of bins, we observe
substantially less dispersed average expectations across individuals in this question
compared to the point estimates. For this reason, we would expect smaller coefficients
when estimating equation (2) relative to when we use the point estimates directly.
Consistently, columns (4)-(6) of Table A.1 document a statistically significant, positive
yet smaller association between expected inflation and the Frequency CPI when we use
the average of the full distribution instead of the point forecast. A one-standard-deviation
increase in the Frequency CPI is associated with a 0.1% increase in expected inflation.
     The perception of past inflation is highly correlated with expected future inflation
(see Jonung (1981)). We argue and document below that the price changes in households'
shopping bundle help explain variation in inflation expectations because they shape
individuals' perceived inflation. A concern is that a spurious correlation between inflation
perceptions and expectations might drive our findings. For instance, because respondents
provide first their inflation perception for the previous 12 months and then their
expectations about future inflation, one might worry they only think about perception

                                            27
and then anchor all the following answers to the value they chose for perception. In
columns (7)-(9) of Table A.1, we report our baseline results when excluding individuals
who report the same numerical value for perceptions and expectations. Even for this
sample, we confirm the positive association between the Frequency CPI and inflation
expectations. Within individual, the effect is no longer statistically significant but still
economically large and similar in magnitude to the baseline effect.
     Overall, our baseline results do not depend systematically on the method we use to
elicit inflation expectations or on any potential mechanical correlation and/or anchoring
of inflation expectations to inflation perceptions.



V      Understanding the Mechanisms
After having documented the fact that individuals use the price changes of the goods
they purchase frequently when forming their general inflation expectations as well as
the robustness of this finding, we move on to assess the mechanisms that might explain
the baseline results. In particular, we aim to assess the extent to which the standard
rational-inattention framework might be consistent with our findings, or, alternatively, in
which directions the standard framework should be adjusted to accommodate the findings.


A.    Size of Price Changes and Inflation Expectations

The standard rational-inattention framework would suggest consumers learn similarly
from the signals they obtain through the price changes they experience while grocery
shopping, irrespective of the size of such price changes. By contrast, if the salience of
price changes matters, consumers who experience more extreme price changes should rely
more on them when forming inflation expectations. In this case, consumers who happen
to sample from the tails of the grocery-price-change distribution would react more to the
signal they observe relative to consumers who happen to sample from the middle of the
distribution. We provide evidence consistent with this latter intuition.
     In Table 4, we estimate our baseline specification separately for three mutually
exclusive equal-sized subsamples. Bottom F requency CP I includes the third of our

                                             28
sample that faces the most extreme negative price changes, for which the Frequency CPI
ranges from -11.7% to -0.9%. Columns (1)-(2) of Table 4 show a positive association of
0.32 percentage points between Frequency CPI and inflation expectations for this group.
This coefficient is about 50% larger than the baseline coefficient for the whole sample we
reported in column (5) of Table 2.
     Columns (3)-(4) of Table 4 consider the third of the sample with intermediate values
of Frequency CPI, ranging between -0.9% and 2.8%. This group includes respondents who
face small price changes, either on the positive or negative side. In this case, we estimate
an economically and statistically insignificant association between the Frequency CPI
and inflation expectations, suggesting those consumers who face moderate price changes
barely use such changes when forming expectations.
     We then move on to T op F requency CP I --the top third of the sample, based
on grocery-price changes.    The Frequency CPI ranges from 2.8% to 23.1% for this
group, which thus only includes positive price changes.          Similar to the opposite
extreme--Bottom F requency CP I --respondents in this group display an economically
and statistically significant association between experienced price changes and inflation
expectations.
     Overall, the results in Table 4 suggest respondents who face the most extreme price
changes in their consumption bundles, irrespective of the sign of such changes, use them
extensively when forming inflation expectations.      By contrast, respondents who face
moderate price changes do not seem to use them at all when forming expectations.


B.    Shopping Frequency and Exposure to Price Changes

A second prediction of the standard rational-inattention framework is that agents should
rely on the price changes observed while grocery shopping if these signals are cheaper to
gather that other signals about inflation. From this perspective, frequent shoppers should
face a lower cost of recalling price information and collect more frequent and hence more
precise signals relative to infrequent shoppers. Frequent shoppers should thus rely more
on household-level prices when forming expectations.
     Recent models that depart from the rational-inattention framework (e.g., see Bordalo

                                            29
et al. (2019)), instead, generate the opposite prediction: Infrequent shoppers should rely
more on the price changes they observe while shopping. This prediction arises because
infrequent shoppers observe fewer price changes (due to the lower frequency of shopping),
but larger price changes. When infrequent shoppers think about price changes from their
shopping trips, they should be more likely to recall large price changes. Frequent shoppers,
instead, tend to face only small departures from the "normal price" and experience many
small price changes at high frequency (Eichenbaum, Jaimovich, and Rebelo (2011)),
because grocery prices change in all directions at high frequencies, including negative
changes due to temporary sales, discounts, and coupons (Nakamura and Steinsson (2008)).
These facts diminish the surprise and hence the stimulus that would induce automatic
retrieval of prior experiences when forecasting inflation (Bordalo et al. (2019); Kahneman
and Miller (1986)), thus reducing the role of household-specific prices on expectations.
    For our empirical test, we consider three alternative proxies of grocery-shopping
frequency. First, we split the sample based on whether the respondent is the primary
grocery shopper of the household. By definition, primary grocery shoppers are exposed
to grocery prices more often than others. Columns (1)-(2) of Table 5 show the correlation
between the Frequency CPI and inflation expectations is 40% higher for respondents who
are not their household's main grocery shopper.
    Columns (3)-(4) split the sample between individuals who shop more than once a
week and others. In column (3), the correlation between the Frequency CPI and inflation
expectations is about 40% higher for respondents who shop less than once a week. Because
the sample of respondents who shop less than once a week is small (N=4.745), though,
the statistically significant coefficient is estimated with noise, and we fail to reject the
null that this coefficient equals the one for respondents who shop at least once a week.
    The survey did not distinguish within the group of respondents who shop at least
once a week, and the vast majority of the sample falls into this group. In a third test, we
thus also consider the respondent's distance (in minutes) from the household's primary
shopping outlet. Here, we conjecture that respondents who live close to their shopping
outlet might grocery shop often, and possibly several times in a week, whereas individuals
living farther away might only shop infrequently. In columns (5)-(7) of Table 5, we find the


                                            30
association between the Frequency CPI and inflation expectations increases monotonically
with respondents' distance from their main shopping outlet, ranging from 0.14 for those
who live less than 20 minutes from the store to 0.80 for those who live more than one
hour away.
      All three tests in Table 5 provide results consistent with the conjecture that a lower
frequency of exposure to prices correlates with higher reliance on observed price changes
when forming inflation expectations. This fact informs theorists on the direction in which
the standard rational-inattention framework should be enriched to explain the formation
process of macroeconomic expectations.


C.     Testing Additional Economic Mechanisms

In the rest of this section, we propose additional tests that add to our understanding of
the process through which consumers incorporate household-level price changes into their
inflation expectations.


C.1     Perceived Price Changes and Frequency CPI

First, we verify that exposure to price changes relates not only to inflation expectations,
but also to consumers' perceptions about the prevailing inflation rate. Verifying this
condition helps rule out that unobserved changes in consumers' characteristics affect their
consumption baskets as well as their expectations about future macroeconomic variables,
including inflation, through a channel that does not involve relying on observed price
changes.
      We estimate a set of specifications similar to equation (2), in which we regress
individual-level numerical inflation perceptions, which we elicited for a horizon of 12
months before the interview, on the Household CPI and Frequency CPI. We report the
results of this estimation in Table A.2 of the Online Appendix. The Household CPI
(column (1)) and the Frequency CPI (column (2)) are both positively associated with
perceived inflation separately, but similar to our baseline results, only the correlation
between the Frequency CPI and perceived inflation remains economically and statistically
significant when both measures are added to the same specification.

                                             31
C.2     Exposure to Alternative Information Sources

In the introduction, we argued our results could be interpreted as direct evidence in
support of the island-model assumption that observed price changes are agents' source of
information about inflation. Our findings do not imply, though, that consumers ignore
other direct and indirect sources of information about inflation.
      To test whether the role of price changes consumers experience in their daily lives
varies systematically based on other sources of information, we asked respondents in
the second wave of the survey to choose the three most common sources of information
they thought about when they answered the questions on inflation expectations. Choices
included the following: Newspaper, Magazine; Radio, Television; Colleagues; Friends
& Family; Financial advisors; Social networking websites; Other websites; Shopping
experience; Other (specify). We randomized the ordering of appearance of these options
to avoid any anchoring effects.
      We split our sample based on three sorting variables: (1) a Media dummy that takes
the value of 1 if the respondent ranks Newspaper, Magazine; Radio, Television; Social
networking websites; Other websites among the top three choices; (2) an Other People
dummy that takes a value of 1 if the respondent ranks Colleagues; Friends & Family
among the top three choices; and (3) an Own Experience dummy that takes a value of 1
if the respondent ranks Shopping experience among the top three choices.9
      Table 6 estimates our baseline specification across sample splits. When we consider
individuals who obtain information about inflation from the media (columns (1)-(2)), we
detect an economically and statistically insignificant correlation between the Frequency
CPI and expected inflation. Because the sample size is large, lack of statistical power is
unlikely to drive this result. The association is positive for respondents who do not rely
on the media. The size of this coefficient is 50% larger than the size of the estimated
coefficient for the whole sample (see column (5) of Table 2). Overall, once individuals
have access to objective information about overall inflation, the effect of shopping-bundle-
experienced price changes on inflation expectations is muted, consistent with the early
  9
    Note the survey allows for non-exclusivity in the sources respondents access, and hence the same
respondent might at the same time report consulting the media, other people, and/or own experience
among the top three sources of information.


                                                32
critique of the Lucas model.
    In columns (3)-(4), we consider respondents who rely on information obtained from
other people. This category includes family members, and hence the results might capture
the effect of household-level price changes on household members that do not do the
grocery shopping directly. This effect would be consistent with Bailey et al. (2018) and
Bailey et al. (2019), who document the transmission of experienced house-price changes
across social networks. Indeed, we can reject the null that the Frequency CPI in unrelated
to inflation expectations for respondents who rely on information obtained through other
people.
    Finally, we check that our splits are meaningful by considering respondents who
report that they rely mainly on their own experience (columns (5)-(6)). In this case, as
we would expect, the size of the estimated coefficient is twice as large for respondents
who rely on their own experience, and a t-test for whether the two coefficients are equal
rejects the null hypothesis below the 10% level of significance.
    The last split we consider compares respondents who go to gas stations at least once
a week (High) to others (Low). Hastings and Shapiro (2013) show gas-price changes are
salient to consumers and drive their consumption choices. Being exposed to gas price-
changes frequently might thus reduce the extent to which respondents rely on grocery-price
changes when forming inflation expectations, which is what we find in columns (7)-(8) of
Table 6.
    These results link back to the debate about the assumption in the Lucas model.
The positions of both Lucas (1975) and his critics seem to have merits. The majority
of our representative sample uses the price changes they face on their "shopping island"
to form inflation expectations. At the same time, respondents who access newspapers or
other media sources do not rely on such price changes. The key insight our test brings
to the debate is that, despite the availability of unbiased information about aggregate
inflation, many consumers do not access such information, and hence household-specific
price changes from grocery shopping matter in their expectations-formation process.




                                            33
C.3      Cognitive Costs of Accessing Alternative Information Sources

Building on the rational-inattention framework, we also ask whether the cognitive costs
consumers face to access information about aggregate inflation might explain the fact they
do not access such sources. Such costs could be lower for consumers with higher cognitive
abilities and numeracy,10 as well as for consumers who access economic news for reasons
unrelated to their expectations, irrespective of their decision to sort into such information
sources, for instance, because they own a mortgage and need to follow the movements of
interest rates and house prices.
       To assess the relevance of grocery-price changes for inflation expectations based on
the costs respondents might face to access unbiased sources of information about inflation,
we run the analysis of equation (2) separately across four sample splits. First, we split the
sample based on whether the respondent has a college major in a quantitative subject.
We define the quantitative major dummy to take a value of 1 for respondents who hold
one of the following majors: accounting, economics, finance, computer programming,
computer science, data processing, engineering, mathematics, or physical sciences. We
focus on quantitative majors, as opposed to any college education, because the curricula of
non-quantitative college majors barely include any topics that might strengthen students'
numeracy and/or financial literacy skills. Numeracy and financial literacy should reduce
respondents' costs of accessing information sources about inflation such as the specialized
press. Consistent with our conjecture, in columns (1)-(2) of Table 7, we find a higher
association of the Frequency CPI with inflation expectations for respondents who do not
hold a quantitative college degree.
       The second split we study considers respondents who are exposed to other sources of
information about prices even if they do not actively access them with the aim of forming
inflation expectations. Because inflation has a big impact on the real value of mortgages,
we conjecture that individuals who hold a mortgage might be more exposed than others
to specialized sources of information regarding inflation. Consistently, individuals who
hold mortgages display a 45% lower association between the Frequency CPI and inflation
  10
    For instance, D'Acunto et al. (2019b) and D'Acunto et al. (2019c) document high-IQ men have more
accurate inflation expectations and are more likely to make economic decisions in line with theoretical
predictions than other men.


                                                  34
expectations relative to non-mortgage holders.
     In a similar vein, we compare respondents who participate in the stock market with
other respondents. Previous research documented greater stock market participation for
more educated and higher-income individuals (D'Acunto, Prokopczuk, and Weber (2019))
who also tend to have more accurate inflation expectations (D'Acunto et al. (2016)).
Consistently, in columns (5)-(6), we find stock market participants have an association
between the Frequency CPI and inflation expectations that is lower by 30% than do
non-participants.
     Finally, we consider respondents with different levels of uncertainty of inflation
expectations.   Respondents with more uncertain inflation expectations might follow
rules of thumb when forming inflation expectations (Binder (2017)) and not follow
economic news or other sources of information that would anchor their expectations.
Following Manski and Molinari (2010) and Binder (2017), we proxy for uncertainty of
numerical inflation expectations based on whether respondents report rounded values or
non-rounded values when reporting their expectations. Consistent with our conjecture,
in columns (7)-(8) of Table 7, we find the association between the Frequency CPI and
inflation expectations is more than twice as large for rounders than for non-rounders.



VI      Inflation Expectations and Other Outcomes
So far, we have studied the relationship between the price changes individuals observe
while shopping and their inflation expectations. One might wonder what is the extent
to which varying inflation expectations influence economic decisions and are ultimately
relevant for real outcomes. D'Acunto et al. (2016) show individuals who expect higher
inflation are more likely to purchase durable goods in a representative sample of European
households. To shed light on the far-reaching role of inflation expectations for other
economic outcomes in the current setting, we test for the association between respondents'
inflation expectations and a set of relevant expectations and choices in domains we can
directly observe other than shopping.
     As far as expectations of other relevant prices are concerned, we focus on expected


                                           35
wage inflation as well as house-price expectations. Wage inflation, that is, the expectations
about future wage growth, are central for the consumption and investment decision of
households as well as for their labor-supply decisions. Moreover, these expectations are
important because they determine firms' marginal costs of production. Higher inflation
expectations might make workers and unions bargain for higher wages to ensure inflation
does not lower their real wages, and hence individuals who expect higher inflation might
expect a higher future wage growth. Individuals' wage-inflation expectations thus have
far-reaching implications for both workers' own long-term wealth accumulation and for
firms' factor choices.
    House-price expectations are also a central driver of household-level investment
choices--housing is typically the largest asset homeowner US households own--as well
as aggregate business cycles through variation in observed house-price booms and busts
(Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) and Glaeser and Nathanson (2017)). If consumer-price
inflation expectations shape house-price expectations, the cross-sectional variation in
inflation expectations might help us understand both individual and aggregate housing
outcomes.
    In terms of economic choices, we first focus on housing-related investment and
financing choices, such as the outstanding mortgage balance and the monthly mortgage
payments as measures of the size of mortgages, as well as the share of a household's
portfolio that is invested in real estate. Given most mortgages in the US are fixed-rate
mortgages, we would expect to find larger mortgages for individuals with higher inflation
expectations, because these individuals perceive lower real interest rates in the future.
Moreover, conditional on holding any investments, individuals with higher inflation
expectations should invest more in real assets such as real estate, because inflation will
affect the value of these assets less than the value of other assets.
    Second, we consider the fundamental intertemporal consumption/saving choice
of households summarized by the Euler equation.          Individuals with higher inflation
expectations in the cross section perceive lower real interest rates, which implies higher
consumption and lower savings at the present date.           Therefore, we should observe
individuals with higher inflation expectations are less likely to save than other households,


                                             36
ceteris paribus. This implication of the Euler equation is quite important in terms
of long-run effects of varying inflation expectations, because fluctuations in inflation
expectations can drive the amount of long-run wealth accumulation by individuals.
Forgoing saving today due to higher inflation expectations would have consequences on
the overall future path of wealth accumulation.
       To bring all these predictions to the data, we use the microdata from the Chicago
Booth Communication and Expectations survey, which is a different source than the
survey we employed in the rest of the paper.11 We need to rely on this alternative
source of data, because our original survey did not elicit information on individual-level
wage-growth expectations or house-price expectations. A drawback of using this data
set is that we do not see the prices individuals in that survey observed while grocery
shopping, because the survey was fielded in 2018 and the individual price-level information
for Nielsen is currently not available for any of the two years before individuals answered
the survey questions.
       Table 8 reports the results for testing the predictions discussed above. Column (1)
studies the association between inflation expectations and wage expectations, and column
(2) reports the association between inflation expectations and house-price expectations.
To measure wage-growth expectations, we use the numerical answer to the following
question: "What is your best guess about the rate at which average wages in the economy
will change on average over the next 12 months?" To measure house-price expectations,
we use the numerical answer to "What is your best guess about the rate at which housing
prices in the U.S. will change over the next 12 months?"
       In column (1), a one-standard-deviation increase in inflation expectations is
associated with an increase in expected wage growth of about 1.6 percentage points.
In column (2), a one-standard-deviation increase in inflation expectations is associated
with an increase in house-price expectations of 2.5 percentage points. In both cases,
the estimated associations align with the directional prediction of higher wage-inflation
expectations and higher house-price inflation expectations for individuals with higher
consumer-price inflation expectations as discussed above.
  11
    Please see Coibion et al. (2018) for a detailed description of the survey and data. The structure and
questions follow a similar setup as the surveys designed for the current paper.


                                                   37
    Columns (3)-(6) of Table 8 study the association between inflation expectations and
financial choices. Columns (3) and (4) show a one-standard-deviation increase in expected
inflation is associated with a 6.2% higher mortgage balance and a 3.6% higher monthly
mortgage payment, after controlling for observables and other expectations. In column
(5), higher inflation expectations are associated with a 1.4-percentage-point increase in
the portfolio share invested in real estate, which corresponds to about 24% of the average
portfolio share invested in real estate for those with any real estate investment in our
sample. Finally, column (6) shows higher inflation expectations are associated with a
0.9-percentage-point lower likelihood of having a savings account, which corresponds to
about 2.5% of the unconditional probability of holding a savings account. Consistent
with our conjecture, individuals with higher inflation expectations invest more in a real
asset such as housing and finance such investments with larger mortgages. Moreover,
individuals with higher inflation expectations are less likely to save, which is consistent
with the consumption Euler equation.



VII      Conclusions
Household-specific grocery-price changes shape consumers' inflation expectations. This
correlation is especially strong for price changes of the goods consumers purchase more
frequently. Moreover, the correlation is higher for consumers who face more extreme
price changes and for those who shop less frequently, and hence are more likely to observe
larger price changes from one shopping trip to the next. The correlation is also higher for
consumers who barely access other sources of information for aggregate inflation and those
less exposed to gas prices or other specialized information. These features of expectations
formation we document for the first time in field data beget theoretical adaptations of
the standard rational-inattention framework.
    The results in this paper also open additional avenues for policymaking. The current
conduct of monetary policy that large neglects "volatile" price series such as groceries
might result in systematic policy mistakes. Policy makers might attempt to anchor
and manage households' expectations based on an inflation target that means little to


                                            38
many consumers. Household-level surveys could be the first step for the creation of
micro-based indices of perceived inflation at the household level. Such indices would
provide largely different information regarding household-level expectations relative to
the extant consumer price indices, which are based on a representative consumption
basket, and hence by construction eliminate all the variation in salience and perception of
price changes at the micro level. Considering this heterogeneity explicitly when designing
expectations-based monetary policy measures might ultimately increase the effectiveness
of such policies.




                                            39
References
Adam, K. (2007). Experimental evidence on the persistence of output and inflation. The
  Economic Journal 117 (520), 603­636.
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2018). Perception of house price risk and
  homeownership. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ameriks, J., G. K´ ezdi, M. Lee, and M. D. Shapiro (2019). Heterogeneity in expectations,
  risk tolerance, and household stock shares: The attenuation puzzle. Journal of Business
  & Economic Statistics , 1­27.
Angeletos, G.-M. and C. Lian (2016). Incomplete information in macroeconomics:
  Accommodating frictions in coordination. In Handbook of macroeconomics, Volume 2,
  pp. 1065­1240. Elsevier.
Argente, D. and M. Lee (2017). Cost of living inequality during the great recession.
Armantier, O., W. Bruine de Bruin, G. Topa, W. Van Der Klaauw, and B. Zafar
  (2015). Inflation expectations and behavior: Do survey respondents act on their beliefs?
  International Economic Review 56 (2), 505­536.
Armona, L., A. Fuster, and B. Zafar (2018). Home price expectations and behavior:
  evidence from a randomized information experiment, forthcoming. Review of Economic
  Studies .
Bachmann, R., T. O. Berg, and E. R. Sims (2015). Inflation expectations and readiness to
  spend: Cross-sectional evidence. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (1),
  1­35.
Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2018). The economic effects of social
  networks: Evidence from the housing market. Journal of Political Economy 126 (6),
  2224­2276.
Bailey, M., E. D´
                avila, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2019). House price beliefs and mortgage
  leverage choice. Review of Economic Studies (forthcoming) .
Bernanke, B. S. (2007). Inflation expectations and inflation forecasting. Speech 306,
  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).
Binder, C. C. (2017). Measuring uncertainty based on rounding: New method and
  application to inflation expectations. Journal of Monetary Economics 90, 1­12.
Binder, C. C. (2018). Inflation expectations and the price at the pump. Journal of
  Macroeconomics 58, 1­18.
Bordalo, P., K. B. Coffman, N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2016). Beliefs about gender.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, Y. Ma, and A. Shleifer (2018). Overreaction in macroeconomic
  expectations. Technical report, Working Paper.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2019). Memory, attention, and choice.
  Technical report, Working Paper.
Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein (2010). Product creation and destruction: Evidence and
  price implications. American Economic Review 100 (3), 691­723.
Carvalho, C. and F. Nechio (2014). Do people understand monetary policy? Journal of
  Monetary Economics 66, 108­123.


                                            40
Cavallo, A., G. Cruces, and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Inflation expectations, learning, and
  supermarket prices: Evidence from survey experiments. American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 9 (3), 1­35.
Cavallo, M. (2008). Oil prices and inflation. FRBSF Economic Letter (oct3).
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012). What can survey forecasts tell us about
  information rigidities? Journal of Political Economy 120 (1), 116­159.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015a). Information rigidity and the expectations
  formation process: A simple framework and new facts.               American Economic
  Review 105 (8), 2644­78.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015b). Is the phillips curve alive and well after
  all? inflation expectations and the missing disinflation. American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 7 (1), 197­232.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2018). Monetary policy communications
  and their effects on household inflation expectations. Working Paper 120 (1), 116­159.
Crump, R. K., S. Eusepi, A. Tambalotti, and G. Topa (2018). Subjective intertemporal
  substitution. Unpublished manuscript, New York Fed .
D'Acunto, F. (2018a). Identity and choice under risk. Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F. (2018b). Tear down this wall street: Anti-market rhetoric, motivated beliefs,
  and investment. Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F., D. Hoang, M. Paloviita, and M. Weber (2019a). Cognitive abilities and
  inflation expectations. Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F., D. Hoang, M. Paloviita, and M. Weber (2019b). Human frictions to the
  transmission of economic policy. Technical report, Working Paper.
D'Acunto, F., D. Hoang, M. Paloviita, and M. Weber (2019c). Iq, expectations, and
  choice. Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber (2016). The effect of unconventional fiscal policy
  on consumption expenditure. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
D'Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber (2018). Unconventional fiscal policy. In AEA
  Papers and Proceedings, Volume 108, pp. 519­23.
D'Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber (2019). Managing households' expectations with
  salient economic policies. Unpublished Manuscript .
D'Acunto, F., U. Malmendier, and M. Weber (2018). Gender roles distort women's
  economic expectations. Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F., M. Prokopczuk, and M. Weber (2019). Historical antisemitism, ethnic
  specialization, and financial development. The Review of Economic Studies 86 (3),
  1170­1206.
Das, S., C. Kuhnen, and S. Nagel (2018). Socioeconomic status and macroeconomic
  expectations. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago .
de Bruin, W. B., W. Van der Klaauw, and G. Topa (2011). Expectations of inflation: The
  biasing effect of thoughts about specific prices. Journal of Economic Psychology 32 (5),
  834­845.
Del Negro, M., M. P. Giannoni, and C. Patterson (2012). The forward guidance puzzle.
  FRB of New York Staff Report (574).

                                           41
Eichenbaum, M., N. Jaimovich, and S. Rebelo (2011). Reference prices, costs, and nominal
  rigidities. American Economic Review 101 (1), 234­62.
Evans, C. L. and J. D. Fisher (2011). What are the implications of rising commodity
  prices for inflation and monetary policy? Chicago Fed Letter (286), 1.
Frydman, C. and M. M. Mormann (2018). The role of salience in choice under risk: An
  experimental investigation. Available at SSRN 2778822 .
Fuhrer, J. C. (2017). Intrinsic expectations persistence: Evidence from professional and
  household survey expectations. Working Paper .
Georganas, S., P. J. Healy, and N. Li (2014). Frequency bias in consumemers' perceptions
  of inflation: An experimental study. European Economic Review 67, 144­158.
Glaeser, E. L. and C. G. Nathanson (2017). An extrapolative model of house price
  dynamics. Journal of Financial Economics 126 (1), 147­170.
Goldfayn-Frank, O. and J. Wohlfart (2019). Expectation formation in a new environment:
  Evidence from the german reunification. Journal of Monetary Economics (forthcoming) .
Goodfriend, M. and R. G. King (1997). The new neoclassical synthesis and the role of
  monetary policy. NBER macroeconomics annual 12, 231­283.
Harris, E. S., B. C. Kasman, M. D. Shapiro, and K. D. West (2009). Oil and the
  macroeconomy: Lessons for monetary policy. In US Monetary Policy Forum Report,
  Volume 23, pp. 2015.
Hastings, J. and J. Shapiro (2013). Fungibility and consumer choice: Evidence from
  commodity price shocks. Quarterly Journal of Economics .
Jaravel, X. (2018). The unequal gains from product innovations: Evidence from the us
  retail sector. Working Paper .
Jonung, L. (1981). Perceived and expected rates of inflation in sweden. The American
  Economic Review 71 (5), 961­968.
Kahneman, D. and D. T. Miller (1986). Norm theory: Comparing reality to its
  alternatives. Psychological Review 93 (2), 136­153.
Kaplan, G. and S. Schulhofer-Wohl (2017). Inflation at the household level. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 91, 19­38.
King, R. and A. L. Wolman (1999). What should the monetary authority do when prices
  are sticky? In Monetary policy rules, pp. 349­404. University of Chicago Press.
Kuchler, T. and B. Zafar (2019). Personal experiences and expectations about aggregate
  outcomes. The Journal of Finance (forthcoming) .
Landier, A., Y. Ma, and D. Thesmar (2017). New experimental evidence on expectations
  formation.
Lucas, R. E. (1972). Expectations and the neutrality of money. Journal of Economic
  Theory 4 (2), 103­124.
Lucas, R. E. (1973). Some international evidence on output-inflation tradeoffs. The
  American Economic Review 63 (3), 326­334.
Lucas, R. E. (1975). An equilibrium model of the business cycle. Journal of political
  economy 83 (6), 1113­1144.
Lusardi, A. and O. S. Mitchell (2007). Baby boomer retirement security: The roles of
  planning, financial literacy, and housing wealth. Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (1),

                                           42
  205­224.
Maggiori, M., J. Stroebel, S. Giglio, and S. P. Utkus (2019). Five facts about beliefs and
  portfolios. Unpublished Manuscript .
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2015a). Learning from inflation experiences. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 131 (1), 53­87.
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2015b). Learning from inflation experiences. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 131 (1), 53­87.
Manski, C. F. and F. Molinari (2010). Rounding probabilistic expectations in surveys.
  Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 28 (2), 219­231.
Mian, A., A. Sufi, and N. Khoshkhou (2015). Government economic policy, sentiments,
  and consumption. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Motley, B. (1997). Should monetary policy focus on "core" inflation? FRBSF Economic
  Letter (11).
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008). Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of menu
  cost models. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4), 1415­1464.
Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2009). Momentum traders in the housing market: survey
  evidence and a search model. American Economic Review 99 (2), 406­11.
Roth, C. and J. Wohlfart (2019). How do expectations about the macroeconomy affect
  personal expectations and behavior? Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming) .
Seitz, A. and T. Watanabe (2005). A unified model for perceptual learning. Trends in
  cognitive sciences 9 (7), 329­334.
Shwayder, A. B. E. (2012). Essays on Commodity Prices. Ph. D. thesis, Northwestern
  University.
Stroebel, J. and J. Vavra (2019). House prices, local demand, and retail prices. Journal
  of Political Economy 127 (3), 1391­1436.
Watanabe, T., J. E. Nanez, and Y. Sasaki (2001). Perceptual learning without perception.
  Nature 413 (6858), 844.
Yellen, J. L. (2016). Macroeconomic research after the crisis. Speech 915, Board of
  Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).




                                           43
                 Figure 4: Grocery Shopping and Inflation Expectations: Raw Data

                     A. Inflation Expectations                                                                 B. Observed Grocery-Price Changes

                    Density of 12-month-ahead Inflation Expectations                                                       Density of the Household-level Inflation Measures




                                                                                                               .1
    .2




                                                                                                               .08
    .15




                                                                                                               .06
 Density




                                                                                                               .04
 .1




                                                                                                               .02
    .05




                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                     -20       -10         0                10           20            30
    0




           -20            0                                                 20            40         60                    Household CPI                               Frequency CPI




                                                                            C. Grocery Shopping and Inflation Expectations

                                                                                      Inflation Expectations by bins of Household CPI
                                 Average Inflation Expectations 12 months
                              4.2      4.4         4.6       4.8       5




                                                                                 1        2      3        4          5     6         7          8

                                                                                     Household CPI             Frequency Adjusted Household CPI




Notes.    This figure plots the distribution of inflation expectations (Panel A), the distribution of
household-level measures of observed price changes (Panel B), and the average of inflation expectations across
households in eight equal-sized bins by observed price changes (Panel C). We measure inflation expectations
from the customized Chicago Booth Attitudes and Expectations survey we fielded in 6/2015 and 7/2016. We
use the micro data from the Nielsen homescan panel to create different measures of experienced inflation.
We use the 12 months before June of the survey wave to measure price changes, and the 12 months before
that period as the base period. Household CPI uses the Nielsen expenditure shares in the base periods as
weight, and Frequency CPI uses the frequency of purchases of a given good in Nielsen in the base period as
weight. We detail the construction of the indices in section II.C.


                                                                                                          44
    Figure 5: Inflation Expectations and Realized Core Inflation over Time


                10
                                                                       Mean Expectations
                 9                                                     P25
                                                                       P75
                 8
                                                                       Core
                 7

                 6

                 5

                 4

                 3

                 2

                 1

                 0

                 -1
                       12 0
                       12 1
                       12 2
                       12 3
                       12 4
                       12 5
                       12 6
                       12 7
                       12 8
                       12 9
                       12 0
                       12 1
                       12 2
                       12 3
                       12 4
                       12 5
                       12 6
                            7
                         /0
                         /0
                         /0
                         /0
                         /0
                         /0
                         /0
                         /0
                         /0
                         /0
                         /1
                         /1
                         /1
                         /1
                         /1
                         /1
                         /1
                         /1
                      12




Notes. This figure plots average inflation expectations over time from the Michigan Survey of Consumers
together with the 25th and 75th percentiles as well as the realized core inflation rate for a sample period
from January 2000 until December 2018.




                                                  45
                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics
Notes. This table reports summary statistics for the main independent and dependent variables in our
running sample. Expected Inflation and Perceived Inflation are reported numerical expectations and
perceptions of inflation rates for a 12-month period, and are bounded between -100 percentage points
and 100 percentage points. Household CPI and Frequency CPI are the measures of household-level
grocery inflation based on scanner data from the Nielsen Homescan Panel defined in section II.C. Both
measures are computed over an horizon of 12 months before the respondent took part in the Chicago
Booth Expectations and Attitudes Survey. Income Outlook, Economic Outlook, and Financial Outlook
are qualitative respondent expectations on the soundness of income growth, personal financial conditions,
and overall economic outlook of the country for the following 12 months, and are bounded between 1
(very bad) and 5 (very good).


                              Observations    Mean      St. dev.   Min      25th    Median   75th   Max
                                  (1)          (2)         (3)     (4)       (5)     (6)      (7)   (8)
 Age                              59,118       61.4      12.9         21     54       63      70     102
 Male                             59,126       0.36      0.48         0       0        0      1       1
 Unemployed                       59,126       0.05      0.22          0      0        0       0      1
 Home Owner                       59,126       0.74      0.44          0      0        1       1      1
 Household Size                   56,227       2.19      1.11          1      1        2      3        9
 College                          59,126       0.48       0.5          0      0        0      1        1
 Income Outlook [1-3]             59,126       2.18       0.9          1      1        3      3        3
 Economic Outlook [1-5]           59,126       2.69      1.04         1       2        3      4       5
 Financial Outlook [1-5]          59,126         3       0.88         1       2        3      4       5
 Expected Inflation               59,126       4.67       8.2        -15      0        2      6       50
 Perceived Inflation              59,126       4.44      8.27        -20      0        2      5      45
 Household CPI                    59,126       0.81      7.14       -17.5   -3.17    0.23    4.02   27.16
 Frequency CPI                    59,126       1.61      5.85      -11.71   -1.91    0.83    4.21   23.08




                                                   46
                  Table 2: Grocery Shopping and Inflation Expectations: Multivariate Analysis

     Notes. This table reports the estimates of regressing individuals' inflation expectations on the inflation rates experienced in their
     household consumption bundle. We measure inflation expectations from the customized Chicago Booth Attitudes and Expectations
     survey which we fielded in June of 2015 and 2016. We randomize the inflation question asking one half of the survey about changes
     in prices following the wording in the Michigan Survey of Consumers, and one half directly about inflation, following the wording
     in the New York Fed Survey. We use the micro data from the Nielsen homescan panel to create different measures of experienced
     inflation. We use the 12 months before the June of the survey wave to measure price changes and the 12 months before that period
     as the base period. Household CPI uses the Nielsen expenditure shares in the base periods as weight, and Frequency CPI uses the
     frequency of purchases of a given good in Nielsen in the base period as weight. We detail the construction of the indices in section
     II.C. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. All regressions include survey-wave and inflation-question fixed effects.
     Demographic controls include age, square of age, sex, employment status, 16 income dummies, home ownership, marital status,
     household size, college dummy, four race dummies, and reported risk tolerance. Expectations controls include household income
     expectations, aggregate economic outlook, and personal financial outlook.

                               (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)        (9)
                                                        
       Household CPI         0.17        0.17       0.19                                                0.05        0.01        0.07




47
                            (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.07)                                              (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.09)
       Frequency CPI                                               0.20       0.22        0.30          0.16        0.21        0.24
                                                                  (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.09)        (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.12)

       Nobs                  59,126      56,220     56,220         59,126     56,220      56,220        59,126      56,220      56,220
       R2                    0.0279      0.0950     0.7758         0.0281     0.0907      0.7758        0.0281      0.0907      0.7758
       Demographics                        X          X                         X           X                         X           X
       Expectations                        X          X                         X           X                         X           X
       County FE                           X          X                         X           X                         X           X
       Individual FE                                  X                                     X                                     X
       Standard errors in parentheses
       
        p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01
  Table 3: Grocery Shopping and Inflation Expectations: Robustness

Notes. This table reports the estimates of regressing individuals' inflation expectations on
the inflation rates experienced in their household consumption bundle. We measure inflation
expectations from the customized Chicago Booth Attitudes and Expectations survey, which we
fielded in June of 2015 and 2016. We randomize the inflation question asking one half of the
survey about changes in prices, following the wording in the Michigan Survey of Consumers,
and one half directly about inflation, following the wording in the New York Fed Survey. We
use the micro data from the Nielsen homescan panel to create measures of experienced inflation.
We use the 12 months before the June of the survey wave to measure price changes and the 12
months before that period as the base period. Frequency CPI uses the frequency of purchases of
a given good in Nielsen in the base period as weight. We detail the construction of the indices
in section II.C. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. All regressions include
survey-wave and inflation-question fixed effects. Demographic controls include age, square of age,
sex, employment status, 16 income dummies, home ownership, marital status, household size,
college dummy, four race dummies, and reported risk tolerance. Expectations controls include
household income expectations, aggregate economic outlook, and personal financial outlook.

                               Income                        Age              Household Size
                         Low         High           Young           Old      Small      Big
                         (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)       (5)         (6)
 Frequency CPI          0.20        0.19          0.13          0.22         0.19       0.21
                       (0.06)      (0.05)        (0.06)        (0.05)       (0.04)     (0.08)

 Nobs                   30,829      25,391          18,194         38,026   42,109      14,118
 R2                     0.0970      0.1107          0.1009         0.1001   0.1008      0.1127
 Demographics             X           X               X              X        X           X
 Expectations             X           X               X              X        X           X
 County FE                X           X               X              X        X           X
 Standard errors in parentheses
 
  p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01




                                               48
            Table 4: Salient Price Changes and Inflation Expectations

Notes. This table reports the estimates of regressing individuals' inflation expectations on the inflation
rates experienced in their household consumption bundle across three equal-sized groups based on the
experienced inflation rates. We measure inflation expectations from the customized Chicago Booth
Attitudes and Expectations survey, which we fielded in June of 2015 and 2016. We randomize the
inflation question asking one half of the survey about changes in prices, following the wording in the
Michigan Survey of Consumers, and one half directly about inflation, following the wording in the
New York Fed Survey. We use the micro data from the Nielsen homescan panel to create measures
of experienced inflation. We use the 12 months before the June of the survey wave to measure price
changes and the 12 months before that period as the base period. Frequency CPI uses the frequency
of purchases of a given good in Nielsen in the base period as weight. We detail the construction of the
indices in section II.C. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. All regressions include
survey-wave and inflation-question fixed effects. Demographic controls include age, square of age,
sex, employment status, 16 income dummies, home ownership, marital status, household size, college
dummy, four race dummies, and reported risk tolerance. Expectations controls include household
income expectations, aggregate economic outlook, and personal financial outlook.

                                   Bottom                   Intermediate                   Top
                                Frequency CPI              Frequency CPI              Frequency CPI
                                 (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
                                                                                         
 Frequency CPI                 0.30        0.32           0.09      -0.01            0.16       0.20
                              (0.15)      (0.15)         (0.28)     (0.33)          (0.08)     (0.08)

 Range Frequency CPI            [-0.117, -0.009]            [-0.009, 0.028]            [0.028, 0.231]

 Nobs                          19,706      18,568         19,707      18,903        19,713      18,749
 R2                            0.0230      0.1002         0.0293      0.1038        0.0314      0.1122
 Demographics                                X                          X                         X
 Expectations                                X                          X                         X
 County FE                                   X                          X                         X
 Standard errors in parentheses
 
  p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01




                                                    49
                                      Table 5: Frequency of Exposure to Grocery Price Changes

     Notes. This table reports the estimates of regressing individuals' inflation expectations on the inflation rates experienced in their household
     consumption bundle. Columns (1) to (2) split the sample by main grocery short, columns (3) to (4) split the sample by shopping frequency, and
     columns (5) to (7) split the sample by distance to the primary grocercy store. We measure inflation expectations from the customized Chicago
     Booth Attitudes and Expectations survey, which we fielded in June of 2015 and 2016. We randomize the inflation question asking one half of
     the survey about changes in prices, following the wording in the Michigan Survey of Consumers, and one half directly about inflation, following
     the wording in the New York Fed Survey. We use the micro data from the Nielsen homescan panel to create different measures of experienced
     inflation. We use the 12 months before the June of the survey wave to measure price changes and the 12 months before that period as the base
     period. Frequency CPI uses the frequency of purchases of a given good in Nielsen in the base period as weight. We detail the construction
     of the indices in section II.C. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. All regressions include survey-wave and inflation-question
     fixed effects. Demographic controls include age, square of age, sex, employment status, 16 income dummies, home ownership, marital status,
     household size, college dummy, four race dummies, and reported risk tolerance. Expectations controls include household income expectations,
     aggregate economic outlook, and personal financial outlook.

                         Primary Grocery Shopper            Shopping Frequency                            Time to Primary Shopping Outlet
                          Yes           No              > 1 per Week < 1 per Week                    < 20 Min > 20 Min & < 60 Min > 60 Min




50
                           (1)           (2)                  (3)              (4)                       (5)                (6)               (7)
                                                                                                                              
     Frequency CPI       0.17          0.27                 0.17             0.28                      0.14               0.27              0.80
                          (0.05)        (0.06)               (0.06)          (0.14)                     (0.06)             (0.13)            (0.24)

     Nobs                32,005         24,215              21,302            4,745                    18,540              5,867             1,640
     R2                  0.1036         0.0973              0.0895           0.1425                    0.0954             0.1171             0.2322
     Demographics          X              X                   X                 X                        X                   X                 X
     Expectations          X              X                   X                 X                        X                   X                 X
     County FE             X              X                   X                 X                        X                   X                 X
     Standard errors in parentheses
     
      p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01
                                     Table 6: Sources of Information About Prices
     Notes. This table reports the estimates of regressing individuals' inflation expectations on the inflation rates experienced
     in their household consumption bundle. Columns (1) to (2) split the sample by media information, columns (3) to (4) split
     the sample by other peoples' information and columns (5) to (6) split the sample by own experience. We measure inflation
     expectations from the customized Chicago Booth Attitudes and Expectations survey, which we fielded in June of 2015 and
     2016. We randomize the inflation question asking one half of the survey about changes in prices, following the wording
     in the Michigan Survey of Consumers, and one half directly about inflation, following the wording in the New York Fed
     Survey. We use the micro data from the Nielsen homescan panel to create different measures of experienced inflation. We
     use the 12 months before the June of the survey wave to measure price changes and the 12 months before that period as
     the base period. Frequency CPI uses the frequency of purchases of a given good in Nielsen in the base period as weight. We
     detail the construction of the indices in Section II.C. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. All regressions
     include survey-wave and inflation-question fixed effects. Demographic controls include age, square of age, sex, employment
     status, 16 income dummies, home ownership, marital status, household size, college dummy, four race dummies, reported
     risk tolerance. Expectations controls include household income expectations, aggregate economic outlook, and personal
     financial outlook.

                                    Media               Other People             Own Experience          Frequency Gas Station




51
                              No            Yes         No       Yes              No       Yes             Low        High
                              (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)            (7)          (8)
                                                                                                              
      Frequency CPI         0.30        0.08          0.28        0.12          0.14        0.28          0.27         0.16
                           (0.07)      (0.07)        (0.08)      (0.07)        (0.06)      (0.08)        (0.05)       (0.06)

      Nobs                  13,224      12,823        12,306      13,741        16,541      9,506         33,202       23,018
      R2                    0.1131      0.0517        0.1167      0.0556        0.0717      0.1243        0.1050       0.0953
      Demographics            X           X             X           X             X           X             X            X
      Expectations            X           X             X           X             X           X             X            X
      County FE               X           X             X           X             X           X             X            X
      Standard errors in parentheses
      
       p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01
                                      Table 7: Sophistication in Economic Matters

     Notes. This table reports the estimates of regressing individuals' inflation expectations on the inflation rates experienced in
     their household consumption bundle. Columns (1)-(2) split the sample by quantitative major, columns (3)-(4) by mortgage
     ownership, and columns (5)-(6) by whether respondents reported rounded values for their inflation expectations. We measure
     inflation expectations from the customized Chicago Booth Attitudes and Expectations survey, which we fielded in June of
     2015 and 2016. We randomize the inflation question asking one half of the survey about changes in prices, following the
     wording in the Michigan Survey of Consumers, and one half directly about inflation, following the wording in the New York
     Fed Survey. We use the micro data from the Nielsen homescan panel to create different measures of experienced inflation. We
     use the 12 months before the June of the survey wave to measure price changes and the 12 months before that period as the
     base period. Frequency CPI uses the frequency of purchases of a given good in Nielsen in the base period as weight. We detail
     the construction of the indices in section II.C. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. All regressions include
     survey-wave and inflation-question fixed effects. Demographic controls include age, square of age, sex, employment status, 16
     income dummies, home ownership, marital status, household size, college dummy, 4 race dummies, reported risk tolerance.
     Expectations controls include household income expectations, aggregate economic outlook, and personal financial outlook.

                           Quantitative Major         Mortgage Holder         Stock Market Participant             Rounder




52
                             No         Yes            No       Yes              No          Yes                 No       Yes
                             (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)        (8)
      Frequency CPI         0.23       0.17           0.28       0.16           0.26          0.17             0.10        0.26
                           (0.04)     (0.07)         (0.06)     (0.06)         (0.05)        (0.05)           (0.03)      (0.05)

      Nobs                  46,466     9,754          19,131     20,942         37,112        19,108           19,340      36,880
      R2                    0.0934     0.1351         0.1112     0.1190         0.1114        0.1182           0.0690      0.1007
      Demographics            X          X              X          X              X             X                X           X
      Expectations            X          X              X          X              X             X                X           X
      County FE               X          X              X          X              X             X                X           X
      Standard errors in parentheses
      
       p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01
                   Table 8: Other Expectations and Real Outcomes
Notes. This table reports the estimates of regressing individuals' national wage growth (column (1)),
national house-price inflation expectations (column (2)), the logarithm of outstanding mortgage balances
(column (3)), the logarithm of monthly mortgage payments (column (4)), the share of one's overall wealth in
real estate (column (5)), and a dummy for whether the respondent holds a savings account (column (6)) on
the individual numerical inflation expectations over the next 12 months. We measure inflation expectations
from the customized Chicago Booth Expectations and Communication survey, which was fielded in March
of 2019. Survey participants are directly asked about inflation, following the wording in the New York Fed
Survey. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. Demographic controls include age, square
of age, sex, employment status, 16 income dummies, home ownership, household size, and college dummy.
Expectations controls include household income expectations and mortgage rate expectations.


                       Wage        House Price      Mortgage        Mortgage        Share        Savings
                     Inflation      Inflation       Balance         Payment        Housing       Account
                        (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
                                                                                        
 Inflation            1.63            2.48            6.19           3.62           1.43        -0.87
 Expectations        (0.28)          (0.30)          (2.96)         (1.78)         (0.77)       (0.21)

 Nobs                 3,374            8.862            43,487       43,487         42,227        62,304
 R2                   0.0978          0.1367            0.0788       0.0808          0.037        0.0745
 Demographics           X                X                X            X               X            X
 Expectations           X                X                X            X               X            X
 Standard errors in parentheses
 
  p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01




                                                   53
             Online Appendix:
Grocery Shopping Drives Inflation Expectations
Francesco D'Acunto, Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael Weber

                         Not for Publication




                                  1
                            Table A.1: Alternative Definitions of Inflation Expectations

    Notes. This table reports the estimates of regressing individuals' inflation expectations on the inflation rates experienced in
    their household consumption bundle. Columns (1) to (3) exclude inflation expectations of 0, columns (4) to (6) use the mean
    of the inflation expectations distribution, and columns (7) to (9) exclude individuals who report the same values for inflation
    perceptions and expectations. We measure inflation expectations from the customized Chicago Booth Attitudes and Expectations
    survey, which we fielded in June of 2015 and 2016. We randomize the inflation question asking one half of the survey about
    changes in prices, following the wording in the Michigan Survey of Consumers, and one half directly about inflation, following
    the wording in the New York Fed Survey. We use the micro data from the Nielsen homescan panel to create different measures
    of experienced inflation. We use the 12 months before the June of the survey wave to measure price changes and the 12 months
    before that period as the base period. Frequency CPI uses the frequency of purchases of a given good in Nielsen in the base
    period as weight. We detail the construction of the indices in section II.C. Standard errors are clustered at the household level.
    All regressions include survey-wave and inflation-question fixed effects. Demographic controls include age, square of age, sex,
    employment status, 16 income dummies, home ownership, marital status, household size, college dummy, four race dummies, and
    reported risk tolerance. Expectations controls include household income expectations, aggregate economic outlook, and personal
    financial outlook.




2
                           No 0 Inflation Expectations              Mean of Distribution              Perceptions = Expectations
                            (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)        (9)
                                                                                                                     
     Frequency CPI         0.19       0.20        0.23          0.06        0.08       0.16           0.13       0.16        0.24
                          (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.12)        (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.04)         (0.06)     (0.06)      (0.19)

     Nobs                  42,263     40,158      40,158        59,125      56,219     56,219         29,019     27,558      27,558
     R2                    0.0205     0.1250      0.8570        0.0184      0.1324     0.8022         0.0158     0.1144      0.8828
     Demographics                       X           X                         X          X                         X           X
     Expectations                       X           X                         X          X                         X           X
     County FE                          X           X                         X          X                         X           X
     Individual FE                                  X                                    X                                     X
     Standard errors in parentheses
     
      p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01
Table A.2: Grocery Shopping and Inflation Perceptions

      Notes. This table reports the estimates of regressing
      individuals' inflation perceptions on the inflation rates
      experienced in their household consumption bundle.
      We measure inflation expectations from the customized
      Chicago Booth Attitudes and Expectations survey,
      which we fielded in June of 2015 and 2016. We
      randomize the inflation question asking one half of the
      survey about changes in prices, following the wording
      in the Michigan Survey of Consumers, and one half
      directly about inflation, following the wording in the
      New York Fed Survey. We use the micro data from the
      Nielsen homescan panel to create different measures of
      experienced inflation. We use the 12 months before the
      June of the survey wave to measure price changes and
      the 12 months before that period as the base period.
      Household CPI uses the Nielsen expenditure shares in
      the base periods as weight, and Frequency CPI uses the
      frequency of purchases of a given good in Nielsen in the
      base period as weight. We detail the construction of the
      indices in section II.C. Standard errors are clustered at
      the household level. All regressions include survey-wave
      and inflation-question fixed effects. Demographic con-
      trols include age, square of age, sex, employment status,
      16 income dummies, home ownership, marital status,
      household size, college dummy, four race dummies, and
      reported risk tolerance. Expectations controls include
      household income expectations, aggregate economic
      outlook, and personal financial outlook.

                               (1)         (2)         (3)
                                  
       Household CPI          0.20                 -0.02
                             (0.03)                (0.05)
       Frequency CPI                     0.28       0.29
                                        (0.03)     (0.05)

       Nobs                   57,730     57,730      57,730
       R2                     0.0878     0.0883      0.0883
       Demographics             X          X           X
       Expectations             X          X           X
       County FE                X          X           X
       Standard errors in parentheses
       
        p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01




                                 3
