                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                IMPACT OF DEFAULTS IN RETIREMENT SAVING PLANS:
                            PUBLIC EMPLOYEE PLANS

                                          Robert L. Clark
                                          Denis Pelletier

                                       Working Paper 26234
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26234


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2019




We would like to thank Rob Wylie, Executive Director of the South Dakota Retirement System,
and his team for providing the administrative data used in this analysis. They also provided
useful information about the introduction of automatic enrollment into the 457 plan. We also
acknowledge the assistance of Joshua Franzel on earlier work describing the adoption of
automatic enrollment in South Dakota. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2018
SIEPPR "Working Longer Conference" at Stanford University. Damon Jones, Joanna Lahey, and
Anirudh Mylavarapu have provided helpful comments. This project received funding from the
TIAA Institute and the Wharton School's Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent official views
of the above-named institutions, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Robert L. Clark and Denis Pelletier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Impact of Defaults in Retirement Saving Plans: Public Employee Plans
Robert L. Clark and Denis Pelletier
NBER Working Paper No. 26234
September 2019
JEL No. J18,J26,J45

                                          ABSTRACT

This study examines the impact of the adoption automatic enrollment provisions by the state of
South Dakota for its supplemental retirement saving plan (SRP). In South Dakota, state and local
government employees, including teachers, are also covered by a defined benefit pension plan
and by Social Security. Thus, career public employees in South Dakota can expect a life time
annuity from these two programs of around 75 percent of their final salary. Prior to the
introduction of automatic enrollment, the proportion of newly hired employees who were
contributing to the SRP was less than three percent in their first year of employment. After the
introduction of automatic enrollment, over 90 percent of newly hired workers who were auto
enrolled were participating in the plan. Significant differences compared to earlier studies of auto
enrollment include: we are examining public employees who are also covered by a defined
benefit retirement plan, prior to the introduction of auto enroll participation were extremely low,
and these is no employer match to employee contributions to the SRP. Thus, the key question is
whether auto enrollment has the same powerful impact on contributions to a retirement saving
plan under these conditions.


Robert L. Clark
Poole College of Management
Box 7229
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
and NBER
robert_clark@ncsu.edu

Denis Pelletier
Department of Economics
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
denis_pelletier@ncsu.edu
         Impact of Defaults in Retirement Savings Plans: Public Employee Plans
       Over the past two decades, a series of papers have shown the power of defaults to alter

saving decisions in employer-provided retirement saving plans. Studies have shown that

automatic enrollment policies have two primary effects. First, the adoption of automatic

enrollment results in a substantial increase in the proportion of employees participating in

retirement saving plans. While the magnitude of the increase in the participation ranges from

study to study, research generally indicates participation rises from about 60 percent of the

workforce in traditional plans without automatic enrollment to over 90 percent once automatic

enrollment is adopted. Second, firms adopting automatic enrollment policies must also select a

default contribution rate, often three percent of salary, and this default contribution rate usually

becomes the modal contribution to the plan.

       In general, these studies have been conducted using administrative data for a single firm

or a small set of private sector firms in which the retirement saving plan is the only employer-

provided pension plan. The analysis typically focuses on the introduction of automatic

enrollment to an existing 401(k) and compares participation and contributions rate shortly before

and a few months after the adoption of the policy.

       The present study adds to this literature by examining the impact of the adoption

automatic enrollment provisions by a state government, specifically the adoption of automatic

enrollment by the state of South Dakota for its supplemental retirement saving plan (SRP). In

South Dakota, state and local government employees, including teachers, are also covered by a

defined benefit pension plan and by Social Security. Thus, career public employees in South

Dakota can expect a life time annuity from these two programs of around 75 percent of their

final salary. Prior to the introduction of automatic enrollment, the proportion of newly hired

employees who were contributing to the SRP was less than three percent in their first year of

                                                  2
employment. After the introduction of automatic enrollment, over 90 percent of newly hired

workers who were auto enrolled were participating in the plan.

        We begin with a review of the literature examining the impact of defaults in retirement

saving plans and show how the present study represents an important addition and extension to

our understanding of the role of defaults in a different setting. Section II describes both the

mandatory defined benefit plan offered by South Dakota and the process by which automatic

enrollment was adopted by some but not all of the government agencies in South Dakota. We

then discuss the administrative data available to us and how this project differs from the earlier

studies on defaults. Section III presents an overview of the change in participation and

contribution rates after the introduction of automatic enrollment for the SRP. Finally, in Section

IV, we use regression analysis to determine the characteristics of individuals most likely to

remain in the SRP who were employed by agencies that adopted automatic enrollment along

with the probability of individuals, who are employed by agencies that did not adopt automatic

enrollment, deciding to opt into the SRP.


   I.      Review of the Default Literature

   In large measure, the focus on defaults in retirement saving plans stems from the emergence

of behavior economics and the framing of choices (Benartzi and Thaler, 2004, 2013).

Traditional economic theory would suggest that with freedom of choice among various options,

defaults should not affect ultimate outcomes. However, limited information about the value of

different distribution options and procrastination or inertia may result in defaults leading to

permanent decisions.




                                                  3
      The recent literature examining the importance of defaults in supplemental retirement

savings plans begins with Madrian and Shea (2001). They analyze the 401(k) savings behavior

of employees in one large corporation before and after the introduction of automatic enrollment.

The company in this analysis is a publicly traded Fortune 500 company in the health care and

insurance industry, it was national in scope with locations in 38 states. The employer match in

the plan was 50 percent on the first 6 percent of an employee's salary before and after the change

in enrollment. The 401(k) plan was the only retirement plan offered by the firm. Prior to the

adoption of automatic enrollment, the participation rate in the 401(k) plan was 57 percent.

      Auto enrollment was adopted by the firm in 1998 with a default contribution of 3 percent of

salary. The result of automatic enrollment was that participation increased to over 80 percent

and default contribution rate was a strong determinant of actual contributions. 1 Among those

hired after the introduction of automatic enrollment, 86 percent remained in the plan after one

year. Madrian and Shea (2001, p. 1161) also found that automatic enrollment "equalizes

participation rates across various demographic groups," i.e. the participation rates among those

employees least likely to participate in retirement saving plans increased before automatic

enrollment (younger and lower-paid employees along with black and Hispanic workers)

increased in magnitude relative to those groups who were already participating at high rates.

      Choi, et al (2004) examined the impact of automatic enrollment using data from three large

corporations in different industries (office equipment, health services, and food products). Once




1
    In a related paper, Carroll, et al (2009) examine a strong positive effect on participation when a firm
used what the authors called an "active decision" requirement. This study examined data for a single
large financial services firms. See Beshears, et al (2009) and Choi et al (2005) for additional analysis of
the effect of auto enrolment.

                                                        4
again, the retirement saving plan is the only pension plan offered by each of the companies. This

paper utilizes data over a three year period. They report that adoption of automatic enrollment

has a "dramatic impact" of increasing participation rates to over 85 percent in all three

companies. After being automatically enrolled, between 65 and 87 percent of individuals in all

three companies contributed exactly at the default contribution rate. 2

      Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2004) examine employee responses to the introduction of

automatic enrollment in nine companies. In each case, they find that in the absence of automatic

enrollment participation rates are rather low but increase with tenure. Following the introduction

of automatic enrollment, participation rates jump to between 86 and 96 percent.

      Several earlier studies should be mentioned as they relate to the current study even though

they did not examine automatic enrollment policies. Key areas of interest are the presence of an

additional pension plan and the level of employer communications about plans offered by the

employer and the importance of additional saving for retirement. As we will see later, public

employees in South Dakota are covered by a defined benefit plan and the retirement system sent

regular communications concerning the adoption of automatic enrollment into the SRP.

Andrews (1992) examined Form 5500 data which report pension information provided by plan

sponsors. She finds that the probability of participation in a retirement saving plan rises with

age, earnings, and tenure and importantly, participation rates decline in the presence of a defined

benefit pension plan. Papke (1995) also finds that workers covered by another retirement plan

are less likely to contribute to a 401(k) plan. Clark and Schieber (1998) and Bernheim and




2
    Bernheim, Fradkin, and Popov (2015) develop various method of evaluating the welfare gains and costs
of imposing defaults in 401(k) plans.

                                                     5
Garret (2003) report that employer communications concerning retirement plans can increase

participation in retirement savings plan.

    Most of the studies to date have examined data from private sector firms that do not provide

a defined benefit plan in addition to the retirement saving plan. An exception to the focus on

private sector firms is Goda, et al (2018) which examines federal employees and participation in

the Thrift Saving Plan (TSP). In additional to being able to contribute to the optional TSP,

federal employees are also covered by a defined benefit plan. This study reports a participation

rate over 90 percent before the adoption of automatic enrollment and a subsequent small increase

in participation after its adoption.

    Clark and Mitchell (2019) studied the saving decisions of employees in a quasi-governmental

agency. The employees were covered by Social Security and a defined benefit pension plan. In

addition, workers were given the opportunity to contribute to a 401(a) retirement saving plan

with relatively generous employer contributions. Clark and Mitchell found that a change in the

default investment from a moderate asset allocation fund (AAF) to age related target date funds

(TDF) with more investment risk did not alter participation rates in the plan nor did it alter the

contribution rates of participants. At the time of the change in the default, all assets previously

held in the AAF were mapped into the new TDF. While participants could change investment to

offset the higher risk associated with the TDF relatively few did so. Thus, the power of defaults

seems to extend to the default investment in retirement savings plans.

     Most of the papers examine the response to automatic enrollment in 401(k) plans offered by

private sector firms where the plan sponsor has an employer match and does not offer any other

retirement plan. In general, the research findings indicate that the adoption of automatic

enrollment for 401(k) plans in these situations results in substantial increases in participation in


                                                  6
saving plans 3 and that employee contributions are centered on the default contribution rates.

These findings imply that workers do not subsequently opt out of the plans and that once in the

plan, they seldom change their contribution rate. The present study examines whether automatic

enrollment will have similar powerful effects for public employees who are also covered by a

defined benefit plan and when the employer does not provide an employer matching

contribution.


      II.      Adoption of Automatic Enrollment in South Dakota

            Virtually all state and local government employees teachers in South Dakota are covered
by the South Dakota Retirement System (SDRS) and they are also covered by Social Security.
SDRS is a defined benefit pension plan with a benefit formula:

            Benefit = 1.55% times (final average salary) times (years for service after 2008)

            Plus

            Benefit = 1.7% times (final average salary) times (years for service before 2008)

Individuals can retire with unreduced benefits at age 65 or if they meet the Rule of 85
requirements, if the sum of the retiree's age plus years of service equal 85. 4

            Prior to the introduction of automatic enrollment, very few newly hired employees
enrolled in the SRP in their first years of employment. For example, between 2005 and 2009,
fewer than three percent of newly hired workers enrolled in the SRP during their first year of
employment. This level of participation is much lower than found in earlier studies of private



3
    An exception to this conclusion is the paper by Butrica and Karamcheva (2015) which reports that
automatic enrollment increases participation by only seven percentage points.
4
    Details of the SDRS pension are described in the member handbook of the system which can be
accessed at http://www.sdrs.sd.gov/docs/ClassAFoundationMemberHandbook.pdf

                                                     7
sector firms who do not offer a defined benefit. 5 Another potential reason for limited
participation in the plan is that the South Dakota SRP does not have an employer matching
contribution. In 2009, the state legislature enacted legislation that allowed, but did not require,
each government agency that participated in the South Dakota Retirement System and the SRP to
institute automatic enrollment for all newly hired employees. 6

          While virtually all primary defined benefit and defined contribution public sector plans
automatically cover all full-time employees, the SDRS was one of the first major public sector
retirement systems, along with the Employees Retirement System of Texas, to implement
automatic enrollment for their supplemental savings plan. The adoption of the automatic
enrollment policy by an agency requires that this policy be applied to all of the agency's newly
hired employees. Once the automatic enrollment policy is adopted, all permanent full-time
employees hired on or after a determined date are automatically enrolled in the SRP at a default
contribution of $25 per month (about one percent of the mean salary of South Dakota public
employees). This default contribution rate is much lower than is typically associated with
automatic enrollment policies in the private sector.

          The initial contributions to the SRP are placed in a money market account, for first 90
days after which time funds are transferred to an age appropriate target date fund. The participant
can allocate these contributions to other investment options anytime during this 90-day window
as well. Once automatically enrolled in the SRP, the participant has the option to increase
contributions up to IRS maximum limits, move current and future contributions to other
investment options, and within the first 90 days of being automatically enrolled, opt out of the
SRP and receive a refund of all contributions. Once this 90-day window has past, future
contributions can be stopped, i.e. the employee can opt out of the SRP; however, the participant




5
    The proportion of South Dakota public employees who participate in the retirement saving plan is also
considerably lower than participation rates for North Carolina teachers who are also covered by a state
managed defined benefit plan (Clark, et al 2016 and Clark, Pathak, and Pelletier, 2018)
6
    Clark, Franzel, and Pelletier (2018) provide a detailed description of the automatic enrollment
provisions and the process by which this policy was adopted and introduced.

                                                       8
cannot receive a refund of initial contributions unless they are eligible for a one-time, in-service
distribution under IRS rules, are separated from service, or retire.

       The introduction of automatic enrollment by South Dakota provides the opportunity to
estimate the impact of automatic enrollment provisions in an environment that is much different
from previous studies. There are three major differences between the South Dakota case and that
of earlier studies. First, public employees in South Dakota are also covered by a defined benefit
plan that provides employees with 20 to 30 years of service with a life annuity of 30 to 50
percent of final earnings. Since the workers are also covered by Social Security, most career
public employees in South Dakota will have retirement income of about 75 percent of their final
salary in the form of life annuities from SDRS and Social Security without contributing to the
SRP. Second, the SRP does not provide any employer matching contributions so there is a more
limited enticement to contribute to this tax deferred saving plan compare to private sector 401(k)
plans that have been the focus of previous studies.   Third, the default contribution is
considerably lower than that used by most employers in other studies so that the monetary need
to opt out is much less for the South Dakota employees. The main research question we examine
is whether automatic enrollment will have the same powerful impact on participation rates for
public sector workers covered by a defined benefit pension plan and a retirement saving plan that
provides no employer matching contributions.


   III.    Changes in Participation and Contribution Rates in Response to the
           Adoption of Automatic Enrollment

   To determine how public employees who are also covered by a defined benefit plan respond
to automatic enrollment in a supplemental retirement plan, we obtained administrative records
from SDRS on all public employees in South Dakota who were hired between 2005 and 2016.
Using these data, we are able to determine enrollment and contribution rates for all new hires in
the first year of employment and the subsequent participation rates between the hire date and
2016. A unique aspect of this analysis is that we are able to observe contributions for a number
of years after employment for both those hired before and after the introduction of automatic
enrollment. Since not all public agencies adopted automatic enrollment, we also observe
participation and contributions for individuals hired in the same year for those automatically
enrolled and those employed in agencies that did not adopt auto enrollment. The data on annual
                                                  9
contributions, account balances, and annual salary is reported over fiscal years ( July 1 to June
30). Our analysis covers new hires in SDRS and who have access to the SRP. Between 2005
and 2016, 50,333 such new employees were hired by government agencies in South Dakota.

Participation Rate Soars with Adoption of Automatic Enrollment

   From the administrative data, we observe the year each employee was hired and whether they
contributed to the SRP in that first year as measured by total contributions at the end of the fiscal
year, these trends are shown in Table 1. The number of new hires range between 3,000 and
6,000 every year. Columns 2 and 3, Table 1 sort new hires in each year into individuals whose
employer had adopted auto enrollment and those employed by agencies where auto enrollment
was not adopted. Of course, prior to 2010, no agency auto enrolled any new employees. Column
4 reports the percent of all new employees enrolled in the SRP by year of employment. The
participation rate in the SRP for individuals hired between 2005 and 2009 was less than three
percent in each year. It is important to note that this low participation rate is much lower that
was found in other studies prior to the adoption of automatic enrollment, Thus, it would appear
that given the expectation of lifetime annuities from both the SDRS and Social Security, most
public employees decided that it was not in their self-interest to make contributions to a
retirement saving plan.

                                               [Table 1]

   The introduction of automatic enrollment into the SRP produced a dramatic change in
savings outcomes. After the new law went into effect, participation rates in the SRP for all new
hires jumped from less than three percent to over 40 percent. This dramatic increase actually
understates the impact of the adoption of automatic enrollment. Column 5, Table 1 indicates the
percent of individuals hired after 2009 who were automatically enrolled in the SRP and who
remained in the plan during their first year of employment rose to over 90 percent (except for
individuals hired in 2012) following the introduction of the new policy. In comparison, Column
6 shows the percent of individuals who enrolled in the SRP and were not subject to automatic
enroll remained less than eight percent in every year. The ability to compare same year
contribution rates for South Dakota employees with and without automatic enrollment allows us


                                                 10
to control for time variant market conditions in a manner that has not been available to other
studies.

   Chart 1 further illustrates the impact of adopting an automatic enrollment policy. The solid
line indicates the participation rate for all newly hired public employees in each year. The
hashed line shows the participation rate of individuals hired after 2009 by agencies that did not
adopt automatic enrollment and the dotted line indicates the proportion of new employees
contributing to the SRP in agencies who were automatically enrolled. Thus, the adoption of
automatic enrollment appears to have increased participation by approximately 40 percent for all
South Dakota employees with the option of contributing to the SRP; however, the initial
participation rate for those at agencies that adopted auto enrollment exceeds the rate for agencies
that do not have auto enrollment by 85 percentage points.

                                                [Chart 1]

   It is interesting to note that the participation rate of 90 percent with automatic enrollment
observed in South Dakota is very similar to the participation rate found in studies of private
sector firms that do not provide their employees with a defined benefit plan and whose 401(k)
plans offer employer matches. The low rate of opting out of the SRP supports the finding of
earlier studies that inertia plays a substantial role in the effect of automatic enrollment. In
addition, the low opt out rate in South Dakota may also be influenced by the relatively low
default contribution rate of only $25 per month or about 1 percent; did the new employees even
notice the modest reduction in their take home pay due to the default contribution. The change
in participation rates in South Dakota indicate that even when employees have relatively high
replacement rates from a defined benefit pension plan and Social Security automatic enrollment
in a retirement saving plan produces participation rates of 90 percent.

Contribution Rate Settles around Default Contribution

   Table 2 shows the median contribution rates for workers who enrolled in the SRP in their
first year of employment ranged between 2 and 3.5 percent of annual salary prior to the




                                                  11
introduction of automatic enrollment. 7 As noted earlier, the default contribution rate for those
automatically enrolled is only $25 per month. The average annual salary for all new hires during
this period is $31,907, implying a default contribution rate for workers earning the mean salary
for public employees equal to about one percent of annual earnings. The effect of this rather low
default contribution rate is shown in the post 2009 years when median contribution rates fell
substantially to approximately one percent of annual salary. One should note that these
participants include individuals who would have contributed to the SRP without automatic
enrollment plus those who would have not participated without automatic enrollment.

                                                    [Table 2]

      These data support earlier findings that contribution rates after the introduction of automatic
enrollment tend to cluster around the default contribution rate. An interesting observation is that
the contribution rate to the SRP plan fell even for those who were not subject to automatic
enrollment. This latter decline may be due to peer effects or the idea that the state has endorsed
the low default contribution rate as the optimal saving level.

Are There Lasting Effects of Automatic Enrollment?

      In order to determine the long-range impact of automatic enrollment on participation in
retirement saving plans, one needs several years of employment data to see whether participation
rates with automatic enrollment decline over time. Similarly, one needs to determine if
participation rates rise over time without automatic enrollment. If rates decline relative to year
of hire rates for those automatically enrolled and rise for those without automatic enrollment,
then limiting the analysis of year of hire rates would overstate the positive impact of adopting
automatic enrollment. To examine these issues, we once again sort the observations by year of
employment and whether the employer adopted automatic enrollment, and then calculate the
proportion of individuals by hire year who are contributing to the SRP for each year between



7
    Rollovers from other tax qualified saving plans into the SRP were not distinguished from annual
contributions to the SRP. To avoid having large rollovers influencing our analysis, we capped total
contributions to the SRP at the legal limit for each year.

                                                     12
year of hire and 2016. Participation rates between hire date and 2016 for those with and without
automatic enrollment are shown in Table 3 by year of hire.

                                                [Table 3]

   The proportion of workers contributing to the SRP among those automatically enrolled
steadily declines with additional years of employment. For those hired in 2010 who were auto
enrolled, the participation rate fell from 92.3 percent in year of hire to 80.5 percent in 2016.
Similarly for those hired in 2011, the year of employment rate was 94.4 percent and this rate
declined to 84.8 percent in 2016. Thus, the proportion of individuals contributing to the SRP
who were auto enrolled fell by about 10 percent points after five years. In contrast, the
participation rates for those not automatically enrolled rise with years of service so that the
positive effect of automatic enrollment on participation in the SRP declines over time with
increased tenure. For example, for those not automatically enrolled and hired in 2010, the
participation rate increased from 7.2 percent in 2010 to 11.5 percent in 2016. In each year of
hire, the proportion of those not auto enrolled who were contributing to the SRP rose by about
four percentage points after five years.

   Once again, these findings are consistent with earlier studies that find that participation rates
in traditional opt in savings plans rise with increases in tenure while participation in plans with
opt out provisions tend to decline gradually over time. Despite these trends indicating a
narrowing of the differences in participation the difference in participation rates for those subject
to automatic enrollment and those who are not is still very significant several years after
employment. This analysis shows that the adoption of automatic enrollment substantially
increased participation in the SRP by South Dakotan public employees.

Comparing Agencies with and without Automatic Enrollment

   An important question in this analysis is whether employees in agencies that adopted

automatic enrollment differ significantly from those agencies that chose not to institute automatic

enrollment. To examine the potential that differences across agencies are affecting changes in

participation rates, we examine the participation rates between 2005 and 2009 in agencies that

                                                 13
ultimately did and did not adopt automatic enrollment along with the mean characteristics in the

two groups of government agencies.


   The results presented in Tables 4 and 5 suggest that employees in agencies that adopted auto-

enrollment differ from those hired by agencies that did not adopt auto-enrollment. In Table 4, we

report the fraction of new hires per year who participate in the SRP, before the introduction of

auto-enrollment, splitting the sample according to whether or not the hiring agencies will

eventually adopt auto-enrollment once it becomes available. We see that new hires in agencies

who will later on adopt auto-enrollment are, for four out of the five years, more than twice as

likely to participate in the SRP. At a 5 percent significance level we can reject the hypothesis that

these rates are equal for any given year using a basic equality of means test. Overall the

participation rates are low and the largest gap, 4.5 percent versus 1.67 percent, is just before the

introduction of auto-enrollment. The difference in pre-reform participation rates across agencies

may suggest that employee preferences influenced whether agencies adopted the automatic

enrollment policy.


                                                [Table 4]


   To further assess how employees differ depending on whether the hiring agencies eventually

adopt auto-enrollment we report in Table 5 the sample means for the different characteristics we

have information about. More specifically, we look at age at hire, gender, and salary.

Furthermore, we compute sample averages for new hires through the whole sample, before 2010

or 2010 and after. These sample averages are computed for all new hires in Column 1, new hires

by agencies who eventually adopt auto-enrollment in Column 2, new hires by agencies who

never adopted auto-enrollment in Column 3. A simple equality of means test strongly reject the

                                                 14
hypothesis that the means for agencies adopting or not auto-enrollment are equal. Economically,

some of these differences are small. For example, the differences in age at hire are at most one

year. The biggest differences can be seen for gender and salary. For pre and post auto-

enrollment, new hires by agencies who eventually adopt auto-enrollment are about 10 percent

more likely to be male and the salary is about $6,000 higher.


                                                [Table 5]


   These results suggest that there are differences in the employees of agencies who adopt auto-

enrollment compared to those by agencies who don't. They tend to be slightly more likely to be

male and have a higher salary. Before the introduction of auto-enrollment, they were also more

likely to participate in the SRP. This suggest that in the more formal regression analysis below

for the decision to participate in the SRP we want to control for these factors: age at hire, gender,

salary, whether the agency eventually adopt auto-enrollment, whether the employee was auto-

enrolled. While the participation rates and worker characteristics are statistically significantly

different between the two groups of agencies, the magnitudes are relative small and are unlikely

to affect the large post-reform differences in the proportion of new hires who contribute to the

SRP in the first year of retirement.


   IV.     Regression Analysis

       The richness of the administrative data from South Dakota allows us to examine several

conclusions reported in earlier studies in more detail. In the following analysis, we estimate

participation rates using probit models. Specifically, we estimate the probability of new hires

making contributions to the SRP in their first year of employment whether they were

automatically enrolled in the SRP or whether the new employee was not automatically enrolled.

                                                 15
A unique aspect of this analysis is that in the automatic enrollment years, some government

agencies adopted automatic enrollment and others did not. Thus, we are able to examine

participation decisions for individuals hired by agencies that ultimately adopted auto enrollment

before and after this policy was established ­ this is the type of comparison in previous studies.

However, we are also able to compare participation decisions for the same year when some

agencies adopted automatic enrollment and others did not, thus controlling for year effects which

is not done in other studies.

       As with other studies that use administrative data, we have limited information about the

personal characteristics of new hires. The data provided by the SDRS include the age of

employees when first employed (measured in years), whether the employee is a female or male,

the annual salary (measured in thousands of dollars), the specific state agencies that employed

the individual, whether the employee was auto-enrolled in the SRP, and when the employer

adopted auto-enrollment if it ever did. Using these data, we estimate participation decisions in

various contexts.

Participation in SRP in First Year of Employment: 2005 to 2016

       Using the complete sample of all 50,333 employees hired over the years 2005-2016, we

estimate the probability that an employee participates in the SRP in the year of hire. The model

includes explanatory variables: age at hire, a dichotomous variable equal to one if the employee

is a male and zero if not, annual salary in first year of employment, a dichotomous variable equal

to one if the employee was auto-enrolled and zero if not, a dichotomous variable equal to one if

the employer adopted auto-enrollment and zero if not, and year of employment fixed effects. The

participation model is estimated with and without interaction terms between automatic




                                                16
enrollment and the individual characteristics of the new hires. The marginal effects derived from

the two probit equations are shown in Table 6.

                                                  [Table 6]

       Column 1, Table 6 reports the partial effects evaluated at the mean of the sample for the

model without interaction terms. In this base case participation regression, age has no significant

impact on the probability of newly employed workers participating in the SRP. Other variables

in the model have small but statistically significant effects on the probability of contributing to

the SRP. The probability that a male participates in the retirement saving plan is 0.83 percentage

points higher than a newly hired female while a $10,000 higher initial salary increases the

probability of participation by 2.0 percentage points. One should remember that during first half

of the sample period, participation rates were very low so these small percentage point increases

represent substantial percentage increases in the pre-auto enroll period.

       Whether the employee was auto-enrolled into the SRP dramatically increases the

probability of making a contribution to the SRP in the first year of employment. In this base

case model, the probability of participation is 75.7 percentage points higher for those who were

auto enrolled compared to those who were not. Whether the employer eventually adopts auto-

enrollment also has an important impact, increasing the probability of participation by 13.7

percentage points. Holding constant whether the individual was automatically enrolled in the

SRP, the year fixed effects indicate that the overall participation rate is between 10 and 20

percentage points higher in the post-automatic years compared to the years prior to agencies

being allowed to adopt auto-enrollment. This finding suggests that there was a spill-over effect

to the investment decisions of individuals hired by agencies who did not adopt auto enrollment.




                                                 17
        To the base case model, we now add interaction terms consisting of age at hire, male,

salary and employer auto-enroll dummy times an indicator variable 2010 equal to one for years

2010 and later, zero otherwise. The addition of interaction terms allow the slope parameters to

change for these variables after the introduction of auto-enrollment. Results for the extended

model are presented in Column 3, Table 6. We see that the impact of adding the interaction terms

increases the magnitude of the direct effect of the personal characteristics in the pre auto-

enrollment period. For example, if age at hire increases by 10 years then the probability of

participation increases by about 3.2 percentage points. This compares to the finding of no effect

of age in the base case. The estimated effect of being male increases from 0.08 percentage point

to 2.05 percentage points, and a $10,000 higher initial salary increases the probability of

contributing to the SRP by 3.9 percentage points compared to 2.0 percentage points in the base

case.

        While the direct effects increase in size in the auto-enrollment period, all the personal

interaction terms have a negative sign which indicates that the adoption of automatic enrollment

significantly reduces the differences in the probability of participation across age, gender, and

salary groups. The magnitude of the interaction terms is such that auto enrollment almost

cancels the economic significance of these factors (statistically with a Wald test we can reject the

hypothesis that they are canceled). With a LR test, we can strongly reject the hypothesis that the

interaction terms are all zero. The impact of employers auto-enrolling their employees declines

from 75.7 percentage points in the base case to 64.4 percentage points. The impact of the

employer being one who eventually adopt auto-enrollment goes form increasing the probability

of participation by 6.6 percentage points before 2010 to 26.7 percentage points in 2010 and later.




                                                 18
The year fixed effects across the years 2010-2016 indicate that the probability of participating in

SRP goes up by about 30 percentage points compared to the years 2005-2009.

       An alternative way to interpret the estimates from the probit model is to compute the

predicted probabilities of participating in the SRP for different scenarios. For example, let us

consider the estimates for the model with interaction terms in Table 6 and the following stylized

new hire: a 37 year old female earning $30,000. If this individual was hired in 2006 from an

employer who never adopted auto-enrollment, the predicted probability of participating in the

SRP is 1.5 percent, increasing to 4.55 percent if hired in 2011 instead. In 2006, if the employer is

one who will eventually adopt auto-enrollment once it becomes available, then the probability is

2.84 percent. Finally, if this individual was hired in 2011 and auto-enrolled then the probability

is 92.3 percent.

Participation in SRP during the Auto Enrollment Era

       A unique aspect of this study is that we are able to examine how participation rates in

different agencies vary in the same year based on whether the agency adopted auto enrollment.

Recall that in 2010 the South Dakota legislature gave each governmental agency the authority to

adopt an auto enrollment policy but agencies were not required to institute auto enrollment. If the

agency adopted auto enrollment, all new employees were subject to this policy. Thus, in each

year after 2010, some new hires were auto enrolled while others were not. It is important to

remember that all of the agencies included in this study provided the same defined benefit plan,

offered the same retirement saving plan, and most had the same health insurance.

       Using data for all new employees in the auto enrollment period, we are able to estimate

contemporaneous decisions on whether to contribute to the SRP based on the auto enroll status

of each employee. Table 7 presents estimates of the probability that an employee participates in

                                                 19
SRP during the auto-enrollment era, 2010 to 2016. The participation model remains the same as

we include the same explanatory variables used in Table 6 with one exception, the interaction

terms are based on whether the individual employee was auto-enrolled or not.

                                                  [Table 7]

       Column 1, Table 7 reports the estimates from our base case model. The marginal effects

indicate that age at hire reduces the probability of participating in the SRP by about 1.3

percentage points for each additional 10 years of age. This effect is somewhat surprising since

most studies find that older employees are more likely to contribute to retirement saving plans.

In the auto enrollment era, being a male is estimated to increase the probability of participation

by about 0.24 percentage points (although this effect is not statistically significant) while a

$10,000 salary increase raises the probability by 1.7 percentage points. These latter two effects

are similar in size to those presented for the entire sample period in Table 6.

       The impact of the employee auto-enroll dummy is very large and indicates that

employees that were auto enrolled when hired were 71.4 percentage points more likely to

contribute to the SRP. Interestingly, the magnitude of this individual indicator variable is

essentially the same as we observed in Table 6 for the auto enroll era variable. New hires by

agency that will eventually adopt auto-enrollment are 35.1 percentage points more likely to

contribute. Similar to the results in Table 6, there is not much variation among the year fixed

effects (except for 2012).

       When auto enroll interaction terms are added to the specification (see Column 3), the

marginal effects have negative signs similar to what was seen for the entire sample period. Once

again the direct effects of the personal characteristics indicate a positive effect while the

interactive terms have a negative influence on the participation probability. These estimates

                                                  20
indicate that the adoption of auto enrollment tends to eliminate differences in saving tendencies

by age, gender, and salary. For employees that are not auto-enrolled, being a male increases the

probability by about 2.4 percentage point but it decreases the probability by 2.9 percentage

points for employees that are auto-enrolled. For a $10,000 salary increase, the marginal effects

indicate a 6.4 percentage point increase in the probability of participating for the employees that

are not auto-enrolled but a 2.3 percentage point decrease for auto-enrolled employees. The year

fixed effects remain about the same and now, holding everything else the same, the probability

of participating increases by about 90 percent if the employee is auto-enrolled and 32.5 percent if

the employer adopts auto-enrollment.

Impact of Auto Enrollment for Agencies that Adopted this Policy

       Most previous studies of auto enrollment have examined the change in participation rates

in a firm using participation in a retirement saving plan before and after the adoption of an

automatic enrollment policy. Following this methodology, we now estimate participation

probabilities using newly hired employees only for those agencies that adopted auto enrollment.

Thus, we have five years of hiring data before the adoption of the auto enroll policy and six years

after the policy was implemented. By contrasting these results with those in Table 6, we can see

if employees hired by agencies that eventually take part in auto-enrollment behave differently

from all new hires.

       In this sample, almost all the new employees are auto-enrolled in the years 2010-2016.

189 of the 196 agencies who adopted auto-enrollment did so at the beginning of 2010. They

account for 95% of new hires during this period. Thus, we remove the employee auto-enroll

dummy from the model. But notice that for new employees hired before the employer adopted

auto-enrollment, they will of course not be auto-enrolled; however, we can use a dichotomous


                                                21
variable indicating whether the person was hired after the adoption of the auto enroll policy as an

interactive term with the personal variables. The marginal effects from the base case estimates

(no interactive terms) are shown in Column 1, Table 8. In this model, only the age at hire

variable is significant and it indicates that 10 years older at hire is associated with a 1.1

percentage point decrease in the probability participating in the SRP. As expected, the year fixed

effects show a large increase (about 90 percentage points) in the probability of participating in

the SRP in the years 2010-2016 compared to the years before the introduction of auto

enrollment.

         The impact of adding interaction terms to the base specification is similar to found for the

full sample and shown in Table 6. Before 2010, holding everything else constant, increasing age

at hire by 10 years increases the probability by about 5.9 percentage points, being a male

increases it by 2.2 percentage points, and a $10,000 salary increases it by 6.1 percentage points.

In 2010 and after, the probabilities become -3.5 percentage points, -3.5 percentage points, and -

2.3 percentage points, respectively. The impact of year fixed effects is even stronger, about 97

percent increase once auto-enrollment is introduced in 2010.

                                               [Table 8]

    V.      Conclusions

    There is a considerable literature indicating the effectiveness of automatic enrollment

policies in increasing participation in retirement saving plans. Virtually all of these studies

examine private sector firms where a 401(k) plan is the only retirement plan offered by the

employer. In contrast, there are no studies of the introduction of automatic enrollment by state

and local governments.




                                                  22
   In general, all public full-time employees are covered by a mandatory pension, usually a

defined benefit plan. As a result, career public employees that are also covered by Social

Security are likely to have a life annuity equal to 70-80 percent of their final salary. While

government employers offer their employees the opportunity to contribute to a retirement saving

plan, employees may believe that they have less of a need for additional retirement saving. In

addition, the plans offered by government employers rarely have matching employer

contributions so there is less of an incentive for employees to contribute to these plans.

   As a result, participation rates in retirement saving plans in the public sector tend to be much

lower than they are for private sector firms. In our example, only about 3 percent of newly hired

workers in South Dakota enrolled in the 457 plan offered to state and local employees prior to

2010. The objective of this study is to determine whether employees in South Dakota responded

to the introduction of an automatic enrollment policy at the same level as private sector

employees.

   The key finding of this analysis is that participant rates in the retirement saving plan go from

less than 3 percent to 90 percent after the introduction of automatic enrollment. The richness of

the data provided by the SDRS allows us to explore several interesting issues. A unique

component of the data is that South Dakota allowed each government agency to adopt automatic

enrollment in 2010 but the agencies were not required to adopt this policy. As a result, we can

compare the change in participation over time for the same agencies before and after the

introduction of auto enroll and also to compare employees hired in agencies with and without

auto enrollment in the same year. All of the comparisons indicate that the introduction of

automatic enrollment yield increases in participation rates of newly hired employees of over 80

percent. Similar to earlier studies, our regression analysis illustrates that the adoption of


                                                  23
automatic enrollment tends to equalize participation rates across age, gender, and level of

income.

   Another difference in the automatic enrollment policy in South Dakota is that relatively low

default contribution rate of $25 per month, or approximately one percent of the average salary of

a new employee. This low default contribution may partially explain the large response to the

auto enroll policy. The typical South Dakota employee follows the usual pattern of remaining at

the default contribution.

   This study shows that public employees who are covered by a defined benefit plan and Social

Security tend not to contribute to a traditional opt-in retirement saving plan; however, the

adoption of automatic enrollment for new employees results in a dramatic increase in the

proportion of employees who participate in the plan. Across country, state and local

governments are reducing the generosity of their retirement plans. As a result, the findings from

this study have important policy implications and indicate that state and local governments

should consider the adoption of defaults to encourage participation in the supplement saving

plans to enhance the retirement security of public employees.




                                                24
                                        References
Andrews, Emily. 1992. "The Growth and Distribution of 401(k) Plans. 1992." Trends in
      Pensions 1992, John Turner and Daniel Beller (eds), pp. 149-176. Washington DC: US
      Department of Labor.

Bernartzi, Shlomo and Richard Thaler. 2004. "Save more tomorrow: Using behavioral
       economics to increase employee saving," Journal of Political Economy, S1: S164-S187.

Bernartzi, Shlomo and Richard Thaler. 2013. "Behavioral economics and the retirement savings
       crisis," Science, 339(6124): 1152-1153.

Bernheim, Douglas, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov. 2015. "The Welfare Economics of Default
      Options in 401(k) Plans," American Economic Review, 105(9): 2798-2837.

Bernheim, Douglas and Daniel Garret. 2003. "The Effects of Financial Education in the
      Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Households," Journal of Public Economics 87(7-
      8): 1487-1519.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2009. "The Importance
      of Default Options for Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence from the United States."
      Social Security Policy in a Changing Environment. Jeffrey Brown, Jeffrey Liebman, and
      David Wise (eds.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 167-195.

Butrica, Barbara and Nadia Karamcheva. 2005. "Automatic enrollment, employer match rates,
       and employee compensation in 401(k) plans," Monthly Labor Review, May, pp. 1-19.

Carroll, Gabriel, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2009.
        "Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 1639-
        1674.

Choi, James, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian. 2004. "Plan Desing and 401(k) Savings
       Outcomes," National Tax Journal, LVII (2): 275-298.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004. "For Better or
       for Worse: Default Effects and 401 (k) Savings Behavior." Perspectives on the
       Economics of Aging, David Wise (ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 81-
       126.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2005. "Saving for
       Retirement on the Path of Least Resistance." Behavioral Public Finance: Toward a New
       Agenda, Edward J. McCaffrey and Joel Slemrod (eds.), pp. 304-351. New York: Russell
       Sage Foundation, 2006.

Clark, Robert and Joshua Franzel. 2011. "Adopting Automatic Enrollment in the Public Sector:
       A Case Study," Government Finance Review, February, pp. 42-48.


                                              25
Clark, Robert, Joshua Franzel, and Denis Pelletier. 2018. "Impact of Automatic Enrollment in
     the 457 Plan for South Dakota Public Employees," Center for State and Local Government
     Excellence. https://slge.org/publications/impact-of-automatic-enrollment-in-the-457-plan-
     for-south-dakota-public-employees

Clark, Robert, Emma Hanson, Melinda Morrill, and Aditi Pathak. 2016. "Supplemental Plan
       Offerings and Retirement Saving Choices: An Analysis of North Carolina School
       Districts," Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 15(3): 333-355.

Clark, Robert and Olivia Mitchell. 2019. "Target Date Funds as Default Investments
       in a Public Sector Retirement Saving Plan." Unpublished working paper.

Clark, Robert, Aditi Pathak, and Denis Pelletier. 2018. "Supplemental Retirement
       Savings Plans in the Public Sector: Participation and Contribution Decisions by School
       Personnel," Journal of Labor Research, 39(4): 383-404.

Clark, Robert and Sylvester Schieber. 1998. "Factors Affecting Participation Levels in 401(k)
       Plans," in Living with Defined Contribution Plans: Remaking Responsibility for
       Retirement, Olivia Mitchell and Sylvester Schieber (eds), University of Pennsylvania
       Press.

Goda, Gopi Shah, Marthew Levy, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, Aaron Sououner, and Joshua
      Tasoff. 2018. "Mechanisms Behind Retirement Saving Behavior: Evidence from
      Administrative and Survey Data," Research Dialogue No. 140, TIAA Institute, February.

Madrian, Brigitte, and Dennis Shea. 2001. "The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
      Participation and Savings Behavior." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 66 (4): 1149­88.

Papke, Leslis. 1995. "Participation in and Contributions to 401(k) Plans," Journal of Human
       Resources, 30 (2): 311-25.




                                               26
Table 1. Proportion of Employees Contributing to SRP in First Year of Employment.

       Fiscal   Number     Number of       Number of       Percent    Percent of      Percent of
       year     of new     hires who       hires who       of hires   hires who       hires not
       of       hires by   were            were not        enrolled   were            automatically
       hire     year       automatically   automatically   in SRP     automatically   enrolled who
                           enrolled        enrolled                   enrolled who    are in the
                (1)                                        (4)
                                                                      are in the      SRP
                           (2)             (3)
                                                                      SRP
                                                                                      (6)
                                                                      (5)

       2005     3150       N/A             3150            1.33       N/A             1.33
       2006     3483       N/A             3483            2.24       N/A             2.24
       2007     3770       N/A             3770            1.99       N/A             1.99
       2008     4020       N/A             4020            2.51       N/A             2.51
       2009     3950       N/A             3950            2.86       N/A             2.86
       2010     3335       1206            2129            37.96      92.29           7.19
       2011     3349       1500            1849            43.95      94.40           3.03
       2012     4183       2128            2055            44.47      82.75           4.82
       2013     4692       2177            2515            45.23      92.93           3.94
       2014     4959       2181            2778            42.83      91.79           4.39
       2015     5493       2332            3161            42.93      93.35           5.73
       2016     5949       2547            3402            43.99      93.95           6.58


This table reports the participation rate in the SRP in the first year of employment for different
year of hire cohorts. The participation rate is computed as the number of individuals hired in a
given fiscal year, with positive earnings in the designated year, and who made a positive
contributions divided by the number of individuals who were hired in this fiscal year and who
had positive annual earnings in their first year.




                                                   27
Table 2. Median Contribution Rate to SRP as Percent of Annual Salary in Each Year
Conditional on participation.
 Fiscal   Contrib Contribution rate for individuals     Contribution rate for those
 year of  ution     who were automatically enroll in    not automatically enrolled in
 hire     rate      the SRP                             the SRP
     2005      3.51                                N/A                             3.51
     2006      3.35                                N/A                             3.35
     2007      3.78                                N/A                             3.78
     2008      3.23                                N/A                             3.23
     2009      2.01                                N/A                             2.01
     2010      0.99                                1.01                            0.57
     2011      0.96                                0.95                            1.47
     2012      1.00                                1.00                            0.98
     2013      0.97                                0.97                            1.06
     2014      0.94                                0.94                            0.95
     2015      0.88                                0.88                            0.66
     2016      0.86                                0.86                            0.80

This table reports the median contribution rate to the SRP in the first year of hire for different
cohorts. The median contribution rate is computed as the median of the employee's annual
contribution divided by her annual compensation, using only employees who participate in the
SRP.




                                                 28
Table 3. Participation Rate by Year of Hire with and without Automatic Enrollment
 Year of hire                       2005    2006    2007     2008     2009   2010    2011    2012    2013    2014    2015    2016
     2005                            1.33    2.16    3.11    4.42     6.18    7.60    7.90   8.01     8.29    9.70   10.88   11.71
     2006                                    2.24    3.72    4.44     6.17    7.44    7.86   8.00     8.15    9.34    9.98   10.82
     2007                                            1.99    3.59     5.06    6.86    7.51    8.52    8.87   10.08   11.56   12.83
     2008                                                    2.51     3.74    5.78    6.47    6.95    7.70    8.75    9.59   11.02
     2009                                                             2.86    4.55    5.55    6.29    7.05    8.11    9.42   10.86
     2010                                                                    37.96   35.99   35.24   34.28   35.09   35.47   35.51
             with auto                                                       92.29   86.57   84.04   82.28   81.87   80.90   80.50
             w/o auto                                                         7.19    6.25    7.12    8.01    9.50   10.57   11.46
     2011                                                                            43.95   40.83   39.18   40.14   39.58   39.19
             with auto                                                               94.40   87.89   86.07   86.01   85.41   84.81
             w/o auto                                                                 3.03    2.99    3.47    5.63    6.27    7.06
     2012                                                                                    44.47   42.19   41.39   41.84   42.06
             with auto                                                                       82.75   77.33   73.93   73.26   71.90
             w/o auto                                                                         4.82    4.10    6.06    7.65    8.73
     2013                                                                                            45.23   43.97   43.40   42.74
             with auto                                                                               92.93   89.01   87.54   86.46
             w/o auto                                                                                 3.94    4.49    5.75    6.82
     2014                                                                                                    42.83   42.53   41.58
             with auto                                                                                       91.79   89.40   87.38
             w/o auto                                                                                         4.39    4.28    5.22
     2015                                                                                                            42.93   41.85
             with auto                                                                                               93.35   91.14
             w/o auto                                                                                                 5.73    4.54
     2016                                                                                                                    43.99
             with auto                                                                                                       93.95
             w/o auto                                                                                                         6.58



                                                                 29
Table 4. Participation Rate in SRP in the Year of Hire: Agency Eventually Adopts Auto
Enrollment

 Fiscal year of      Number of hires      Number of hires     Percent of hires     Percent of hires
 hire                who were not         who were not        not auto             not auto
                     auto enrolled        auto enrolled       enrolled and         enrolled and
                     and employer         and employer        employer never       employer
                     never adopted        eventually          adopted who          eventually
                                          adopted             are in the SRP       adopted who
                     (1)                                                           are in the SRP
                                          (2)                 (3)
                                                                                   (4)
 2005                1642                 1508                0.85                 1.86**
 2006                1671                 1812                1.43                 2.99***
 2007                2036                 1734                1.47                 2.60**
 2008                2188                 1832                1.65                 3.55***
 2009                2281                 1667                1.67                 4.50***




This table reports the participation rate in the SRP in the first year of employment for different year
of hire cohorts before the introduction of auto-enrollment. The results are separated between
employers who eventually do auto-enrollment (number of hires in column 1, participation rate in
SRP in column 2) and employers who never do auto-enrollment (number of hires in column 2,
participation rate in SRP in column 4). The participation rate is computed as the number of
individuals hired in a given fiscal year, with positive earnings in the designated year, and who made
a positive contributions divided by the number of individuals who were hired in this fiscal year and
who had positive annual earnings in their first year. The symbols *, ** and *** means that the
difference between the value in column 3 is statistically different than the corresponding value in
column 4 at the 10%, 5% and 1% significance level respectively.




                                                  30
Table 5. Sample Means of Employee Characteristics: Agency Eventually Adopts Auto
Enrollment
                          All employees            Only employees           Only employees
                                                   from employers who       from employers who
                          (1)                      eventually joined        never joined auto-
                                                   auto-enrollment          enrollment
                                                   (2)                      (3)
 Age at hire
        Full sample       36.80                    36.42                    37.12***
      Before 2010         37.88                    37.30                    38.37***
     2010 and after       36.17                    35.92                    36.39***
 Male
        Full sample       38.47%                   44.14%                   33.58%***
      Before 2010         39.04%                   45.20%                   33.72%***
     2010 and after       38.14%                   43.54%                   33.49%***
 Salary
        Full sample       $28,972                  $32,291                  $26,112***
      Before 2010         $26,489                  $29,478                  $23,904***
     2010 and after       $30,399                  $33,913                  $27,377***


This table reports the sample average of the different regressors employed in the regression
analysis. Column 1 reports values computed for the complete sample. Columns 2 and 3 respectively
split the sample into new hires by employers who eventually do auto-enrollment or never do auto-
enrollment. The variable I2010 represents a dummy variable equal to one if the observation is in year
2010 or later, otherwise it's equal to zero. The symbols *, ** and *** means that the difference
between the value in column 3 is statistically different than the corresponding value in column 4 at
the 10%, 5% and 1% significance level respectively.




                                                 31
Table 6. Probit Model for Individual Participation in the SRP in Year of Hire

                                    No Interaction Terms                  Interaction Terms
                              Partial Effects   PE Std. Errors     Partial Effects    PE Std. Errors
                                    (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)
age at hire                       0.01              0.02               0.32***            0.05
age at hire*I2010                                                     -0.40***            0.05
Male                              0.83*             0.49               2.05*              1.10
Male*I2010                                                            -1.86               1.23
Salary                            0.20***           0.01               0.39***            0.02
Salary*I2010                                                          -0.28***            0.03
                                       ***                                  ***
Employee auto-enroll             75.70              1.22              64.43               1.60
Employer auto-enroll             13.65***           0.85               6.62***            1.08
Employer auto-enroll*I2010                                            20.12***            1.84
Year dummy 2006                   2.41              1.93               1.04               1.98
Year dummy 2007                   2.26              1.93               0.82               1.99
                                       **
Year dummy 2008                   3.74              1.85               1.39               1.91
                                       ***
Year dummy 2009                   4.84              1.84               1.70               1.89
Year dummy 2010                  19.29***           1.75              30.24***            2.90
                                       ***                                  ***
Year dummy 2011                  17.96              1.88              30.11               2.90
Year dummy 2012                   8.73***           1.70              19.41***            2.82
Year dummy 2013                  17.70***           1.75              29.91***            2.82
                                       ***                                  ***
Year dummy 2014                  16.89              1.72              29.22               2.80
Year dummy 2015                  20.75***           1.70              34.30***            2.78
Year dummy 2016                  22.79***           1.68              36.76***            2.76


Marginal effects are calculated at the mean values based on probit estimates of participation.
Statistical significance: 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***). The LR test (p-value) for the hypothesis
that all interaction terms are zero is 298.58 (0.000). The Wald test (p-value) for the hypothesis that
the interaction terms cancel out the regressors in the auto-enroll era is 322.10 (0.000). The number
of observations is 50333. The fraction of individuals who participate in the SRP is 28.27%. The
standard errors of the partial effects are calculated with the Delta method. The variable I2010
represents a dummy variable equal to one if the observation is in year 2010 or later, otherwise it's
equal to zero.

                                                  32
Table 7. Probit Model for Individual Participation in the SRP in Year of Hire: Auto-
Enrollment Years (2010-2016)
                                  No Interaction Terms                    Interaction Terms
                            Partial Effects    PE Std Errors      Partial Effects    PE Std Errors
                                  (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)
age at hire                     -0.13***               0.04           0.13***             0.05
age at hire*Iauto                                                     -0.46***            0.07
Male                             0.24                  0.85           2.46*               1.28
                                                                           ***
Male*Iauto                                                            -5.38               1.74
Salary                           0.17***               0.02           0.64***             0.02
                                                                           ***
Salary*Iauto                                                          -0.87               0.03
                                        ***                                ***
Employee auto-enroll            71.39                  2.37          90.11                3.76
Employer auto-enroll            35.12***               2.34          32.55***             2.40
Year dummy 2011                 -0.41                  2.15           1.36                2.16
Year dummy 2012                 -2.07***               1.78           -9.88***            1.82
Year dummy 2013                 -0.65                  1.90           1.17                1.92
Year dummy 2014                 -1.38                  1.84           0.35                1.86
Year dummy 2015                  3.93**                1.82           5.30***             1.84
Year dummy 2016                  6.47***               1.79           7.95***             1.81


Marginal effects are calculated at the mean values based on probit estimates of participation.
Statistical significance: 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***). The LR test (p-value) for the hypothesis
that all interaction terms are zero is 533.13 (0.000). The Wald test (p-value) for the hypothesis that
the interaction terms cancel out the regressors for the employees auto-enrolled in the SRP is 158.11
(0.000). The number of observations is 31960. The fraction of individuals who participate in the
SRP is 43.24%. The standard errors of the partial effects are calculated with the Delta method. The
variable Iauto represents a dummy variable equal to one if the observation is for an employee who
was auto-enrolled in the SRP, otherwise it's equal to zero.




                                                  33
Table 8.Probit Model for Individual Participation in the SRP in Year of Hire: Only
Employees in Agencies that Adopted Auto Enrollment
                                No Interaction Terms             Interaction Terms
                               Partial Effects PE Std. Errors    Partial Effects PE Std. Errors
                                     (1)            (2)                (3)            (4)
        age at hire               -0.11**              0.05          0.59***            0.10
        age at hire*I2010                                           -0.94***            0.12
        Male                      -1.25                1.06          2.27               2.36
                                                                          **
        Male*I2010                                                  -5.73               2.66
        Salary                     0.01                0.02          0.61***            0.05
                                                                          ***
        Salary*I2010                                                -0.84               0.06
        Year dummy 2006            1.12                3.79          0.10               4.16
        Year dummy 2007            0.75                3.88          0.07               4.26
        Year dummy 2008            1.69                3.69          0.14               4.08
        Year dummy 2009            2.67                3.66          0.22               4.02
        Year dummy 2010           90.44***             3.77         97.37***            6.42
                                        ***                               ***
        Year dummy 2011           92.52                3.76         98.24               6.42
        Year dummy 2012           80.90***             3.36         93.30***            6.24
        Year dummy 2013           91.02***             3.52         97.67***            6.28
                                        ***                               ***
        Year dummy 2014           89.90                3.49         97.25               6.26
        Year dummy 2015           91.45***             3.52         97.87***            6.25
                                        ***                               ***
        Year dummy 2016           92.05                3.49         98.11               6.27


Marginal effects are calculated at the mean values based on probit estimates of participation.
Statistical significance: 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***). The LR test (p-value) for the hypothesis
that all interaction terms are zero is 378.65 (0.000). The Wald test (p-value) for the hypothesis that
the interactions cancel out the regressors in the auto-enroll era is 150.4024 (0.000). The number of
observations is 22626. The fraction of individuals who participate in the SRP is 58.13%. The
standard errors of the partial effects are calculated with the Delta method. The variable I2010
represents a dummy variable equal to one if the observation is in year 2010 or later, otherwise it's
equal to zero.




                                                  34
Chart 1. Participation Rate in Supplement Retirement Saving Plan in Their First Year




                                           35
