                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              OAKLAND'S SUGAR-SWEETENED BEVERAGE TAX:
IMPACTS ON PRICES, PURCHASES AND CONSUMPTION BY ADULTS AND CHILDREN

                                          John Cawley
                                        David E. Frisvold
                                           Anna Hill
                                          David Jones

                                       Working Paper 26233
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26233


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




We thank Ronette Briefel, Tina Kauh, Jayson Lusk, Erich Muehlegger, Shiriki Kumanyika, and
Mary Story for their helpful comments. We thank Nancy Clusen, Jon Gellar, Mindy Hu,
Jeannette Holdbrook, Keith Kranker, Kim Mook, Tyler Rose, and Eric Zeidman for their
assistance with the data collection and analysis. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26233.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John Cawley, David E. Frisvold, Anna Hill, and David Jones. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Oakland's Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Tax: Impacts on Prices, Purchases and Consumption
by Adults and Children
John Cawley, David E. Frisvold, Anna Hill, and David Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 26233
September 2019
JEL No. H71,H75,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

Several cities in the U.S. have implemented taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) in an
attempt to improve public health and raise revenue. On July 1, 2017, Oakland California
introduced a tax of one cent per ounce on SSBs. In this paper, we estimate the impact of the tax
on retail prices, product availability, purchases, and child and adult consumption of taxed
beverages in Oakland, as well as of potential substitute beverages. We collected data from
Oakland stores and their customers and a matched group of stores in surrounding counties and
their customers. We collected information in the months prior to the implementation of the tax
and again a year later on: (1) prices, (2) purchase information from customers exiting the stores,
and (3) a follow-up household survey of adults and child beverage purchases and consumption.
We use a difference-in-differences identification strategy to estimate the impact of the tax on
prices, purchases, and consumption of taxed beverages. We find that roughly 60 percent of the
tax was passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices. There was a slight decrease in the
volume of SSBs purchased per shopping trip in Oakland and a small increase in purchases at
stores outside of the city, and we find some evidence of increased shopping by Oakland residents
at stores outside of the city. We do not find evidence of substantial changes in the overall
consumption of SSBs or of added sugars consumed through beverages for either adults or
children after the tax.


John Cawley                                            Anna Hill
2312 MVR Hall                                          Mathematica Policy Research
Department of Policy Analysis and Management           955 Massachusetts Avenue
and Department of Economics                            Suite 801
Cornell University                                     Cambridge, MA 02139
Ithaca, NY 14853                                       ahill@mathematica-mpr.com
and NBER
JHC38@cornell.edu                                      David Jones
                                                       Mathematica Policy Research
David E. Frisvold                                      955 Massachusetts Avenue
Department of Economics                                Suite 801
University of Iowa                                     Cambridge, MA 02139
21 East Market Street                                  DJones@mathematica-mpr.com
Iowa City, IA 52242
and NBER
david-frisvold@uiowa.edu
I. Introduction
   Taxes on goods that impose external costs on society have been a focus of economics from
the beginning of the discipline; even Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations specified that sugar, rum,
and tobacco were "extremely proper subjects of taxation" (Smith, 1776). Historically, countries
have tended to focus such taxes on tobacco and alcohol rather than sugar. However, in recent
decades, there has been increasing recognition of the role of sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs)
in causing diabetes and obesity (Johnson, Appel, Brands, et al., 2009; Malik and Hu, 2011). In
the past ten years, numerous countries, including France, India, Mexico, and the U.K., have
begun taxing SSBs (Cawley, Thow, Wen, and Frisvold, 2019). Such taxes have also been
implemented by several U.S. cities in the past five years, including Berkeley, California (2015);
Albany, California (2017); Oakland, California (2017); Boulder, Colorado (2017); Cook County,
Illinois (August-December 2017); Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (2017); San Francisco, California
(2018); and Seattle, Washington (2018).
       The effects of these city-level taxes on SSBs are of great interest, but the evidence base is
relatively new and data are scarce; thus, information from each city is valuable and contributes to
the evidence base. The purpose of this paper is to estimate the effect of the SSB tax in Oakland,
California, which is equal to one cent per ounce and was first levied on July 1, 2017. The tax is
levied on caloric SSBs, including regular soda, energy drinks, sweetened iced tea, and juice
drinks; beverages such as water, milk, unsweetened iced tea, and 100% fruit juice are exempt.
Using original hand-collected data of store prices, store exit interviews with customers, and
surveys of households, this paper reports the first evidence of the effect of Oakland's SSB tax on
a wide range of relevant outcomes, including retail prices, purchases, and consumption.
       This study contributes to the evidence that is based on the experience of cities that
adopted such taxes before Oakland. The impact of SSB taxes on retail prices varies across cities,
from less than 50 percent in Berkeley (Cawley and Frisvold, 2017; Falbe, Rojas, Grummon, and
Madsen, 2015), to greater than 50 percent but less than complete in Boulder (Cawley, Crain,
Frisvold, and Jones, 2018), to essentially complete in both Philadelphia (Cawley, Frisvold, Hill,
and Jones, 2018a; Cawley, Willage, and Frisvold, 2018; Seiler, Tuchman, and Yao, 2019) and
Cook County (Leider, Pipito, and Powell, 2018). The impact of SSB taxes on purchases or sales
also varies considerably, not just across cities but also within cities across different studies. For
example, in Berkeley, two studies using retail scanner data find a substantial reduction in SSB

                                                   1
sales of roughly 7 to 12 percent in supermarkets (Silver, Ng, Ryan-Ibarra, et al., 2017; Bollinger
and Sexton, 2018), while another finds no reduction in sales in supermarkets (Rojas and Wang,
2017), and one finds no reduction in sales in pharmacies (Bollinger and Sexton, 2018). In
Philadelphia, one study that conducted store exit interviews found a relative reduction in
purchases in the city of 8.9 ounces per shopping trip (Cawley, Frisvold, Hill and Jones, 2018b),
while another found a 38 percent reduction in sales at large chain retailers one year after the tax
(Roberto et al., 2019). Both studies find evidence of substantial increases in cross-border
shopping, and the former estimate of 8.9 ounces per shopping trip is inclusive of increases in
shopping outside of the city.
       There is also mixed evidence regarding the impact of SSB taxes on consumption. For
Berkeley, researchers found a 24 percent reduction in adults' SSB consumption and a 37 percent
increase in water consumption, 6 months after the tax (Falbe, Thompson, Becker, Rojas, and
McCulloch, 2016). The reduction in SSB consumption grew over time, averaging over 50
percent three years after the tax (Lee, Falbe, Schillinger et al., 2019). Results are more mixed for
Philadelphia. Repeated cross-sectional phone surveys conducted shortly before and after the tax
suggest that the probability of being a daily consumer of soda fell 40 percent after the tax, but
there was no substantial change in consumption by several other measures, such as being a daily
consumer of any SSBs; the daily volume consumed of SSBs or any category of SSBs also did
not substantially change (Zhong, Auchincloss, Lee, and Kanter, 2018). Another study of
Philadelphia uses longitudinal household surveys and finds no detectable impact of the
Philadelphia SSB tax on the overall SSB consumption of adults or children; however, they do
find a reduction in soda consumption for adults and substantial reductions among adults and
children that were high consumers of SSBs prior to the tax (Cawley et al., 2018b).
       The evidence base on city-level SSB taxes is still being formed. In this paper, we present
comprehensive evidence of how the SSB tax in Oakland influenced all of the outcomes described
above: retail prices, purchases, and consumption. In brief, we find that roughly 60 percent of the
tax was passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices. There was a slight decrease in the
volume of SSBs purchased per shopping trip in Oakland and a small increase in the volume of
purchases at stores outside of the city, and we find some evidence of increased shopping by
Oakland residents at stores outside of the city. We do not find evidence of substantial changes in
overall consumption of SSBs or untaxed beverages for adults or children after the tax.

                                                 2
II. Data
       To examine the beverage tax's influence on prices, purchases, and consumption, we
collected data from three sources following a nested design: 1) longitudinal data on beverage
prices at stores in Oakland and comparison communities prior to and after implementation of the
tax, 2) cross-sectional data from consumers at stores in Oakland and comparison communities
about their beverage purchases prior to and after implementation of the tax, and 3) a longitudinal
household survey of beverage consumption prior to and after implementation of the tax among
adults and children living in Oakland and the comparison communities. We used the same data
collection methods as Cawley et al. (2018a, b), which estimated the impact of the beverage tax in
Philadelphia.
       We selected a representative set of stores, based on sales volume, in Oakland and a
matched comparison group of stores in areas without SSB taxes in the Oakland MSA (Alameda
and Contra Costa counties, excluding Oakland and Berkeley). The primary advantage of
selecting stores in the same geographic area as stores in Oakland is that consumers in this area
are subject to similar local economic conditions, similar state policies, and similar media
markets; thus, the estimates are likely to reflect the impact of the tax as opposed to the impact of
information campaigns surrounding the tax or local economic fluctuations. A disadvantage of
selecting stores in the same geographic area is that these stores could be influenced by cross-
border shopping, in which residents of Oakland evade the tax by purchasing SSBs at stores
outside of the city. We selected stores from varying distances to the city border and investigate
the potential magnitude of cross-border shopping in the analysis.
       We matched each store in the Oakland sample to a store of the same type (large grocery
store, small grocery store, pharmacy, convenience store, and gas station with a convenience
store) in the comparison communities with the closest score on a composite measure of the three
local population characteristics (percentage African-American, percentage Hispanic, and
percentage of households in poverty in the neighborhood where the store is located). The
approach also led to a pool of possible consumers and households for the purchases and
consumption analyses who shop at the same types of stores and have similar percentages who are
African-American, Hispanic, and in households below the federal poverty level (FPL).



                                                 3
         To select the stores in Oakland, we stratified retailers listed in the ReferenceUSA
database by store type and allocated the stores proportionally. We then selected stores within
each store type stratum that had a probability proportional to sales (as reported in the
ReferenceUSA database). 6 We collected data from stand-alone convenience stores [10 stores in
Oakland and 15 in the comparison area], gas stations with convenience stores [6 stores in
Oakland and 8 in the comparison area], small grocery stores [13 stores in Oakland and 14 in the
comparison area], pharmacies [14 stores in Oakland and 19 in the comparison area], and large
grocery stores [18 stores in Oakland and 19 in the comparison area].


    a. Store observations (price and availability data)
         From each store in our sample, we collected data on the posted shelf prices of 23 taxed
and 23 untaxed products across a range of beverage types, manufacturers, and container sizes. To
ensure comparability across stores and over time, we collected the prices of the commonly-sold
sizes of commonly-sold items, such as Coke, Diet Coke, Arizona Iced Tea, Minute Maid
Lemonade, Tropicana 100% Orange Juice, and Dasani bottled water. 7 We collected the
information at two points in time one year apart: April to June 2017 (pre-tax) and April to June
2018 (post-tax). 8 We recorded prices in the same months in both years because beverage prices
may be seasonal. 9
         Before the tax, the sample includes 70 stores in Oakland with prices for 918 taxed
beverages and 616 untaxed beverages. After the tax, the sample includes 61 stores with prices for
773 taxed beverages and 497 untaxed beverages. In the comparison areas, the sample includes 87


6
  We included a slight oversample of small store types to facilitate subgroup analysis by store type (these results are
discussed in the results section and presented in an appendix). We account for the oversample by adjusting the
impact estimates using survey weights to be representative of sales at retailers in Oakland.
7
  Appendix Table A1 includes a complete list of all products, the average price per ounce before and after the
implementation of the tax in Oakland and the comparison area, and the number of stores selling each product in each
time period and each location.
8
  In all of the analyses reported in this paper, we used the listed price for a single item. However, we also collected
information on whether the store was offering any multi-buy promotions (e.g., two for the price of one) or offered a
discount for loyalty club members only.
9
  Besides recording a large number of posted (or shelf) prices in each store, we also purchased a taxed beverage
from each store and reviewed the receipt to determine whether the tax was being applied at the register and thus
would not be reflected in the posted or shelf prices. Two of the stores we visited applied the tax at the register.
Cawley et al. (2018c) observed a similar pattern following the SSB tax in Boulder, Colorado. This is relevant
because taxes tend to have a greater impact on consumer behavior when they are more salient (e.g., Chetty, Looney,
and Kroft, 2009). We adjusted the posted prices for taxed beverages sold at these stores to add the amount of the tax
and reflect the final price paid by shoppers, excluding sales tax.

                                                          4
stores with prices for 1,067 taxed beverages and 774 untaxed beverages in before the tax and 75
stores, and prices for 996 taxed beverages and 739 untaxed beverages after the tax. The loss of
stores at follow-up was due to a mixture of store closures and cases in which the store managers
or owners did not allow field interviewers to collect price data.


     b. Exit interviews (repeated cross-sectional data on purchases)
         We also collected information from consumers as they exited stores. We selected the time
of the day (defined as blocks of time within the stores' operating hours) and day of the week at
random to visit stores for interviews, and we interviewed consumers at all times of the day and
every day of the week to capture the range of consumers visiting the stores. 10
         Children's beverage consumption is of particular policy interest, so we asked consumers
several screener questions to identify adults age 18 and older who lived in a household with at
least one child between 2 and 17 years of age, located in Oakland or one of the comparison
areas. 11 As a result, the cross-sectional sample is representative of consumers in with children
shopping at the stores in the sample, after applying survey weights, but it is not a representative
sample of all consumers in Oakland. For consumers meeting these criteria, we recorded: (1) the
quantity, size, and name of each beverage they purchased on that trip; (2) basic demographic
information (age, gender, race, ethnicity, household size, and income); (3) whether they lived in
Oakland; and (4) whether the store at which they were interviewed was their usual source of
beverage purchases. 12 The main outcomes for the analysis of purchases are the volume of taxed
and untaxed beverages purchased by consumers per shopping trip. 13 We collected the
information from cross-sections of consumers visiting the stores at two points in time, one year




10
   We interviewed as many customers as possible during the blocks of time. Thus, the completed interviews during a
block of time are roughly proportional to the volume of shoppers during the block of time, and in aggregate, the
completed interviews should be representative of shoppers with children overall at the stores in our sample.
11
   In Oakland, 899 out of 3,532 individuals (25.5 percent%) screened met the eligibility criteria in 2017 prior to the
tax; 955 out of 4,002 individuals (23.9 percent) who we screened did so in 2018 after the tax was implemented. At
stores in the Oakland MSA but outside of the city, 952 out of 2,990 individuals (31.8 percent) screened in 2017 and
1,027 out of 3880 individuals (26.5 percent) screened in 2018 met the eligibility criteria.
12
   We collected information on all beverages that consumers purchased from out-of-pocket expenditures, SNAP
benefits, and WIC benefits.
13
   We coded beverages as taxed or untaxed based on a manual review of the beverage names that were directly
observed by interviewers or self-reported by consumers. If we were not able identify the volume for all beverages
purchased by a consumer, then we recorded the value for the volume of purchases for that shopping trip as missing.

                                                          5
apart: April to June 2017 (pre-tax) and April to June 2018 (post-tax). We interviewed consumers
in the same months in both years because beverage purchases may be seasonal.
        For Oakland, the exit interview sample includes 785 consumers before the tax (25.12
percent purchased a taxed beverage and 20.37 percent purchased an untaxed beverage) and 786
consumers after the tax (22.72 percent purchased a taxed beverage and 21.12 percent purchased
an untaxed beverage). 14 In the comparison areas, the exit interview sample includes 741
consumers before the tax (21.23 percent purchased a taxed beverage and 18.95 percent
purchased an untaxed beverage) and 766 consumers after the tax (19.44 percent purchased a
taxed beverage and 13.34 percent purchased an untaxed beverage). We successfully collected
information from over 70 percent of consumers we approached at stores in Oakland and at
comparison stores in both time periods who met the eligibility criteria described above (87.3
percent and 77.8 percent in Oakland and comparison stores at baseline, respectively, and 82.3
percent and 74.6 percent at follow-up).
        We report the characteristics of shoppers participating in the exit interviews in Appendix
Table A2. Age, gender, and the household size of shoppers in Oakland are similar to those
shopping at comparison stores before and after the tax. The racial and ethnic composition of the
shoppers at Oakland and comparison stores varies. A greater percentage of shoppers at Oakland
stores are African American, and comparison stores have higher percentages of Hispanic, white,
and other race or multi-racial shoppers. Oakland stores also have higher percentages of families
below 185 percent of the FPL, although the difference is only statistically significant at the 5
percent level for shoppers after the implementation of the tax. 15


     c. Household survey (longitudinal data on consumption)
        In the period before the implementation of the tax, we contacted the consumers who
completed an exit interview and who agreed to provide their contact information. 16 Among
Oakland residents, 42.6 percent also completed the household survey; among residents of the

14
   Throughout the paper, "taxed beverage" refers to a beverage that was subject to the SSB tax in Oakland after July
1, 2017. Thus, when we refer to "taxed beverages" for Oakland before the tax or in the comparison communities in
any time period, it was not taxed at that time or place, but was taxed in Oakland after July 1, 2017. Likewise,
"untaxed beverage" means it was exempt from Oakland's SSB tax after July 1, 2017.
15
   We used 185 percent of the FPL because it is a cutoff used for many federal programs (e.g., the Special
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children [WIC] and the National School Lunch Program).
16
   This contact included 773 individuals in Oakland and 738 individuals in the comparison areas in the Oakland
MSA.

                                                         6
comparison communities, 48.9 percent completed the household survey. We surveyed these
same households one year later, after the implementation of the Oakland SSB tax. We collected
the information on the same timeline as the exit interviews, April to June 2017 (pre-tax) and
April to June 2018 (post-tax). The number of households that responded to both waves of the
survey was 193 in Oakland (58.7 percent of those that responded at baseline) and 218 in the
nearby comparison communities (60.4 percent of those that responded at baseline) for an overall
completion rate of 26.9 percent of households in all areas who completed the exit interview and
also completed both waves of the household survey. 17 We classified households according to
their original location; eleven households moved out of, and four households moved into,
Oakland.
        Through the survey, which was administered online with follow-up by telephone for
those who could not complete it online, we collected detailed information on beverage
consumption for the adult respondent and a randomly chosen child within the household. We
surveyed children over 12 years of age directly; parents responded for younger children and any
older children who could not be reached directly. 18 In addition, we collected information on
beverage shopping patterns, attitudes toward the tax and SSBs, and individual and household
characteristics. We measured beverage consumption using the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) Dietary Screener Questionnaire (DSQ), which has been
validated for adults and children two years of age and older. We used the responses in the survey
to measure the frequency of beverage consumption for a range of taxed and untaxed beverage
types over the past 30 days. We then constructed the total amount of added sugars consumed
from beverages as a summary measure of consumption, using the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) algorithm developed for the DSQ. 19


17
   The percentage of those approached for exit interviews that were eligible and ultimately completed both waves of
the household survey is roughly 20 percent in Oakland and comparison areas. The percentage of those completing
exit interviews that completed both waves of the household survey is 24.6 percent in Oakland and 29.4 percent in
the comparison areas.
18
   For households living in Oakland, 82.6 percent of child responses were conducted by the adult respondent; in the
households in comparison communities, 85.6 percent of child responses were conducted by the adult respondent.
For children over 12 years of age, roughly one-half of the responses were ultimately conducted by the adult
respondent in Oakland and comparison communities.
19
   The algorithm uses age, gender, and the self-reported frequency of consumption of SSBs to estimate the daily
intake of added sugars from beverages for both adults and children two years of age and older. The parameters in the
algorithm are based on estimates of the amount of each serving size consumed for each beverage type (e.g., regular
soda) in a given consumption period, which are based on responses to the What We Eat in America 24-hour dietary
recall module from the 2009-2010 NHANES (National Cancer Institute, 2009­2010).

                                                         7
       We report the characteristics of the household survey respondents for those living in
Oakland and comparison areas in Appendix Table A3. The respondents are similar in terms of
age (adult and child ­ note, the average age of children in the sample is between 8 and 9), gender
(adult and child), education (adult), receipt of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP) and Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)
benefits, and receipt of free or reduced-price lunch. Similar to the exit interviews, respondents
differ somewhat by race and ethnicity; in particular, 49 percent of respondents in Oakland are
African American compared to 39 percent in comparison areas. The average household size is
also lower in Oakland, 3.97 compared to 4.59 in comparison areas.


III. Methods
   a. Analysis of beverage prices and availability
       The methods used in our analyses closely follow those used in Cawley et al. (2018a, b) to
study the beverage tax in Philadelphia. We estimate the effects of the Oakland tax using a
difference-in-differences (DiD) design, which compares the change in outcomes in stores in
Oakland to those in stores in comparison (or control) communities. We estimate the impact on
two outcomes, the price and availability of beverages by type of beverage. The DiD equations
are of the general form:


        = 0 + 1  + 2    +  +  +  ,                                                             (1)


where Ybst is either the price per ounce or availability of the beverage b in store s in time period t.
Oakland is a binary variable equal to 1 if the store is in Oakland and equal to 0 if the store is in a
comparison area. Post indicates that an observation occurred after the Oakland tax took effect.
 is a vector of product fixed effects and  is a vector of store fixed effects. 2 is the
coefficient of interest; it represents the change in the outcome (price per ounce or percentage of a
beverage type sold in stores) before the tax to after the tax in Oakland relative to the comparison
communities. The regression is estimated using ordinary least squares when the outcome is price;
it is estimated by logistic regression when the outcome is an indicator variable for product




                                                   8
availability. In all cases, we cluster standard errors at the store level to account for correlations
between observations within stores. 20
         We estimate the impact of the Oakland tax on the prices of all taxed beverages and all
untaxed beverages separately. The elasticities of supply and demand may vary by product and
store characteristics. Thus, we estimate regressions separately for both taxed beverages (regular
soda, energy drinks, sports drinks, sweetened iced teas, and sweetened juice drinks) and untaxed
beverages (diet soda, other diet drinks such as sugar free energy drinks, 100% fruit juice, and
bottled water). We also estimate the differential impacts of the tax by store type, chain versus
independent stores, product size, characteristics of the local population, and travel time to the
closest untaxed competitor. See Appendix B for more details about how we tested for
heterogeneity in the impact of the tax on prices and availability.
         To establish that the observed changes in prices are in fact due to the SSB tax in Oakland,
we examine whether the trends in prices at Oakland and comparison stores were parallel prior to
the implementation of the tax. We do not have information on beverage prices at the stores in our
sample prior to our pre-tax data collection. Instead, we used Nielsen Retail Scanner Data and
provide supporting evidence that the trends in prices are parallel for retailers in Oakland and the
area outside of Oakland but still in the Oakland MSA (Figure 1). 21 The trends in the average
weekly price per ounce of regular soda are parallel in the 18 months prior to the tax. The price is
consistently about 0.3 to 0.4 cents per ounce higher in retail stores in the Oakland MSA than in
retail stores in Oakland in the year prior to the tax. 22 The parallel trends in beverage prices in
Oakland and the Oakland MSA are consistent with our identifying assumption that the treated
and comparison stores had parallel trends prior to the tax and the prices in stores in the Oakland

20
   With only two geographic regions, standard errors that are clustered at the geographic level would be degenerate
(Donald and Lang, 2007). As a result, we cluster standard errors at the store level, following Cawley and Frisvold
(2017).
21
   Using the Nielsen data, we examined the average weekly price per ounce and sales volume (in ounces) of regular
soda for all retailers in Oakland and the Oakland MSA (outside of Oakland and Berkeley). Each retailer in the
dataset reports the weekly price and sales volume for every UPC code with any sales volume during the week.
Based on the UPC code, Nielsen categorizes beverage types. Sports drinks, energy drinks, and sweetened teas are
not defined separately in the data. The Nielsen data include the three-digit zip code and the FIPS county code of
each store, so we were able to approximately determine which retailers are located in the city of Oakland (Alameda
County with a three-digit zip code of 946; this area also includes the cities of Emeryville and Piedmont) and in the
Oakland MSA outside of Oakland and Berkeley (Contra Costa County, excluding the three-digit zip code of 947
[Berkeley] and Alameda County with a three-digit zip code of 945).
22
   The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen.
Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported
herein.

                                                          9
MSA are a valid counterfactual for the prices in stores in Oakland in the absence of the tax.
Because there are still differences in the price levels in the Nielsen data and in the demographic
characteristics of residents in Oakland and the Oakland MSA, we matched comparison stores to
stores within the city based on store type and the population characteristics of the surrounding
neighborhood to help minimize these differences.


   b. Analysis of beverage purchases and cross-border shopping

       We use the information collected on beverage purchases at stores in Oakland and
comparison communities to examine how consumers changed the volume of their purchases per
shopping trip and the location of their purchases. First, we estimate the changes in the mean
volume of taxed and untaxed purchases in Oakland stores relative to the changes in the matched
stores in communities adjacent to Oakland. We then control for the characteristics of the
consumers and stores in a regression framework. However, if a consumer switched from
purchasing SSBs in Oakland to outside of Oakland, the DiD estimate would double-count the
impact of the tax by adding the decrease in purchases within Oakland to the increase in
purchases outside of the city. Thus, cross-border shopping would amplify the estimate of the
relative change in purchases per shopping trip by consumers in Oakland. We estimate the extent
of cross-border shopping using self-reported responses about where Oakland residents shopped
before and after the tax.
       Changes in purchases
       We estimate the relative change in beverage purchases in Oakland using a DiD design,
which compares the change in purchases at stores in Oakland to those in stores in comparison (or
control) communities. The DiD equations are of the general form:


 = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3    + 4  + 5  +  ,                                                           (2)


where Yist is the volume in ounces of taxed or untaxed beverages for individual i in store s in time
period t. Oakland is a binary variable equal to 1 if the store is in Oakland and equal to 0 if the
store is in a comparison area. This variable is defined based on the location of the store where the
consumer was interviewed; it is not based on the residence of the consumer. Post indicates that
an observation occurred after the tax took effect. Ss is a vector of indicators for store type: stand-

                                                  10
alone convenience stores, gas stations with convenience stores, small grocery stores, and
pharmacies; large grocery stores are the reference store type and, therefore, omitted from the
model. 23 Xit is a vector of consumer and interview characteristics: age, indicator for female,
indicator for African-American, indicator for Hispanic, household size, indicator for the
household being below 185 percent of the FPL, indicators for day of the week, indicators for the
time of the day of the interview (morning, afternoon, evening), indicators for the day of the
study, and an indicator for whether the household is in Oakland. 3 is the coefficient of interest;
it represents the change in the volume of beverages purchased per shopping trip before the tax to
after the tax, in Oakland relative to the comparison communities. The regressions are estimated
using two-part models in which the first part is a logistic model for the indicator variable for any
purchase and the second part is a generalized linear model (GLM) with a Poisson distribution for
the amount (in ounces) purchased conditional on any beverage purchases. We selected a two-part
model to address the large number of observations with zero beverage purchases, which skews
the distribution of our main outcome (ounces purchased). 24 Impact estimates generated using
ordinary least squares (OLS) were similar to the marginal effects obtained using the two-part
model results, but the two part model resulted in improved precision of those estimates. We
cluster the standard errors at the store level to account for correlations between observations
within stores. 25 All regressions are estimated using survey weights at the consumer level, which
account for sample design, oversampling, and nonresponse. 26



23
   We define store types using NAICS codes: convenience stores (445120); gas stations with convenience stores
(447110); pharmacies and drug stores (446110); large grocery stores (445110), which are supermarkets and other
grocery stores with annual sales equal to or greater than $750,000; small grocery stores (445110), which are
supermarkets and other grocery stores with annual sales less than $750,000. Note that we restricted pharmacies to
three chains (CVS, Rite Aid, and Walgreens) due to the difficulty of identifying pharmacies that sold beverages.
24
   A lower percentage of shoppers purchased taxed beverages than in Philadelphia. Roughly 20 to 25 percent of
shoppers purchased a tax beverage in Oakland compared to 25 to 30 percent in Philadelphia (Cawley et al., 2018b).
25
   With only two geographic regions, standard errors that are clustered at the geographic level would be degenerate
(Donald and Lang, 2007). We cluster standard errors at the store level to account for the sampling design, which we
described in Section II, but we acknowledge the possibility that these standard errors overstate the precision of the
estimates.
26
   The weights take into account the multistage sample design, which begins with the selection of stores. We
randomly selected stores and then randomly selected consumers within stores. The weights reflect the probability
that the store was selected for our sample (thus accounting for the small oversample of smaller store types) and the
probability that the consumer was selected within each sampled store. The selection of consumers occurred during a
random time window on a random day of the week, which is also accounted for in the weights. Moreover, the
weights take into account nonresponse for both stores and consumers. The store nonresponse occurs if a store
refuses to allow us to talk with consumers, and consumer nonresponse occurs if the consumer refuses the interview
request.

                                                         11
         We estimate the relative change in purchases separately for beverages subject to, and
exempt from, the Oakland beverage tax. Consumers may treat untaxed beverages as substitutes
for the taxed beverages, leading to a shift in demand for the untaxed beverages and increased
purchases. The elasticity of demand may vary by consumer characteristics, so we also estimate
regressions separately by consumer demographics. See Appendix B for more details regarding
the approach to estimating the impacts of the tax on purchases by consumer characteristics.
         Similar to equation (1) for prices, the identifying assumption in equation (2) is that the
purchases of consumers of stores in the Oakland MSA in our sample are a valid counterfactual
for the purchases of consumers of stores in Oakland if that tax was not implemented. Parallel
trends in purchases in the treated and comparison stores prior to the tax would be consistent with
this assumption. Again, we examine the trends using the Nielsen data and find evidence
consistent with the identifying assumption. In Figure 2, the trends in the average weekly sales
volume of regular soda for retailers in Oakland and in the MSA (but outside of the city) were
generally parallel during the 18 months prior to the tax. 27 The observed parallel trends give us
some confidence that the pre-tax trends in purchases were likely similar between the stores in our
sample in Oakland and the matched untaxed stores in comparison communities.
         There is a difference in the level of sales in the Nielsen data, with average sales volume
consistently higher at Oakland stores. By collecting data from stores in comparison areas that
were matched (based on store type and population characteristics) to those Oakland, we sought
to minimize differences in purchases at baseline and differences in the population characteristics
of the two areas.
         Cross-border shopping
         We also examine more directly the extent to which there was a change in cross-border
shopping--in particular, an increase in Oakland residents shopping for beverages outside of
Oakland. We estimate the change in self-reported frequency of shopping across the city border
among those interviewed as they exited Oakland and comparison stores. We asked consumers
exiting stores how frequently they shopped for beverages across the city border (never, less than
once a week, once a week, or more than once a week). We created an indicator variable for



27
  The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen.
Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported
herein.

                                                         12
whether the respondent shops in the given location once or more per week. We estimate the
changes separately for Oakland residents and those living outside of the city. For example, we
estimate the change in the likelihood that Oakland residents interviewed at a store in Oakland
responded that they shop for beverages one or more times per week outside of Oakland. 28 The
equations take the form of equation (2), excluding the indicator variable Oaklands and the
interaction (Oaklands * Postt), and are estimated using logistic regression.
        In addition, we examine changes in shopping behavior related to possible cross-border
shopping reported through the household survey. We examine changes in: (1) any beverage
shopping outside of Oakland, (2) having a usual source of beverage purchases that is outside of
Oakland, (3) price as the primary factor in determining where to purchase beverages, and (4)
travel time to purchase beverages. The first two variables are direct indications of increased
shopping outside of the city. The third and fourth variables could be indirect indications of cross-
border shopping if households travel greater distances to seek lower prices at untaxed stores. To
estimate the impacts of the tax on these shopping behaviors, we use the method described below
for analyzing the household survey data (see equation 3).


     c. Analysis of beverage consumption

        We use the responses to the longitudinal household survey to estimate the impact of the
tax on beverage consumption among adults and children. The general framework is analogous to
the DiD framework discussed above; however, the approach estimates the impact of the tax on
within-person changes in consumption conditional on baseline consumption and covariates,
which requires a different identifying assumption than DiD. Controlling for the lagged outcome
(i.e., consumption before the tax) requires the assumption of unconfoundedness conditional on
the lagged outcome. In a panel setting, for which we have an observation of the pre-treatment
outcome, and given that we observe differences in mean consumption levels between the
treatment and comparison groups before the tax (discussed later in this section), this approach is
preferred over a DiD approach (Imbens and Wooldridge, 2009).
        We estimate the impact of the tax on continuous outcomes for adults and children. First,
we examine the effects on the daily intake of added sugars (in grams) from SSBs. In addition, we

28
  Note, we did not ask consumers at comparison stores how frequently they shopped outside of Oakland, nor did we
as consumers at stores in Oakland how frequently they shopping for beverages in Oakland.

                                                      13
examine the effects on monthly frequency of consumption of all taxed beverages, specific
categories of taxed beverages (regular soda and sweetened fruit drinks) 29, all untaxed beverages,
and specific categories of untaxed beverages (diet soda, coffee, milk, water, and 100% fruit
juice). 30 To estimate the effects of the tax on these outcomes, we estimated regressions of the
form:


                         1 - 0 = 0 + 1  + 2 0 + 3  +  ,                                 (3)


where 1 - 0 is the change in consumption between baseline data collection (pre-tax) and
follow-up (post-tax) for person i.  is a binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent lives in
Oakland and equal to 0 if the respondent lives in a comparison area. For the consumption
analysis, we define this variable based on the location of residence, as opposed to the location of
the store for equations (1) and (2). 0 is the baseline consumption level reported by person i. 
is a vector of individual-level characteristics including age, race, gender, ethnicity, education
level of the sample adult, and household income. 1 is the coefficient of interest; it represents the
effect of the tax on consumption. We estimate the regression above using OLS and cluster
standard errors at the store level to account for correlations between observations within stores,
which was how respondents for the survey were originally identified. 31 All results are estimated
using survey weights at the household level, which account for sample design, oversampling, and
nonresponse. 32


29
   We received five survey responses to the questions about monthly frequency of consumption that we determined
to be implausible. We removed records from the analysis that reported daily intake of any given individual beverage
greater than 10 per day (or 300 per month). This approach is similar to the approach taken by NCI, in which they top
code results for daily frequency at 7 or 8 per day depending on the beverage type.
30
   Most coffee drinks are untaxed. Any coffee drink sweetened by the consumer after the point of sale is untaxed and
any beverage that is primarily milk is also untaxed.
31
   The distributions for monthly frequency of consumption and grams of sugars consumed are right-skewed with a
small number of extreme values, and there are a large number of observations at or near zero. Thus, we tested the
sensitivity of the results to estimation of nonlinear regression techniques to address the non-normality of the
outcomes (e.g., zero-inflated count models and two-part models). The nonlinear models did not produce appreciably
different estimates of the impacts of the tax compared to the results generated using OLS, and they did not result in
improved precision. Moreover, the changes in the consumption outcomes, which are the primary outcomes, are
approximately normally distributed; thus, we report the estimates from the OLS regressions for the analysis of
consumption.
32
   We impute missing values of all covariates using multiple imputation. Because all of the covariates aside from age
(for which we use OLS) are binary or categorical, we use logistic regressions to impute missing values in the
sample. We estimated all regressions with and without multiple imputation, and the impacts of using imputed values
for the models' covariates were small. We report the results for the regressions using multiple imputation.

                                                         14
        We also estimate the impact of the tax on several binary outcomes, including any
consumption of the beverage type during the month and daily consumption throughout the
month. We use a framework similar to the framework we use for continuous outcomes, except
that the outcome is a binary variable measured after the tax was implemented, instead of the
change in the outcome over time. Thus, we regress the post-tax outcome on treatment status,
baseline outcome, and a set of individual-level covariates (described above for equation 3). We
use survey weights to account for the sampling design, and nonresponse and cluster standard
errors at the store level to account for correlations between observations within stores.
        The impact of the tax on consumption may be heterogeneous, and estimates of the
average impact of the tax on our sample may mask important differences across key baseline
characteristics. We examine heterogeneity in the impact of the tax on consumption by
demographic characteristics, baseline attitudes about the tax and SSBs, and baseline shopping
behavior. For more detail regarding the methods we use to examine possible differential impacts
of the tax, see Appendix B.


IV. Results
     a. Prices and availability
        Stores in Oakland raised prices of taxed beverages by 1.00 cent per ounce on average
after one year (from 7.95 to 8.94), which is exactly the amount of the tax (Table 1). Stores
outside of the city in areas without a tax (i.e., the comparison communities) raised prices by 0.33
cents per ounce during the year after the tax, such that the net increase in Oakland was 0.66 cents
per ounce (i.e., the unadjusted differences-in-differences estimate); however, the estimate of this
net increase is not statistically different from zero. For untaxed beverages, stores in Oakland
raised prices slightly, by 0.24 cents per ounce (from 9.92 to 10.16). In untaxed areas outside of
the city, retailers kept prices fairly stable on average one year after the tax. The net increase in
the average price in Oakland relative to comparison communities outside of the city was 0.27
cents per ounce, and this estimate is not statistically different from zero. 33


33
  The changes in prices are larger, but qualitatively similar, when restricting the sample to stores in the sample
during both periods (Appendix Table A4). The average price of regular soda, which is the most common beverage
type examined in the analysis, increased by roughly 0.93 cents per ounce (Appendix Table A5). The prices for other
taxed beverages increased by 0.23 to 0.63 cents per ounce on average. For untaxed beverages, there is a substantial
amount of variation in the price changes, ranging from decreases in prices for water and juice on average to a 0.49

                                                        15
         In addition to the changes in prices, as shown in the sample sizes in Table 1, we observe a
decline in the availability of the beverage types included in the analysis in Oakland stores. This
decline in product availability could influence the estimate of the average price change for
observed products. For example, the availability of energy drinks decreased the least (Appendix
Table A5). Because energy drinks are substantially more expensive by ounce than the other
beverages (27.74 cents per ounce compared to 7.94 for all beverages on average), the relatively
low decrease in energy drinks causes the average price change to be higher than if we just
examined beverages available in both periods (i.e., a balanced sample). 34 To account for the
differences in availability on prices and examine a more comparable group of beverages between
the two time periods, we focus on the balanced sample of products available at given stores in
both time periods for most of the subsequent analysis. We also include product fixed effects in
the regression analyses so that we are comparing price changes within items (i.e., a specific size
of a specific product). An advantage of this analysis is that product-size items (such as a 20-
ounce bottle of Coke) are perfectly homogenous; variation in price over time or geography is not
due to differences in quality or other unobserved characteristics.
         Comparing the changes in prices in Oakland to untaxed comparison communities outside
the city in a difference-in-differences regression framework, we find that the impact of the tax
was to increase prices in Oakland by 0.61 cents per ounce (estimated using the balanced panel of
beverages ­ Table 2). This increase translates to a 61 percent pass-through rate (i.e., 0.61 of the
1.00 cent per ounce tax), which is 7.7 percent of the pre-tax average of stores in Oakland. The
estimate using the full sample of beverages is similar, although slightly lower at 0.56 cents per
ounce. The impacts vary somewhat by beverage type (Appendix Table A6). We find greater
pass-through for regular soda and energy drinks (0.63 and 0.73, respectively) compared to sports
drinks, juice drinks, and sweetened iced tea (0.44, 0.51, and 0.32, respectively).
         We find a slight increase (0.21 cents per ounce) in the average price of untaxed beverages
in Oakland relative to the untaxed comparison communities (Table 2). The change varies
substantially by the type of beverage; however, the changes are not statistically significant with




cent per ounce increase for diet sodas and a large increase (although not precisely estimated) for other diet beverages
(unsweetened sports drinks, energy drinks, and iced tea).
34
   The relative change in availability also causes the average price increase for all beverages to be higher than any of
the individual beverage types.

                                                          16
the exception of the slight increase for diet soda, which is statistically significant at the 10
percent level (Appendix Table A6).
        In addition, we find that there was a decrease in the availability of taxed and untaxed
beverages on average (Table 2). The probability that Oakland stores carried the taxed beverages
in our sample relative to the comparison stores decreased by 7.71 percentage points nearly one
year after the tax. The largest decrease occurred for regular sodas, a 12.58 percentage point
decrease (Appendix Table A6). We also find a 5.24 percentage point decrease in the availability
of untaxed beverages.
        Heterogeneity of impacts
        We also examined whether the pass-through of the tax in Oakland varied by store type,
the container size of the beverage, distance and time to the closest untaxed competitor, and the
characteristics of the local populations living near the stores (Appendix Tables A7 and A8).
Pharmacies increased prices the most, fully passing through the tax, on average (0.55 higher than
large grocery stores, the reference group, which increased prices by 0.45). Chain stores passed
through more of the tax than independent retailers (0.47 higher than independent retailers, which
raised prices by 0.30, on average). This finding is consistent with the finding that pharmacies
increased prices the most; all pharmacies in the sample are chain stores. Pass-through is lower at
stores with high percentages of local residents living in poverty and high percentages of African-
American (statistically significant at the 10 percent level). For example, the average price
increase at a store located in an area with the average percentage of households living in poverty
(17.45 percent) was 0.60 cents per ounce; a ten percentage point increase in the percentage in
poverty is associated with a 0.17 cents per ounce lower increase. All other differences are not
statistically significant.
        Regarding availability of beverages, we find that the overall decline is concentrated in
independent retailers (Appendix Table A9); the differences between independent retailers and
chain stores are generally substantial in magnitude and statistically significant. In fact, we do not
see declines in availability for chain stores. There are no statistically significant changes in the
availability of beverages by container size, except for a large decrease in the availability of
single-serving bottles of water.
        We do not find a relationship between changes in product availability and the distance
and time to the closest untaxed competitor, but there is some evidence of differential changes

                                                  17
based on the local population characteristics of stores (Appendix Table A10). Stores that are
farther from their closest untaxed competitor did not change the availability of beverages by
more than those closer to competitors. We find larger declines in the availability of untaxed
beverages in stores with relatively high percentages of local households living in poverty. In
addition, we find smaller declines in availability of taxed beverages (particularly regular soda)
for stores with relatively high percentages of local residents that are African American and larger
declines for water. Finally, we find larger declines in availability of taxed and untaxed
(particularly among untaxed) beverages in stores with relatively high percentages of local
residents that are Hispanic.
    b. Purchases

        In Table 3, we report the unadjusted changes in the average volume of beverage
purchases by type of beverage in Oakland and comparison stores. At Oakland stores, the volume
of taxed beverages purchased per shopping trip decreased by 5.51 ounces from 19.26 to 13.75
ounces. When we compare the change to the untaxed comparison stores outside of Oakland,
which saw an increase of 4.64 ounces per shopping trip, the relative decrease in Oakland is larger
at 10.15 ounces. Conversely, we find that the average purchase of untaxed beverages at stores in
Oakland increased by 10.18 ounces, from 36.52 to 46.71 ounces, with almost no changes at the
comparison stores outside of Oakland. Neither of these unconditional difference-in-differences
estimates are statistically significant.
        In Table 4, we report the estimated impact of the tax on purchases in a regression
framework accounting for characteristics of the consumers and stores. We find that consumers at
Oakland stores were slightly less likely to purchase taxed beverages after the tax relative to
consumers at comparison stores outside of the city (4.2 percentage points compared to 25.1
percent of consumers purchasing taxed beverages before the tax), although the change is not
statistically significant. They were 10.8 percentage points more likely to purchase untaxed
beverages (compared to 20.4 percent of consumers purchasing untaxed beverages before the tax).
The findings regarding the volume of beverages purchased are similar to those in the unadjusted
estimates reported in Table 3. Consumers at Oakland stores purchased 11.33 fewer ounces of
taxed beverages per trip after the tax relative to shoppers at the comparison stores outside of
Oakland, although this estimate is not statistically significant. We estimate that shoppers



                                                18
increased the average volume of untaxed beverages, although the change is not statistically
significant.
        We also estimated the change in purchases after the tax for three populations with
relatively high rates of SSB consumption, African-American residents, Hispanic residents, and
families living in poverty. We find larger reductions in purchases of taxed beverages for all three
subgroups compared to all consumers, but only the estimate for African-Americans is
statistically significant (Appendix Table A11). African-American consumers decreased
purchases of SSBs in Oakland, relative to comparison stores outside of Oakland, by 28.18
ounces per shopping trip and increased purchases of other, untaxed beverages by 30.1 ounces per
shopping trip.
        Cross-border shopping
        In Table 5, we report results from the store exit interviews and the household surveys that
provide evidence regarding the level of cross-border shopping and changes in shopping behavior
by Oakland residents. 35 First, we find that there was not much change in the percentage of
Oakland residents who reported shopping outside of the city for beverages at least once a week.
We estimate a 2.98 percentage point increase compared to 36.36 percent before the tax, but the
change is not statistically significant. Similarly, respondents to the household survey reported a
slight, although not statistically significant increase in any shopping outside of Oakland, a 4.65
percentage point increase compared to 58.27 percent before the tax. However, we find a 10.33
percentage point increase in reporting that their usual source of beverage purchases is outside of
Oakland, compared to 24.59 percent before the tax. Finally, we find positive, but not statistically
significant, changes in reporting that price is the primary factor in determining where to purchase
beverages or travel time to purchase beverages, which could be indicators of cross-border
shopping.
     c. Consumption
        In Table 6, we report the unadjusted changes in two key measures of consumption for
adults and children in Oakland and comparison stores: (1) grams of added sugars consumed from
beverages and (2) monthly frequency of consumption overall and for several beverage types. We

35
  We observe some Oakland residents shopping at comparison stores outside of the city, but the number is too small
to estimate changes in the proportion that purchase any taxed beverages and the volume of taxed beverages. Unlike
Cawley et al. (2018a, b), the comparison stores for this analysis are farther from the city border, and we observe
fewer Oakland residents shopping there.

                                                       19
see very little change in added sugars consumed for adults living in Oakland. The average grams
of sugar consumed from beverages increased from 18.10 to 19.25, and the change is not
statistically significant. We see consistent results for the frequency of SSBs consumed; there is
little change in Oakland. Because there was a slight increase among adults living outside of
Oakland, the net change for Oakland residents is a decrease in the frequency of consumption,
although the decrease is small and not statistically significant (1.44 fewer times per month
compared to a mean before the tax of 36.91 times per month). We see a similar pattern for adults
for regular soda consumption, which is the most commonly consumed type of taxed beverage in
Oakland and the comparison areas (Appendix Table A12). Consumption of untaxed beverages is
much more common than taxed beverages in Oakland and the comparison areas; for example,
respondents reported consuming untaxed beverages roughly 180 times per month prior to the tax
compared to taxed beverages roughly 23 times per month. 36 Unexpectedly, we find a fairly large
decline in consumption of untaxed beverages in the comparison communities driven by a decline
in frequency, which leads to a relative increase in consumption for Oakland residents, although
the relative change in untaxed beverage consumption in Oakland (the DiD estimate) is not
statistically significant.
         For children, we do not find substantial changes in consumption of taxed or untaxed
beverages (Table 6). There was a slight (although not precisely estimated) increase in the grams
of sugar consumed from beverages in Oakland and comparison communities. There was little
change in the frequency of taxed beverages overall or for specific types of SSBs (regular soda
and sweetened fruit drinks ­ Appendix Table A12). Similarly, there was little change in
consumption of untaxed beverages overall and for specific beverage types (e.g., bottled water
and milk).
         In Table 7, we report regression estimates of the impact of the tax on grams of added
sugars consumed and frequency of consumption overall and for several beverage types for adults
and children. 37 We find a small and not precisely estimated relationship between the tax and
grams of added sugar consumed for adults and nearly no change for children. We find a fairly


36
   Bottled water is the most commonly consumed untaxed beverage and is consumed 60 times per month, on
average. Cawley et al. (2018b) report similar patterns in Philadelphia; i.e., higher consumption of untaxed beverages
and bottled water being the most commonly consumed untaxed beverage.
37
   The estimates are similar when we restrict the sample to respondents with complete records of all beverages
consumed in both survey waves, as shown in Appendix Table A13.

                                                         20
substantial decline in the frequency of taxed beverages, 9.22 fewer times per month, which is
roughly one fewer times every three days and is a large percentage decline compare to the mean
before the tax of 22.63 times per month. However, the decline is not statistically significant, and
as we see in Table 6, much of the DiD estimate is due to an increase in consumption among
residents in the comparison areas, not a decline in consumption among Oakland residents.
Among SSBs, the largest decline is for sweetened fruit drinks. Oakland residents consumed these
beverages 7.14 fewer times per month after the tax compared to those living in the comparison
areas. For untaxed beverages, we estimate that there was an increase in the frequency of
consumption, although the increase is not statistically significant, and we see in Table 6 that this
result is driven by a decline in consumption among residents living in the comparison areas.
       We do not find a substantial change in beverage consumption for children. The estimated
change in grams of added sugars consumed from beverages is close to zero (0.29 grams, on
average). Similarly, the estimated change in the frequency of consumption of taxed beverages is
small and not statistically significant (2.72 more grams of sugar consumed from beverages after
the tax). In addition, we do not find a substantial change in the frequency of consumption of
untaxed beverages for children overall and for individual beverage types. The one exception is
that we find an increase in the frequency of milk consumption, an extra 10 beverages per month;
however, from Appendix Table A12, this change is driven by a reduction in comparison
communities.
       In Table 8, we report the impact of the tax on whether adults and children consume taxed
and untaxed beverages at all and whether they consume them daily. We find declines in
consumption for some specific taxed beverage types, but they do not add to a substantial overall
decline in consumption of taxed beverages. There were small and statistically insignificant
reductions in the probabilities that adults consume taxed beverages overall (a 1.7 percentage
point decline for any consumption and a 1.2 percentage point decline for daily consumption).
The two types of SSBs (regular soda and sweetened fruit drinks) showed fairly sizable declines
in any consumption, a 7.3 percentage point decline in the probability of any consumption of
regular soda compared to 75.14 percent before the tax and a 12.0 percentage point decline for
sweetened fruit drinks compared to 69.49 percent. There were also declines in daily consumption
of regular soda and sweetened fruit drinks, but the declines were not statistically significant. We
do not find substantial changes in any or daily consumption of untaxed beverages.

                                                 21
       For children, we find negative relationships between the tax and consumption and some
evidence of a decline in any and daily consumption overall. Reporting any consumption declined
by 6.4 percentage points for all taxed beverages compared to 83.57 percent before the tax
(statistically significant at the 10 percent level). We find a negative relationship between the tax
and daily consumption, but the decline is not precisely estimated. We estimate negative
relationships between specific taxed beverages, but the declines are generally not statistically
significant, with the exception of regular soda. We find a fairly sizable decline in the probability
of reporting any consumption of regular soda (11.0 percentage point decline compared to 64.83
percent before the tax, statistically significant at the 10 percent level). We do not find substantial
changes in any or daily consumption of untaxed beverages overall or by beverage type, with the
exception of a decline for any fruit juice consumption (11.8 percentage point decline compared
to 87.44 percent before the tax).
       Heterogeneity of impacts
       We examined the impact of the tax on consumption among African-American and
Hispanic adults and children, two populations that have relatively high rates of consumption and
diet-related health conditions. We also examined the impact of the tax on older children (over
age 10), who have higher consumption of SSBs before the tax. We do not find substantial
changes in consumption for these populations for adults or children (Appendix Table A14). We
find that children over age 10 increased consumption after the tax, although the changes are not
precisely estimated.
       We also examined the impact of the tax among various low-income populations. These
populations are of particular interest because low incomes are associated with higher rates of
SSB consumption and diet-related health conditions. In addition, the tax and resulting higher
prices could have particularly large effects on budgets for these households, leading to larger
declines in consumption. We do not find substantial changes in consumption based on whether
the household lives below the federal poverty level or the adult respondent has a high school
education or less. We find some evidence of reductions in consumption for those in households
receiving SNAP or WIC benefits, particularly among children. Children reduced the frequency
of consumption of taxed beverages by 6.42 (SNAP) and 9.98 times per month (WIC). Children
also reduced grams of added sugars consumed from beverages by 8.12 (SNAP) and 9.87 (WIC),
although the results are only marginally statistically significant. For adults, the changes are not as

                                                  22
consistently negative, large, or precisely estimated, but they mostly point to decreased
consumption for adults living in households receiving SNAP or WIC benefits.
       We examined potential differential impacts of the tax among subgroups that we
hypothesized could be more likely to reduce consumption: (1) those with positive views of the
tax and awareness of the health impacts of SSBs, (2) those less likely to shop outside of the city,
and (3) those with high baseline consumption. We find consistently negative relationships
between the tax and consumption (grams of sugar and frequency of consumption) for adults with
positive views of the tax, awareness that SSBs are bad for your health, and trying to reduce
consumption of SSBs; however, the changes are not statistically significant. We also find some
evidence that adults reporting that they do not shop outside of Oakland and those living farther
from the closest untaxed store reduced consumption, although the estimates are not consistently
statistically significant across the two subgroups and outcomes. Finally, we do not find a
relationship between consumption before the tax and changes in consumption after the tax for
adults, and in fact, we find an increase in consumption after the tax for children with the highest
levels of consumption before the tax (Appendix Figures A1-A4).


V. Discussion
       In this paper, we provide important evidence on the impacts of SSB taxes on a variety of
outcomes, including prices, purchases, and consumption. We contribute to the evidence base by
providing the first evidence regarding the tax in Oakland, California. For Oakland, we find less
than full pass-through (roughly 60 percent) of the SSB tax, some evidence of a moderate decline
in sales of SSBs in Oakland, an increase in the volume of beverages bought through cross-border
shopping, and little evidence of substantial changes in beverage consumption.
       As the evidence base regarding the effects of SSB taxes grows, it is becoming evident
that their effects tend to vary across cities. Some of the difference across cities may be due to
differences in the design of the tax (e.g., the Philadelphia tax is larger and includes non-caloric
sweetened beverages) or the characteristics of the cities (e.g., Philadelphia is much larger in area
and population and had higher baseline consumption of SSBs). The SSB tax in Oakland provides
an interesting point of comparison because its tax is similar to that in Berkeley (one-cent per
ounce, excludes non-caloric sweetened beverages) but Oakland's population is much larger than
that of Berkeley and is also more diverse in its racial and ethnic composition and

                                                 23
sociodemographic characteristics. In addition, Oakland is unique in that there were three other
municipalities nearby that had SSB taxes at the time or shortly after its tax was implemented
(Albany, Berkeley, and San Francisco, California), which limited residents' ability to shop for
untaxed beverages outside of the city.
       Roughly 60 percent of Oakland's one-cent per ounce tax was passed through to
consumers in the form of higher retail prices. To put this in context, the price of a 20-ounce Coca
Cola increased by 10.80 cents (0.54 cents per ounce) on average relative to comparison
communities, which is a 5.76 percent increase in the pre-tax price in Oakland. The price of a 2-
liter bottle of Coca Cola increased by 41.25 cents (0.61 cents per ounces) on average, which is a
17.53 percent increase in the pre-tax price, and the price of a 12-pack of 12-ounce Coca Cola
cans increased by 99.36 cents (0.69 cents per ounce) on average, which is a 15.75 percent
increase in the pre-tax price.
       This pass-through rate in Oakland (60 percent) is greater than the 40 to 50 percent found
in Berkeley (Cawley and Frisvold, 2017; Falbe et al., 2015). However, it is lower than the rates
found in Boulder, Colorado (roughly 80 percent found in Cawley et al. [2018c]) and
Philadelphia, where Cawley et al. (2018a) and Seiler, Tuchman, and Yao (2019) found full pass
through of the tax, and Roberto et al. (2019) found full pass-through at pharmacies but less pass-
through at supermarkets and mass merchandise stores among large chain stores. Factors that
likely influence the degree of pass-through include households' access to untaxed options
(including untaxed beverages and stores selling SSBs outside of the taxed area) and, more
generally, the variation in the price elasticity of demand among households in these cities.
       The lack of a decline in consumption in Oakland is in contrast with findings in Berkeley;
Falbe et al. (2016) and Lee et al. (2019) found 24 percent and 50 percent reductions in
consumption after six months and three years, respectively. Cawley et al. (2018b), which is the
most directly comparable study in Philadelphia, found some evidence of declines in consumption
for subgroups (particularly for regular soda) although not a substantial decline overall. Zhong et
al. (2018) found a decrease in regular soda consumption among adults but not for other types of
SSBs, and Roberto et al. (2019) found larger decreases in sales at large chain stores, respectively.
Seiler, Tuchman, and Yao (2019) did not find substantial impact on calories and sugar intake. It
is possible that the price increases in Oakland are not high enough to induce substantial changes



                                                24
in consumption. This finding is consistent with Alcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky (2018), in
which the authors estimate that the optimal tax is between 1.5 and 2.5 cents per ounce.
        Regarding cross-border shopping, Cawley et al. (2018b) found similar evidence that the
tax induced Philadelphia residents to increase shopping for beverages outside of the city (a slight
increase in ever shopping outside the city and a large increase in reporting a store outside the city
is the usual source of beverage purchases). Although, the study in Philadelphia also provides
direct evidence of increased purchases of SSBs at stores outside of Philadelphia, whereas this
study does not provide similar evidence for Oakland. In addition, while other studies do not have
directly comparable estimates, they find evidence of substantial cross-border shopping (Seiler et
al., 2019; Roberto et al., 2019).
        We also find a decline in the availability of SSBs at Oakland stores, which is another
possible (non-price) mechanism by which the SSB tax could affect purchases, consumption and
health. We find a decline in the probability that Oakland stores sell SSBs of 7.71 percentage
points, or 13.56 percent. This finding is consistent with the decrease in availability of taxed
beverages after Philadelphia implemented its tax (Cawley et al., 2018b). However, in contrast to
Philadelphia, and our expectations, Oakland stores also carried fewer of the untaxed beverages
after the tax. We found a decrease of 5.24 percentage points, which is a 12.79 percent decrease in
the pre-tax value. The decline was concentrated in independent retailers and in small single-
serving bottles of water. It is important to note that, although we record the price and availability
of the most commonly-sold brands, we do not have data for all brands and sizes; it is possible
that the tax caused a shift away from the type of beverages included in our study and toward
other beverage brand and size combinations that we do not observe.
        We observe a small decrease in SSB purchases in Oakland (of 5.51 fewer ounces per
shopping trip), which translates to roughly 88.16 fewer ounces or just over four fewer 20-ounce
bottles purchased per month. 38 We also found an increase of similar size in purchases outside the
city (4.64 more ounces per shopping trip), which led to a somewhat sizable relative decrease in
Oakland. This relative decline is potentially due in part to cross-border shopping; i.e., the
estimate could reflect a spillover effect of the tax by causing shoppers in Oakland to shop more



38
  We assume an average of 16 trips per month (Ver Ploeg, Larimore, and Wilde, 2017). If we estimate the change
relative to consumers in stores in the comparison areas, the decline is 10.15 fewer ounces per shopping trip and
162.40 fewer ounces purchased per month, which is more than a 12-pack of 12-ounce cans or two 2-liter bottles.

                                                       25
outside of the city rather than an impact estimate of the tax on changes in purchases. However,
many of the comparison stores are fairly far away from Oakland; for example, 13 of the stores
are in Richmond, California, which is separated from Oakland by Berkeley. Twenty of the stores
are in Pittsburg or Antioch, which are over 30 miles from Oakland. In addition, we found very
few Oakland residents shopping at these stores (32 before the tax and 40 after the tax, which is
roughly 5 percent of all shoppers interviewed).
       In addition to observing a small increase in SSB purchases outside of Oakland, responses
by shoppers in exit interviews and households surveys provides some evidence of cross-border
shopping. Oakland residents were much more likely to report that a store outside of the city is
their usual source of beverage purchases after the tax, a 10.3 percentage point increase, which is
a 42 percent increase on the pre-tax percentage of 24.6. In contrast, there was only a small
increase in the percentage of households reporting that they ever shop for beverages outside of
the city; roughly half of respondents reported shopping outside the city before the tax, which
increased by roughly five percentage points after the tax. Similar to findings in Philadelphia, it
could be that the tax did not induce households to start shopping for beverages across the border,
but it induced some households already shopping across the border to purchase a higher
proportion of their beverages outside of the city (Cawley et al., 2018b). The geography of the
region and existence of SSB taxes in other nearby municipalities likely play a role in the degree
of cross-border shopping in Oakland. For example, Oakland has San Francisco Bay to the west,
large areas of park lands to the east, and Berkeley (which has an SSB tax) to the north. Thus,
there are limited nearby untaxed options for Oakland residents to cross the border to avoid the
tax. Conversely, Oakland is not a large city, and the average distance to an untaxed store from
households in our sample is less than two miles, so there are nearby untaxed options for
residents.
       The estimated changes in consumption, in addition to not being statistically significant,
are generally small. A 3 gram reduction for adults in sugar consumed from beverages is roughly
12 fewer calories per day; the 0.3 gram reduction for children is just over one fewer calorie per
day. The one beverage where we find the most evidence of a change is regular soda, particularly
in any and daily consumption; Cawley et al. (2018b) found in Philadelphia that the most
substantial and precisely estimated changes in consumption were for regular soda. We find
reductions in any regular soda consumption for adults and children. We caution that the results

                                                  26
for regular soda could in part be due to random chance given the number of outcomes and
subgroups examined in this analysis (i.e., the multiple comparisons problem). However, this
result is robust across cities. One possible explanation is that the popular press often refers to it
as a "soda tax," which might make the tax particularly salient for regular soda and less associated
in the public with other types of beverages.
       The findings of incomplete pass-through, small changes in purchases, and evidence of
greater cross-border shopping are consistent with negligible changes in overall consumption of
SSBs for adults and children. In addition, consumption of SSBs was low before the tax was
implemented; both adults and children consumed SSBs less than once per day on average and 16
percent did not consume SSBs at all. Thus, there was not a lot of room to reduce average
consumption for many adults and children.
       There are several limitations of the analysis to consider when examining the estimated
impacts of the tax in Oakland. First, to estimate the impacts of the tax on price and consumption,
we rely on the assumption that the pre-period trends in these variables in our Oakland and
comparison stores were parallel. While we have indirect evidence that the trends were parallel
before the tax for regular soda in stores in Oakland and those outside the city but in the same
MSA (which is where we draw our matched comparison group from), we do not have direct
evidence that the parallel trends assumption is satisfied in the stores or among the consumers in
the study. The indirect evidence among all stores in the region plus the fact that we matched
comparison to Oakland stores based on store type and local population characteristics give us
more confidence that the parallel trends assumption is satisfied. Second, we estimate the impact
of the tax on self-reported consumption, and although our ability to estimate impacts on
consumption rather than just purchases is an advantage of the study, the reports are subject to the
measurement error concerns inherent in all self-reported data. Because we estimate relative
changes in consumption conditioned on consumption prior to the tax, measurement error from
self reports is only a threat to estimation of the impacts if there is differential measurement error
between Oakland and comparison households and between the pre-tax and post-tax periods. For
example, if Oakland residents inflated their reported consumption in the pre-tax period because
they knew the tax was coming and they would eventually reduce consumption, but those in
comparison communities did not do the same, and Oakland residents did not do the same in the
post-tax period. Third, we examine a host of outcomes and subgroups in the analysis, and the

                                                  27
few statistically significant estimates could be due to chance, particularly since much of the other
evidence suggests that there was no substantial change in consumption. To minimize the risk of
overstating the findings, we do not focus on individual results for specific outcomes and
subgroups, but instead, we focus on consistent patterns across outcomes for individual subgroups
and across subgroups. We also weigh the overall outcomes for all beverage types more heavily
when interpreting the results, i.e., grams of sugar consumed from beverages, monthly frequency
of SSB consumption, and any or daily consumption of SSBs. Finally, although using a matched
group in the Oakland MSA of comparison stores and shoppers at these stores has the benefit of
the same regional factors influencing prices and sales of beverages as the stores in Oakland, there
is the risk that there is a spillover effect of the tax in comparison communities. For example, if
comparison stores near the Oakland border raised prices somewhat because they compete against
Oakland stores that raised their prices substantially, we would underestimate the impact of the
tax on prices. Also, if households in comparison communities reduced their consumption
because of the tax (e.g., due to the increased knowledge of the health effects of SSBs or because
they shop for beverages in Oakland), we would underestimate the impact of the tax. However, as
discussed above, the comparison stores included in the study are fairly far from Oakland, which
decreases the likelihood of spillover effects, and in the case of prices, we did not find differential
effects by the proximity of Oakland stores to their nearest untaxed competitor.
       In this paper, we provide the first estimated impacts of the tax in Oakland, an important
policy with the potential to change consumption and improve health. The approach to the
analysis has several key features that distinguish it from much of the past literature on SSB taxes.
Namely, we provide direct evidence on reported consumption. Consumption, although certainly
correlated with purchases, is not the same, and it is the outcome that ultimately affects health.
We also use longitudinal data on households to directly compare reported consumption and
shopping behavior before and after the tax rather than comparing repeated cross-sections of
different respondents. The study is also only the second study that provides evidence of SSB
taxes on children's beverage consumption. The evidence generated from Oakland can be used to
compare to SSB tax policies in other cities and assess the degree to which details impact the
efficacy of the tax in reducing consumption and improving health. For example, the geography
of the local area, the region covered by the tax (city, state, or nation), and the amount of the tax
can contribute to its efficacy. By considering the findings in this study and the details of the

                                                  28
Oakland tax in the context of the literature on other city-level taxes and their details,
policymakers can design effective policies that are more likely to achieve their aims.




                                                  29
                                           References
Allcott, H., Lockwood, B. B., & Taubinsky, D. (2018). Regressive Sin Taxes, with an
    Application to the Optimal Soda Tax. Working Paper,
    https://site.stanford.edu/sites/g/files/sbiybj8706/f/4786-regressive_sin_taxes.pdf.
Bollinger, B. & Sexton, S. (2018). Local excise taxes, sticky prices, and spillovers: evidence
   from Berkeley's soda tax. Working Paper, SSRN, Rochester, N.Y.
Cawley, J., & Frisvold, D. E. (2017). The PassThrough of Taxes on SugarSweetened
   Beverages to Retail Prices: The Case of Berkeley, California. Journal of Policy Analysis and
   Management, 36(2), 303­326.
Cawley, J., Willage, B., & Frisvold, D. (2018). Pass-Through of a Tax on Sugar-Sweetened
   Beverages at the Philadelphia International Airport. Journal of the American Medical
   Association, 319(3), 305­306.
Cawley, J., Frisvold, D.E., Hill, A., & Jones, D.J. (2018a). The Impact of the Philadelphia
   Beverage Tax on Prices and Product Availability. NBER Working Paper #24990,
   https://www.nber.org/papers/w24990.
Cawley, J., Frisvold, D.E., Hill, A., & Jones, D. (2018b). The Impact of the Philadelphia
   Beverage Tax on Prices and Product Availability. Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming
Cawley, J., Crain, C., Frisvold, D., Jones, D. (2018c). The pass-through of the largest tax on
   sugar-sweetened beverages: the case of Boulder, Colorado. NBER Working Paper #25050,
   https://www.nber.org/papers/w25050.
Cawley, J., Thow, A.M., Wen, K., & Frisvold, D. (2019) The Economics of Taxes on Sugar-
   Sweetened Beverages: A Review of the Effects on Prices, Sales, Cross-Border Shopping, and
   Consumption. Annual Review of Nutrition, 39.
Chetty, R., Looney, A., & Kroft, K. (2009). Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.
   American Economic Review, 99(4), 1145­1177.
DellaVigna, S., & Gentzkow, M. (2017). Uniform Pricing in U.S. Retail Chains. NBER Working
   Paper #23996.
Donald, S. G., & Lang, K. (2007). Inference with Difference-in-Differences and Other Panel
   Data. Review of Economics and Statistics, 89, 221­233.
Falbe, J., Rojas, N., Grummon, A. H., & Madsen, K. A. (2015). Higher Retail Prices of Sugar-
   Sweetened Beverages 3 Months After Implementation of an Excise Tax in Berkeley,
   California. American Journal of Public Health, 105, 2194­2201.
Falbe, J., Thompson, H.R., Becker, C.M., Rojas, N., McCulloch, C.E., & Madsen, K.A. (2016).
   Impact of the Berkeley Excise Tax on Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Consumption. American
   Journal of Public Health, 106(10), 1865­1871.


                                                30
Imbens, G.W., &. Wooldridge, J. M. (2009). Recent Developments in the Econometrics of
   Program Evaluation. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1), 5­86.
Johnson R.K., Appel L.J., Brands M., Howard B.V., Lefevre M., Lustig, R.H., Sacks, F., Steffen,
   L.M., & Wylie-Rosett, J. (2009). Dietary sugars intake and cardiovascular health: a scientific
   statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation, 120, 1011­20.
Lee, M.M., Falbe, J., Schillinger, D., Basu, S., McCulloch, C.E., & Madsen, K.A. (2019). Sugar-
   Sweetened Beverage Consumption 3 Years After the Berkeley, California, Sugar-Sweetened
   Beverage Tax. American Journal of Public Health, 109, 637­639.
Leider J., Pipito, A., & Powell, L. (2018). The Impact of the Cook County, Illinois, sugar
   sweetened beverage tax on prices, 2017. Chicago: Illinois Prevention Research Center.
   University of Illinois at Chicago.
Lin, Biing-Hwan, Travis A. Smith, Jonq-Ying Lee, Kevin D. Hall. (2011). Measuring weight
   outcomes for obesity intervention strategies: The case of a sugar-sweetened beverage tax.
   Economics & Human Biology, 9(4), 329­341.
Malik, V.S., & Hu, F.B. (2011). Sugar-Sweetened Beverages and Health: Where Does the
   Evidence Stand? American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 94, 1161­1162.
National Cancer Institute. Dietary Screener Questionnaire (DSQ) in the NHANES 2009­10:
   Data Processing & Scoring Procedures. Retrieved from
   https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/nhanes/dietscreen/scoring.
Roberto, C.A., Lawman, H. G., LeVasseur, M.T., Mitra, N., Peterhans, A., Herring, B., &
   Bleich, S. (2019). Association of a Beverage Tax on Sugar-Sweetened and Artificially
   Sweetened Beverages With Changes in Beverage Prices and Sales at Chain Retailers in a
   Large Urban Setting. JAMA, 321(18), 1799-1810.
Rojas, C., & Wang, E. (2017). Do taxes for soda and sugary drinks work? Scanner data evidence
   from Berkeley and Washington. Working Paper, SSRN, Rochester, N.Y.,
   https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3041989.
Seiler, S., Tuchman, A., & Yao, S. (2019). The Impact of Soda Taxes: Pass-through, Tax
    Avoidance, and Nutritional Effects. Working Paper #3752, Stanford Graduate School of
    Business, https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/faculty-research/working-papers/impact-soda-taxes-
    pass-through-tax-avoidance-nutritional-effects.
Silver, L.D., Ng, S.W., Ryan-Ibarra, S., Taillie, L.S., Induni, M., Miles, D.R., Poti, J.M., &
    Popkin, B.M. (2017). Changes in prices, sales, consumer spending, and beverage
    consumption one year after a tax on sugar-sweetened beverages in Berkeley, California, US:
    a before-and-after study. PLOS Medicine, 14:e1002283.
Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations. Book V, Chapter 3.




                                               31
Ver Ploeg, Michele, Elizabeth Larimore, and Parke Wilde. (2017). The Influence of Foodstore
   Access on Grocery Shopping and Food Spending, EIB-180, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
   Economic Research Service, October 2017.
Zhong, Y., Auchincloss, A.H., Lee, B.K., & Kanter, G.P. (2018). The Short-Term Impacts of the
   Philadelphia Beverage Tax on Beverage Consumption. American Journal of Preventive
   Medicine, 55(1), 26­34.




                                             32
Figure 1: Average Weekly Price per Ounce of Regular Soda in the 18 Months Prior to the
Oakland SSB Tax (January 2016 to June 2017)




Notes: This figure shows the average weekly price per ounce of regular soda in retail stores in
Oakland and in the Oakland MSA in the 18 months leading up to the tax (January 2016 to June
2017). The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not
reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved
in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein.
Source: Researcher(s) own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part on data from The
Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at
the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of
Business.




                                                33
Figure 2. Average Weekly Sales Volume of Regular Soda per Store in the 18 Months Prior to the
Oakland SSB Tax (January 2016 to June 2017)




Notes: This figure shows the average weekly sales volume of regular soda per retail stores in
Oakland and in the Oakland MSA in the 18 months leading up to the tax (January 2016 to June
2017). The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not
reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved
in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein.
Source: Researcher(s) own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part on data from The
Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at
the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of
Business.




                                                34
Table 1: Average Price per Ounce of Beverages Before and After the Implementation of the SSB
Tax (One Cent per Ounce) in Oakland

                             Stores in Oakland                  Comparison Stores
                     2017          2018    Difference     2017       2018     Difference     DiD
 Taxed               7.95          8.94        1.00       7.91       8.24         0.33       0.66
   Beverages        (0.22)        (0.25)      (0.33)     (0.22)     (0.22)       (0.31)     (0.46)
                    [905]         [767]      [1,672]    [1,048]     [986]       [2,034]    [3,706]

 Untaxed             9.92        10.16        0.24       9.51       9.49        -0.03        0.27
  Beverages         (0.31)       (0.36)      (0.48)     (0.28)     (0.28)       (0.40)      (0.62)
                    [608]        [493]      [1,101]     [762]      [732]       [1,494]     [2,595]


Notes: This table shows the mean price per ounce among beverages for the listed categories.
Standard errors are in parentheses, and sample sizes are in brackets. The sample sizes are store-
beverage combinations. In Oakland, there were 70 stores in April-June 2017 and 61 stores in
April-June 2018. In the Oakland MSA, there were 87 comparison stores in April-June 2017 and
75 stores in April-June 2018. Taxed beverages include regular soda, sports drinks, energy drinks,
juice drinks, and sweetened iced tea. Untaxed beverages include diet soda, other diet drinks
(unsweetened sports drinks, energy drinks, and iced tea), 100% fruit juice, and bottled water).
DiD = difference-in-differences.




                                                  35
Table 2: The Impact of the SSB Tax on Prices and Product Availability

                                             Price
                              Full Sample      Balanced Sample           Availability
 Taxed Beverages                  0.56               0.61                  -7.71
                                 (0.11)             (0.11)                 (2.13)
                                [3,706]             [2,961]               [6,210]

 Untaxed Beverages                 0.26                0.21                 -5.24
                                  (0.13)              (0.12)                (1.50)
                                 [2,595]             [1,928]               [6,256]

Notes: The first two columns show the DiD estimates in cents per ounce (full pass-through is 1.0
cent per ounce) for the beverage category in the row heading and the sample of stores in the
column heading. The results in the third column represent the average percentage point change in
the availability of beverages in Oakland within the given beverage type compared to the
comparison stores. Standard errors, which are robust to clustering at the store level, are in
parentheses, and sample sizes are in brackets. The sample sizes are store-beverage combinations.
Each cell contains the results from a separate regression. Additional variables that are included,
but not shown, are a binary variable indicating that the price or product availability is from after
implementation of the tax, store fixed effects, and product fixed effects. Taxed beverages include
regular soda, sports drinks, energy drinks, juice drinks, and sweetened iced tea. Untaxed
beverages include diet soda, other diet drinks (unsweetened sports drinks, energy drinks, and
iced tea), 100% fruit juice, and bottled water).




                                                36
Table 3. Beverage Purchases (Ounces) Before and After the Implementation of the Beverage Tax
in Oakland


                                                             Consumers at Stores in
                  Consumers at Stores in Oakland           Comparison Communities
                  Pre-tax  Post-tax       Diff.         Pre-tax    Post-tax       Diff.     DiD
 Ounces
 purchased
 Taxed             19.26      13.75       -5.51          12.14       16.78        4.64     -10.15
   Beverages       (3.91)     (2.52)      (4.65)        (-2.79)      (4.45)      (5.25)    (7.01)

 Untaxed           36.52      46.71       10.18         24.96        25.42        0.46      9.72
   Beverages       (7.12)     (9.31)     (11.72)        (6.78)      (10.47)      (12.48)   (17.12)

 Observations       785        786        1,571          741          766        1,507     3,078

Notes: This table shows the mean ounces purchased among all beverages for the listed
categories. Standard errors are in parentheses. The number of observations reported reflect the
total number of exit interviews conducted (note, the actual number of observations varies slightly
by beverage type based on a missing values for some beverage types). Taxed Beverages include
regular soda, sports drinks, energy drinks, juice drinks, sweetened coffee and tea. Untaxed
beverages include bottled water, diet soda, diet versions of sports and energy drinks,
unsweetened coffee and tea, and 100% juice.
Diff. = Difference; DiD = difference-in-differences.




                                                   37
Table 4. The Impact of the Tax on Beverage Purchases (Any Purchases and Ounces Purchased)

                                        Any purchases                Ounces purchased
 Taxed Beverages                            -4.19                         -11.33
                                            (6.10)                        (8.36)
                                           [2,720]                       [2,720]

 Untaxed Beverages                          10.76                          10.07
                                            (4.49)                        (15.65)
                                           [2,726]                        [2,726]

Notes: This table shows the difference-in-differences estimates for any purchases and the ounces
purchased for the product categories in the row headings. Standard errors, which are robust to
clustering at the store level, are in parentheses, and sample sizes are in brackets. The rows
contain the results of two-part regressions (logistic regressions in the first part estimating
whether there was a beverage purchase and GLM with a Poisson distribution in the second part
for the volume of beverages purchased). Additional variables that are included, but not shown,
are age, gender (indicator for female), whether the respondent is African-American, whether the
respondent is Hispanic, household size, whether household income is below the FPL, whether
the respondent is an Oakland resident, indicators for days of the week, time of day, day of the
study, whether the interview location is in Oakland, whether the interview occurred after
implementation of the tax, and store-type indicators. Taxed Beverages include regular soda,
sports drinks, energy drinks, juice drinks, sweetened coffee and tea. Untaxed beverages include
bottled water, diet soda, diet versions of sports and energy drinks, unsweetened coffee and tea,
and 100% juice.




                                               38
Table 5. Estimates of Changes in Shopping Behavior Related to Cross-Border Shopping

    Change in Self-Reported Cross Border Shopping from Exit Interviews
    Interviewed at Oakland store-- Oakland residents                               2.98
      (reported shopping outside Oakland                                          (5.61)
      one or more times per week)                                                [1,302]

    Change in Self-Reported Shopping from Household Survey
    Any beverage shopping outside of Oakland                                       4.65
     (asked only of Oakland residents)                                            (5.46)
                                                                                  [210]

    Usual source of beverage purchases is outside of Oakland                      10.33
                                                                                  (3.85)
                                                                                  [348]

    Price is the primary factor in determining where to purchase                   6.54
      beverages                                                                   (6.39)
                                                                                  [375]

    Travel time to purchase beverages (minutes)                                    0.79
                                                                                  (1.03)
                                                                                  [374]

Notes: The results, with the exception of travel time, are percentage point changes. Standard
errors, which are robust to clustering at the store level, are in parentheses, and sample sizes are in
brackets. Each cell contains the results of a separate regression. Additional variables that are
included, but not shown, are age, gender (indicator for female), whether the respondent is
African-American, whether the respondent is Hispanic, household size, whether household
income is below 185 percent of the federal poverty level, and whether the interview occurred
after implementation of the tax. The regression used to generate the results in the top panel (from
exit surveys) also include indicators for days of the week, time of day, day of the study, and
store-type. The regressions used to generate the results in the bottom panel (from household
surveys) also include an indicator for whether the respondent is an Oakland resident (with the
exception of the regression for any shopping outside of Oakland, since the question was asked
only of Oakland residents).




                                                  39
Table 6. Mean Consumption Before and After Implementation of the Beverage Tax in Oakland

                            Residents of Oakland                 Residents of Comparison
                                                                      Communities
                 Pre-tax        Post-tax     Diff.          Pre-tax     Post-tax   Diff.       DiD
Adults
Added              18.10           19.25            1.15      28.04      28.17        0.13     1.02
 Sugars            (2.38)          (2.78)          (2.14)     (6.21)     (5.41)      (3.99)   (4.53)
                   [158]           [158]           [158]      [183]      [183]       [183]    [341]

Monthly
Frequency
Taxed              22.63           23.45            0.83      36.91      39.18        2.27    -1.44
  Beverages        (3.11)          (3.36)          (3.03)     (9.21)     (7.75)      (6.84)   (7.48)
                   [169]           [169]           [169]      [200]      [200]       [200]    [369]

Untaxed            179.94         170.52        -9.42        192.13      154.35     -37.78     28.37
  Beverages        (15.19)        (12.15)      (20.13)       (14.70)     (12.81)    (12.99)   (23.95)
                    [153]          [153]        [153]         [176]       [176]      [176]     [329]

Children
Added              11.94           14.23            2.29      13.49      15.88        2.39    -0.10
 Sugars            (1.72)          (2.84)          (2.06)     (1.87)     (2.64)      (2.37)   (3.14)
                   [148]           [148]           [148]      [170]      [170]       [170]    [318]

Monthly
Frequency
Taxed              21.81           22.42            0.61      21.90      21.02       -0.87     1.48
  Beverages        (3.52)          (3.82)          (3.23)     (3.65)     (3.05)      (3.16)   (4.52)
                   [158]           [158]           [158]      [182]      [182]       [182]    [340]

Untaxed            162.47         152.11       -10.36        159.63      144.70     -14.93      4.57
  Beverages        (11.95)        (10.76)      (14.78)       (9.67)      (8.91)     (11.07)   (18.47)
                    [133]          [133]        [133]         [161]       [161]      [161]     [294]

Notes: The figures are the unconditional mean values for the outcome variables (grams of added
sugars and frequency of consumption per month by beverage type) for adults and children by
time and location. Standard errors are in parentheses. Sample sizes are in brackets. Added sugars
are measured in grams, and beverage frequency is measured in times consumed per month.
Taxed beverages include regular soda and sweetened fruit drinks, which include sports and
energy drinks. Untaxed beverages include water (bottled and tap), diet soda, milk, coffee, and
100% juice.
Diff. = Difference; DiD = difference-in-differences.




                                                     40
Table 7. The Impact of the Beverage Tax on Consumption

                                     Adults              Children

 Grams of Added Sugars               -3.08                 0.29
                                     (3.67)               (3.10)
                                     [341]                [318]
                                     22.78                12.67
 Frequency of Consumption
 (Times/Month)

 All Taxed Beverages                 -9.22                 2.72
                                     (6.18)               (3.96)
                                     [369]                [340]
                                     29.34                21.85
 Regular Soda                        -4.53                 0.88
                                     (3.79)               (2.17)
                                     [383]                [369]
                                      16.4                 8.71
 Sweetened fruit drinks              -7.14                 0.21
                                     (4.40)               (2.40)
                                     [386]                [345]
                                     13.35                13.55
 Energy Drinks                        n.a.               -1.752
                                                         (4.03)
                                                          [173]
                                                           1.38
 Untaxed Beverages                   13.96                 4.65
                                    (17.01)              (14.28)
                                     [329]                [294]
                                     185.6                161.1
 Diet Soda                           -0.73                 0.03
                                     (1.40)               (0.38)
                                     [400]                [369]
                                      2.76                 1.08
 Bottled Water                       -1.50                -5.08
                                     (8.14)               (5.37)
                                     [385]                [355]
                                     61.15                46.86
 Coffee                               2.22                 n.a.
                                     (4.55)
                                     [384]
                                     30.97


                                              41
 Juice                                 -2.31               -1.16
                                       (5.21)              (3.84)
                                       [382]               [354]
                                       21.92                22.3
 Milk                                   2.19               10.12
                                       (5.85)              (4.88)
                                       [381]               [358]
                                       24.94               36.75

 Tap Water                              8.14                7.45
                                       (6.99)              (8.75)
                                       [379]               [346]
                                       55.35               44.13

Notes: The figures represent the change in the outcome for households in Oakland relative to
those in the comparison communities. Standard errors are in parentheses. Sample sizes are in
brackets. The mean values before implementation of the tax are reported in italics below the
sample sizes. Added sugars are measured in grams, and beverage frequency is measured in times
consumed per month. All regressions were estimated with sample weights and standard errors
clustered at the store level.
n.a. = not applicable. We did not ask adults separate questions about consumption of energy
drinks; energy drinks are included in the questions about sweetened fruit drinks. We collected
information about coffee consumption among children, but very few responded that they drink
any coffee.




                                                42
Table 8. The Impact of the Beverage Tax on Any Consumption and Daily Consumption

                                         Adults                          Children
                                 Any              Daily        Any                   Daily

 All Taxed Beverages            -0.02             -0.01        -0.06                -0.07
                                (0.03)            (0.06)       (0.04)               (0.05)
                                [369]             [369]        [340]                [340]
                                 0.84              0.31         0.84                 0.23
 Regular Soda                   -0.07             -0.04        -0.11                -0.02
                                (0.04)            (0.04)       (0.07)               (0.04)
                                [383]             [383]        [369]                [369]
                                 0.75              0.19         0.65                 0.12
 Sweetened fruit drinks         -0.12             -0.05        -0.06                -0.03
                                (0.07)            (0.05)       (0.07)               (0.04)
                                [386]             [386]        [345]                [345]
                                 0.69              0.14         0.66                 0.14
 Energy Drinks                   n.a.              n.a.        -0.06                -0.03
                                                               (0.05)               (0.05)
                                                               [173]                [173]
                                                                0.06                 0.02
 Untaxed Beverages              -0.01             -0.03        < 0.01                0.03
                                (0.01)            (0.03)      (< 0.01)              (0.04)
                                [329]             [329]        [294]                [294]
                                 1.00              0.96         1.00                 0.98
 Diet Soda                      -0.09             -0.03        -0.07                 < 0.01
                                (0.06)            (0.03)       (0.05)               (< 0.01)
                                [400]             [400]        [369]                 [369]
                                 0.20              0.04         0.12                  0.01
 Bottled Water                   0.02              0.04        -0.03                -0.09
                                (0.04)            (0.06)       (0.05)               (0.06)
                                [385]             [385]        [355]                [355]
                                 0.92              0.62         0.84                 0.52
 Coffee                          0.01              0.04         n.a.                  n.a.
                                (0.05)            (0.07)
                                [384]             [384]
                                 0.82              0.48
 Juice                          -0.01             -0.01        -0.12                -0.02
                                (0.05)            (0.05)       (0.04)               (0.05)
                                [382]             [382]        [354]                [354]
                                 0.84              0.26         0.87                 0.24

 Milk                           -0.01              0.01        -0.01                 0.08
                                (0.04)            (0.08)       (0.03)               (0.06)

                                            43
                                   [381]           [381]            [358]            [358]
                                    0.83            0.36             0.88             0.54
 Tap Water                          0.03            0.12             0.05            0.10
                                   (0.07)          (0.06)           (0.05)          (0.06)
                                   [379]           [379]            [346]           [346]
                                    0.67            0.61             0.47            0.46
Notes: The outcomes are indicator variables for consuming any of the given beverage in the past
month or daily consumption of the given beverage throughout the past month. For additional
notes, see Table 7.




                                              44
          APPENDIX A

SUPPLEMENTAL TABLES AND FIGURES




              45
Appendix Table A1: Average Price per Ounce of Beverages Before and After the
Implementation of the SSB Tax in Oakland for All Products

                                Oakland                      Comparison Stores
                      2017      2018      Difference    2017     2018       Difference   DiD
 Taxed Beverages

 7-Up, 20 ounces       6.87     9.13         2.26       7.61       8.73         1.12      1.14
                      (0.31)   (0.31)       (0.44)     (0.29)     (0.22)       (0.36)    (0.56)
                       [53]     [50]        [103]       [60]       [59]        [119]     [222]
 7-up, 2 liter         3.42     3.85         0.43       3.02       3.32         0.31      0.13
                      (0.08)   (0.12)       (0.14)     (0.10)     (0.17)       (0.19)    (0.24)
                       [50]     [44]         [94]       [58]       [51]        [109]     [203]
 Arizona Iced Tea,     2.61     3.36         0.75       2.48       2.54         0.05      0.70
  1 gallon            (0.07)   (0.13)       (0.14)     (0.05)     (0.04)       (0.07)    (0.15)
                       [19]     [18]         [37]       [22]       [25]         [47]      [84]
 Arizona Iced Tea,     4.33     4.70         0.37       4.17       4.34         0.17      0.21
  23 ounces           (0.13)   (0.15)       (0.20)     (0.07)     (0.04)       (0.09)    (0.21)
                       [41]     [33]         [74]       [45]       [39]         [84]     [158]
 Coke, 12-pack         4.38     5.01         0.63       4.29       4.22        -0.06      0.69
                      (0.10)   (0.12)       (0.16)     (0.10)     (0.07)       (0.13)    (0.21)
                       [36]     [29]         [65]       [55]       [52]        [107]     [172]
 Coke, 20 ounces       9.37    10.25         0.87       9.13       9.47         0.33      0.54
                      (0.10)   (0.15)       (0.18)     (0.11)     (0.20)       (0.22)    (0.30)
                       [62]     [55]        [117]       [74]       [66]        [140]     [257]
 Coke, 2 liter         3.48     4.09         0.61       3.35       3.36         0.00      0.61
                      (0.07)   (0.08)       (0.10)     (0.10)     (0.08)       (0.13)    (0.17)
                       [59]     [52]        [111]       [73]       [63]        [136]     [247]
 Gatorade, 20          8.87     9.20         0.33       8.31       8.94         0.62     -0.29
  ounces              (0.18)   (0.31)       (0.34)     (0.22)     (0.19)       (0.29)    (0.45)
                       [56]     [43]         [99]       [59]       [55]        [114]     [213]
 Gatorade, 8-pack      4.14     5.34         1.20       3.36       3.62         0.26      0.94
  20 ounces           (0.48)   (0.43)       (0.65)     (0.30)     (0.24)       (0.41)    (0.79)
                       [11]     [10]         [21]       [11]        [8]         [19]      [40]
 Hawaiian Punch,       2.29     3.50         1.21       2.44       2.44        -0.01      1.22
  1 gallon            (0.21)   (0.18)       (0.27)     (0.13)     (0.17)       (0.21)    (0.34)
                       [11]     [12]         [23]       [16]       [13]         [29]      [52]
 Hawaiian Punch,       6.08     5.76        -0.32       6.49       5.74        -0.74      0.42
  20- ounces          (0.41)   (0.33)       (0.67)     (0.59)     (0.47)       (0.77)    (1.02)
                       [22]      [9]         [31]       [14]       [12]         [26]      [57]
 Minute Maid           8.93     9.78         0.86       8.68       8.81         0.13      0.73
  Lemonade, 20        (0.25)   (0.29)       (0.39)     (0.41)     (0.31)       (0.50)    (0.64)
  ounces               [31]     [27]         [58]       [24]       [35]         [59]     [117]
 Minute Maid           2.93     3.39         0.46       2.86       2.91         0.05      0.41
  Lemonade, 2 liter   (0.27)   (0.28)       (0.40)     (0.24)     (0.27)       (0.36)    (0.55)
                       [12]      [9]         [21]       [15]       [13]         [28]      [49]
 Lipton Iced Tea,      8.69     9.25         0.56       6.63       8.78         2.15     -1.59
  20 ounces           (0.49)   (0.70)       (0.83)     (1.66)     (0.33)       (1.69)    (1.72)
                       [12]      [7]         [19]        [3]        [3]          [6]      [25]
 Mountain Dew,         9.34    10.10         0.76       9.11       9.24         0.13      0.63

                                            46
  20 ounces          (0.13)   (0.17)   (0.21)   (0.15)   (0.14)   (0.21)   (0.30)
                      [53]     [46]     [99]     [59]     [60]    [119]    [218]
Mountain Dew, 2       3.43     4.12     0.69     3.13     3.22     0.10     0.59
 liter               (0.08)   (0.10)   (0.13)   (0.08)   (0.06)   (0.10)   (0.16)
                      [47]     [36]     [83]     [49]     [52]    [101]    [184]
Pepsi,12-pack 12-     4.14     4.98     0.84     4.18     4.16    -0.02     0.86
 ounces              (0.13)   (0.15)   (0.20)   (0.11)   (0.08)   (0.14)   (0.24)
                      [32]     [26]     [58]     [49]     [41]     [90]    [148]
Pepsi, 20 ounces      9.36    10.21     0.85     9.04     9.27     0.23     0.62
                     (0.10)   (0.16)   (0.18)   (0.14)   (0.12)   (0.18)   (0.26)
                      [59]     [51]    [110]     [71]     [64]    [135]    [245]
Pepsi, 2 liter        3.45     4.11     0.66     3.15     3.27     0.12     0.54
                     (0.08)   (0.08)   (0.11)   (0.07)   (0.06)   (0.09)   (0.14)
                      [52]     [43]     [95]     [62]     [58]    [120]    [215]
Red Bull,            23.44    25.27     1.83    23.78    24.16     0.39     1.45
 4-pack 8.4 ounces   (0.45)   (0.85)   (0.94)   (0.37)   (0.35)   (0.51)   (1.00)
                      [17]     [16]     [33]     [35]     [42]     [77]    [110]
Red Bull, 8.4        28.98    29.26     0.28    29.36    28.82    -0.54     0.82
 ounces              (0.36)   (0.40)   (0.54)   (0.39)   (0.29)   (0.50)   (0.73)
                      [59]     [56]    [115]     [67]     [59]    [126]    [241]
Sprite, 20 ounces     9.32    10.22     0.90     9.14     9.54     0.40     0.50
                     (0.12)   (0.15)   (0.19)   (0.12)   (0.20)   (0.23)   (0.30)
                      [60]     [53]    [113]     [66]     [61]    [127]    [240]
Sprite, 2 liter       3.54     4.04     0.50     3.22     3.43     0.21     0.29
                     (0.06)   (0.09)   (0.11)   (0.08)   (0.14)   (0.16)   (0.20)
                      [51]     [42]     [93]     [61]     [55]    [116]    [209]

Untaxed
Beverages

Apple Juice,          7.65     7.32    -0.33     6.83     7.17     0.34    -0.67
 10-pack boxes       (0.51)   (0.28)   (0.55)   (1.22)   (0.62)   (1.65)   (1.85)
                       [5]      [6]     [11]      [8]      [5]     [13]     [24]
Apple Juice, 15.2    13.00    15.07     2.06    13.28    12.49    -0.78     2.85
 ounces              (0.28)   (0.87)   (0.76)   (0.30)   (0.37)   (0.51)   (0.93)
                      [34]      [6]     [40]     [41]     [18]     [59]     [99]
Aquafina, 20          8.53     8.85     0.32     7.87     7.79    -0.08     0.40
 ounces              (0.31)   (0.41)   (0.51)   (0.24)   (0.24)   (0.34)   (0.59)
                      [36]     [23]     [59]     [47]     [50]     [97]    [156]
Aquafina,             1.49     1.46    -0.03     1.39     1.42     0.03    -0.06
 24-pack 16.9        (0.06)   (0.02)   (0.06)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.06)   (0.09)
 ounces               [16]     [17]     [33]     [19]     [22]     [41]     [74]
Coke Zero, 20         9.46     9.90     0.44     9.21     9.53     0.32     0.12
 ounces              (0.14)   (0.18)   (0.22)   (0.15)   (0.25)   (0.29)   (0.38)
                      [43]     [41]     [84]     [57]     [52]    [109]    [193]
Coke Zero, 2 liter    3.73     3.36    -0.36     3.33     3.62     0.29    -0.65
                     (0.33)   (0.15)   (0.40)   (0.21)   (0.31)   (0.37)   (0.56)
                      [26]     [20]     [46]     [34]     [33]     [67]    [113]
Dasani, 20 ounces     8.45     8.68     0.23     8.05     8.20     0.14     0.09
                     (0.33)   (0.32)   (0.47)   (0.28)   (0.26)   (0.38)   (0.60)
                      [37]     [28]     [65]     [37]     [45]     [82]    [147]

                                       47
Dasani,                 1.44     1.49     0.05     1.38     1.46     0.08    -0.03
  24-pack 16.9         (0.08)   (0.06)   (0.10)   (0.04)   (0.05)   (0.07)   (0.12)
  ounces                [13]     [16]     [29]     [16]     [13]     [29]     [58]
Diet Arizona            6.45     8.02     1.57     6.39     6.33    -0.05     1.62
Iced Tea, 15.5         (0.00)   (1.63)   (2.11)   (0.00)   (0.14)   (0.34)   (1.36)
  ounces                 [2]      [3]      [5]      [2]     [11]     [13]     [18]
Diet Arizona            2.57     3.59     1.02     2.45     2.45     0.00     1.02
  Iced Tea, 1 gallon   (0.00)    n.a.     n.a.    (0.12)   (0.04)   (0.10)   (0.18)
                         [2]      [1]      [3]      [2]      [8]     [10]     [13]
Diet Coke,              4.42     4.63     0.21     4.14     4.22     0.08     0.12
 12-pack 12            (0.09)   (0.17)   (0.18)   (0.12)   (0.07)   (0.15)   (0.24)
 ounces                 [31]     [26]     [57]     [47]     [44]     [91]    [148]
Diet Coke, 20           9.38     9.75     0.36     9.19     9.43     0.24     0.12
 ounces                (0.11)   (0.18)   (0.21)   (0.12)   (0.21)   (0.24)   (0.33)
                        [56]     [53]    [109]     [65]     [64]    [129]    [238]
Diet Coke, 2 liter      3.49     3.71     0.22     3.30     3.30     0.00     0.22
                       (0.06)   (0.14)   (0.14)   (0.13)   (0.06)   (0.15)   (0.21)
                        [46]     [36]     [82]     [63]     [55]    [118]    [200]
Diet Lipton             9.75     n.a.     n.a.     8.00     9.95     1.95     n.a.
 Iced Tea, 20           0.25     n.a.     n.a.     n.a.     n.a.     n.a.     n.a.
 ounces                  [0]      [0]      [2]      [1]      [1]      [2]      [2]
Diet Pepsi,             4.27     4.67     0.40     4.00     4.14     0.14     0.26
 12-pack 12            (0.10)   (0.15)   (0.18)   (0.13)   (0.10)   (0.17)   (0.25)
 ounces                 [30]     [25]     [55]     [39]     [34]     [73]    [128]
Diet Pepsi, 20          9.39     9.75     0.35     9.04     9.29     0.24     0.11
 ounces                (0.11)   (0.19)   (0.21)   (0.14)   (0.12)   (0.19)   (0.28)
                        [53]     [44]     [97]     [66]     [59]    [125]    [222]
Diet Pepsi, 2 liter     3.45     3.80     0.36     3.25     3.20    -0.05     0.41
                       (0.09)   (0.15)   (0.17)   (0.13)   (0.06)   (0.15)   (0.23)
                        [40]     [30]     [70]     [51]     [48]     [99]    [169]
Gatorade G2, 20         9.40    10.61     1.21     8.08     8.43     0.35     0.86
 ounces                (0.25)   (1.09)   (0.73)   (0.49)   (0.55)   (0.73)   (1.16)
                        [13]      [4]     [17]     [14]     [13]     [27]     [44]
Gatorade G2,            4.49     5.25     0.76     3.88     3.52    -0.36     1.12
 8-pack 20 ounces      (0.33)   (0.45)   (0.62)   (0.31)   (0.11)   (0.29)   (0.65)
                         [4]      [6]     [10]      [5]      [7]     [12]     [22]
Red Bull Sugar         23.51    24.38     0.87    23.97    23.98     0.01     0.86
 Free, 4-pack          (0.47)   (0.71)   (0.83)   (0.44)   (0.38)   (0.58)   (1.03)
 8.4 ounces             [14]     [12]     [26]     [26]     [34]     [60]     [86]
Red Bull Sugar         28.93    29.18     0.24    29.21    28.78    -0.43     0.68
 Free, 8.4 ounces      (0.36)   (0.51)   (0.61)   (0.40)   (0.31)   (0.52)   (0.80)
                        [58]     [52]    [110]     [63]     [57]    [120]    [230]
Tropicana 100%         16.65    17.49     0.84    16.18    17.06     0.88    -0.04
 Orange Juice,         (0.39)   (0.88)   (0.90)   (0.33)   (0.89)   (0.91)   (1.31)
 12 ounces              [26]     [21]     [47]     [34]     [30]     [64]    [111]
Tropicana 100%          8.43     8.55     0.11     8.18     8.45     0.27    -0.16
 Orange Juice,         (0.23)   (0.30)   (0.38)   (0.28)   (0.17)   (0.32)   (0.49)
 59 ounces              [21]     [23]     [44]     [25]     [29]     [54]     [98]




                                         48
Notes: See Table 1 and Appendix Table 1. For a few products, there are not enough recorded
prices to calculate standard errors and difference-in-differences estimates.




                                             49
Appendix Table A2. Characteristics of Exit Interview Respondents

                                  Pre-tax                               Post-tax
                     Oakland    Comparison   Difference    Oakland     Comparison   Difference
 Age                  40.20        41.34       -1.14        39.71        40.67        -0.97
                      (0.62)      (0.79)       (1.00)       (0.68)       (0.58)       (0.89)
 Female               64.54        66.80        2.26        60.08        65.48         5.40
                      (3.07)      (2.69)       (4.08)       (2.97)       (3.03)       (4.24)
 Hispanic             26.30        31.16        4.86        23.60        32.78         9.18
                      (2.86)      (2.68)       (3.92)       (2.21)       (3.10)       (3.81)
 African-             49.22        30.32       18.89        53.96        30.19        23.77
  American            (3.65)      (2.69)       (4.54)       (2.91)       (2.61)       (3.90)
 White                13.05        21.42        8.37        16.03        25.77         9.74
                      (2.14)      (2.78)       (3.50)       (2.13)       (2.80)       (3.52)
 Other Race or        37.73        48.26       10.53        30.01        44.04        14.03
  Multi-Racial        (4.06)      (3.03)       (5.06)       (2.54)       (3.86)       (4.61)
 Household             4.26        4.42         0.16         4.20         4.41         0.22
  Size                (0.08)      (0.09)       (0.12)       (0.11)       (0.10)       (0.15)
 Below 185% FPL       60.77        54.73        6.03        56.05        46.89         9.17
                      (4.14)      (3.07)       (5.15)       (2.99)       (3.58)       (4.66)

 Observations          785          797         1,582         741         767         1,508

Notes: The figures represent the mean characteristics of the exit interview respondents at
Oakland stores and stores in comparison communities prior to the tax (April-June 2017) and after
implementation of the tax (April-June 2018). Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                              50
Appendix Table A3. Characteristics of Household Survey Respondents

                                                      Comparison
                                      Oakland         Communities Difference
 Age (adult)                            41.41            41.41         0.00
                                        (1.21)           (1.80)       (2.17)
 Age (child)                             8.52             8.66        -0.15
                                        (0.47)           (0.41)       (0.62)
 Female (adult)                          0.74             0.79        -0.04
                                        (0.04)           (0.04)       (0.06)
 Female (child)                          0.46             0.42         0.04
                                        (0.05)           (0.05)       (0.07)
 Hispanic                                0.23             0.29        -0.06
                                        (0.06)           (0.05)       (0.08)
 African-American                        0.49             0.39         0.10
                                        (0.05)           (0.05)       (0.07)
 White                                   0.16             0.19        -0.03
                                        (0.04)           (0.04)       (0.05)
 Other Race                              0.35             0.42        -0.07
                                        (0.06)           (0.05)       (0.08)
 Household Size                          3.97             4.59        -0.62
                                        (0.13)           (0.21)       (0.24)
 Household income below                  0.41             0.36         0.05
  poverty level                         (0.05)           (0.05)       (0.07)
 Household income below 185%             0.64             0.58         0.07
  poverty level                         (0.04)           (0.04)       (0.06)
 High School Graduate                    0.65             0.64         0.01
                                        (0.05)           (0.05)       (0.07)
 SNAP Recipient                          0.69             0.71        -0.02
                                        (0.06)           (0.08)       (0.10)
 WIC Recipient                           0.48             0.49        -0.01
                                        (0.08)           (0.09)       (0.12)
 Free or Reduced-Price Lunch             0.76             0.73         0.03
   Recipient                            (0.06)           (0.07)       (0.09)

 Observations                            193              218          411

Notes: This table reports the mean characteristics of adults and children living in Oakland and in
the comparison communities who responded to both waves of the household survey and the
differences between the two groups. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                 51
Appendix Table A4: Average Price per Ounce of Beverages Before and After the
Implementation of the SSB Tax (One Cent per Ounce) in Oakland among stores in the balanced
panel

                             Stores in Oakland                   Comparison Stores
                     2017          2018    Difference    2017         2018     Difference    DiD
 Taxed               7.92          9.01        1.09      7.59         8.06         0.47      0.62
   Beverages        (0.27)        (0.31)     (0.42)     (0.28)       (0.29)      (0.40)     (0.58)
                    [816]         [767]      [1583]     [932]        [986]       [1918]     [3501]

 Untaxed            10.09        10.47       0.38        9.16         9.31        0.15       0.23
  Beverages         (0.39)       (0.48)     (0.62)      (0.35)       (0.39)      (0.52)     (0.81)
                    [560]        [493]      [1053]      [703]        [732]       [1435]     [2488]


Notes: This table shows the mean price per ounce among beverages for the listed categories.
Standard errors are in parentheses, and sample sizes are in brackets. The sample sizes are store-
beverage combinations. There were 61 stores in Oakland and 75 stores in the Oakland MSA.
Taxed beverages include regular soda, sports drinks, energy drinks, juice drinks, and sweetened
iced tea. Untaxed beverages include diet soda, other diet drinks (unsweetened sports drinks,
energy drinks, and iced tea), 100% fruit juice, and bottled water).
DiD = difference-in-differences.




                                                  52
Appendix Table A5: Average Price per Ounce of Beverages by Type of Beverage Before and
After the Implementation of the SSB Tax (One Cent per Ounce) in Oakland

                          Stores in Oakland                  Comparison Stores
                    2017        2018    Difference     2017       2018     Difference     DiD
 Taxed              7.95        8.94        1.00       7.91       8.24         0.33       0.66
   Beverages       (0.22)      (0.25)      (0.33)     (0.22)     (0.22)       (0.31)     (0.46)
                   [905]       [767]      [1,672]    [1,048]     [986]       [2,034]    [3,706]

 Regular Soda       6.09      7.02         0.93       5.86       6.14         0.28        0.65
                   (0.12)    (0.13)       (0.18)     (0.11)     (0.12)       (0.16)      (0.24)
                   [614]     [527]       [1,141]     [737]      [682]       [1,419]     [2,560]

 Sports Drink       8.09      8.47        0.38        7.53       8.26        0.73       -0.35
                   (0.28)    (0.33)      (0.43)      (0.29)     (0.28)      (0.40)      (0.59)
                    [67]      [53]       [120]        [70]       [63]       [133]       [253]

 Energy Drink      27.74     28.38        0.63       27.44      26.88       -0.56        1.19
                   (0.40)    (0.41)      (0.57)      (0.39)     (0.32)      (0.50)      (0.77)
                    [76]      [72]       [148]       [102]      [101]       [203]       [351]

 Juice Drink        6.20      6.82        0.62        5.52       6.12        0.60        0.02
                   (0.34)    (0.42)      (0.54)      (0.38)     (0.37)      (0.53)      (0.76)
                    [76]      [57]       [133]        [69]       [73]       [142]       [275]

 Sweet Tea          4.60      4.84        0.23        3.74       3.86        0.12        0.11
                   (0.26)    (0.26)      (0.37)      (0.14)     (0.17)      (0.22)      (0.43)
                    [72]      [58]       [130]        [70]       [67]       [137]       [267]

 Untaxed            9.92     10.16         0.24       9.51       9.49        -0.03        0.27
  Beverages        (0.31)    (0.36)       (0.48)     (0.28)     (0.28)       (0.40)      (0.62)
                   [608]     [493]       [1,101]     [762]      [732]       [1,494]     [2,595]

 Diet Soda          6.43      6.92        0.49        6.06       6.24        0.18         0.31
                   (0.16)    (0.19)      (0.25)      (0.14)     (0.16)      (0.21)       (0.33)
                   [325]     [275]       [600]       [422]      [389]       [811]       [1,411]

 Other Diet        23.00     24.51        1.51       23.20      20.53       -2.67        4.18
                   (0.95)    (1.01)      (1.39)      (0.88)     (0.90)      (1.26)      (1.91)
                    [95]      [78]       [173]       [113]      [131]       [244]       [417]

 Water              6.49      5.90       -0.60        6.02       6.22        0.20       -0.80
                   (0.35)    (0.42)      (0.55)      (0.30)     (0.29)      (0.42)      (0.68)
                   [102]      [84]       [186]       [119]      [130]       [249]       [435]

 Juice             12.68     12.47       -0.21       12.53      12.41       -0.12       -0.09
                   (0.39)    (0.69)      (0.74)      (0.37)     (0.55)      (0.64)      (0.98)
                    [86]      [56]       [142]       [108]       [82]       [190]       [332]




                                               53
Notes: This table shows the mean price per ounce among beverages for the listed categories.
Standard errors are in parentheses, and sample sizes are in brackets. The sample sizes are store-
beverage combinations. In Oakland, there were 70 stores in April-June 2017 and 61 stores in
April-June 2018. In the Oakland MSA, there were 87 comparison stores in April-June 2017 and
75 stores in April-June 2018.




                                                54
Appendix Table A6: The Impact of the SSB Tax on Prices and Product Availability by Beverage
Type

                                            Price
                             Full Sample      Balanced Sample         Availability
 All Taxed Beverages             0.56               0.61                -7.71
                                (0.11)             (0.11)               (2.13)
                               [3,706]            [2,961]              [6,210]

 Regular Soda                    0.57                 0.63              -12.58
                                (0.10)               (0.10)              (4.34)
                               [2,560]              [2,149]             [2,568]

 Sports Drink                    0.49                0.44                -9.72
                                (0.27)              (0.29)               (7.58)
                                [253]               [205]                [432]

 Energy Drink                    0.86                0.73                -5.99
                                (0.48)              (0.47)               (7.24)
                                [351]               [290]                [356]

 Juice Drink                     0.65                0.51                -10.44
                                (0.32)              (0.34)               (6.97)
                                [275]               [140]                 [912]

 Sweet Tea                       0.36                0.32                -8.40
                                (0.15)              (0.15)               (6.64)
                                [267]               [177]                [594]

 All Untaxed Beverages           0.26                 0.21               -5.24
                                (0.13)               (0.12)              (1.50)
                               [2,595]              [1,928]             [6,256]

 Diet Soda                       0.13                 0.21               -6.80
                                (0.13)               (0.12)              (4.51)
                               [1,411]              [1,138]             [1,744]

 Other Diet                      0.70                0.69               -14.23
                                (0.46)              (0.51)               (5.36)
                                [417]               [271]               [1,792]

 Water                          -0.07               -0.17                -15.15
                                (0.16)              (0.15)               (5.48)
                                [435]               [330]                 [792]

 Juice                           0.49                0.03                -3.47
                                (0.76)              (0.63)               (5.28)
                                [332]               [189]                [888]
Notes: The first two columns show the DiD estimates in cents per ounce (full pass-through is 1.0
cent per ounce) for the beverage category in the row heading and the sample of stores in the

                                               55
column heading. The results in the third column represent the average percentage point change in
the availability of beverages in Oakland within the given beverage type compared to the
comparison stores. Standard errors, which are robust to clustering at the store level, are in
parentheses, and sample sizes are in brackets. The sample sizes are store-beverage combinations.
Each cell contains the results from a separate regression. Additional variables that are included,
but not shown, are a binary variable indicating that the price or product availability is from after
implementation of the tax, store fixed effects, and product fixed effects.




                                                56
Appendix Table A7: Variation in Pass-Through Estimates by Subgroup (Binary Variables)

                                                All Taxed Beverages         Regular Soda
 Store type
 Large grocery store (reference category)               0.45                    0.36
                                                       (0.27)                  (0.27)
  Pharmacy                                              0.55                    0.65
                                                       (0.28)                  (0.28)
  Small grocery                                        -0.48                   -0.12
                                                       (0.48)                  (0.42)
  Convenience store                                    -0.02                    0.14
                                                       (0.33)                  (0.34)
  Gas station                                           0.47                    0.51
                                                       (0.33)                  (0.31)

 Chain/independent stores
 Independent retailers (reference category)             0.30                    0.41
                                                       (0.20)                  (0.18)
  Chain stores                                          0.47                    0.32
                                                       (0.24)                  (0.22)

 Container size
 Small Single- Serving (reference category)             0.57                    0.69
                                                       (0.17)                  (0.17)
  Large Containers                                      0.01                   -0.17
                                                       (0.16)                  (0.17)
  Multi-Packs                                           0.20                   -0.06
                                                       (0.26)                  (0.19)

 Observations                                          2,961                   2,149

Notes: The values for the reference groups are the impacts on prices for the groups (for example,
pass-through for large grocery stores is 0.45 for taxed beverages). These groups serve as the
comparison for the other columns. The values in the other columns represent the differential
impacts for the store type compared to reference groups, estimated as the interaction between the
store type indicators and the differences-in-differences interaction term. Standard errors, which
are robust to clustering at the store level are in parentheses. The sample sizes are store-beverage
combinations. Each row contains the results from a separate regression for the specified beverage
category. Additional variables that are included, but not shown, are a binary variable indicating
that the price is from after implementation of the tax, store fixed effects, and product fixed
effects.




                                                57
Appendix Table A8: Variation in Pass-Through Estimates by Subgroup (Continuous Variables)

                                                     All Taxed Beverages         Regular Soda
 Travel Time to Closest Untaxed Competitor
 Oakland x 2017                                             0.61                     0.63
                                                           (0.11)                   (0.10)
 Oakland x 2017 x Time                                      0.04                     0.03
                                                           (0.05)                   (0.05)

 Distance to Closest Untaxed Competitor
 Oakland x 2017                                             0.61                     0.63
                                                           (0.11)                   (0.10)
 Oakland x 2017 x Distance                                  0.16                     0.13
                                                           (0.12)                   (0.11)

 Percentage of Households in Poverty
 Oakland x 2017                                             0.60                     0.62
                                                           (0.11)                   (0.10)
 Oakland x 2017 x Population                               -0.17                    -0.17
                                                           (0.07)                   (0.07)

 Percentage of Population African-American
 Oakland x 2017                                             0.62                     0.64
                                                           (0.11)                   (0.10)
 Oakland x 2017 x Population                               -0.13                    -0.11
                                                           (0.08)                   (0.07)

 Percentage of Population Hispanic
 Oakland x 2017                                             0.61                     0.63
                                                           (0.11)                   (0.10)
 Oakland x 2017 x Population                               -0.05                    -0.07
                                                           (0.05)                   (0.05)

 Observations                                              2,149                     2,149

Notes: The triple interaction represents the change in the DiD estimate for a one-unit change in
the subgroup variable: (1) one-minute increase in the travel time between stores and the closest
untaxed competitor (excludes stores outside of Oakland but in other communities with a soda
tax, i.e., Albany, Berkeley, and San Francisco), (2) one-mile increase in the travel time between
stores and the closest untaxed competitor, (3) an increase of 10 percentage points in the local
population characteristic. Given that the subgroup values are centered at the mean, Oakland x
2017 is estimated at the mean value for the subgroups, which are 6.63 minutes and 1.91 miles for
all stores. The mean percentage of households in poverty is 17.45 percent. The mean percentage
African-American is 24.37 percent. The mean percentage Hispanic is 27.17 percent. Standard
errors, which are robust to clustering at the store level, are in parentheses. The sample sizes are
store-beverage combinations. Additional variables that are included, but not shown, are a binary
variable indicating that the price is from after implementation of the tax, store fixed effects, and
product fixed effects.


                                                58
Appendix Table A9: Variation in Impacts on Availability by Subgroup (Binary Variables)
                                               Taxed       Regular      Untaxed        Diet     Water
                                              Beverages     Soda       Beverages       Soda
 Store type
 Large grocery store (reference category)       -5.06       -8.67         -1.51        11.04    -15.16
                                                (4.93)     (10.26)       (3.24)        (9.92)    (9.33)
  Pharmacy                                       3.50        8.86          1.07         6.35     16.33
                                                (3.50)     (21.31)       (3.83)       (17.47)   (13.20)
  Small grocery                                -13.61      -18.84        -11.06       -40.60    -31.44
                                               (13.61)     (15.46)       (6.86)       (16.28)   (15.70)
  Convenience store                             < 0.01       1.84         -8.31       -21.56     -6.04
                                                (8.78)     (17.86)       (6.28)       (16.40)   (15.38)
  Gas station                                   -4.25        2.13         -7.37       -23.27      4.29
                                                (4.25)     (16.05)       (5.62)       (15.02)   (15.72)


 Chain/independent stores
 Independent retailers (reference category)    -11.83      -13.93        -8.79        -13.89    -27.51
                                               (4.84)       (7.92)       (3.58)        (8.34)    (7.73)
  Chain stores                                  9.19         4.68         6.71         19.97     20.51
                                               (5.58)      (12.77)       (3.98)       (11.95)   (10.22)

 Container size
 Small Single-Serving (reference category)     -3.35        -7.36        -4.96        -1.03     -41.06
                                               (4.54)      (10.32)       (2.10)       (9.48)    (9.54)
  Large Containers                             -7.98        -9.03         1.50        -9.55       n.a.
                                               (5.31)      (11.15)       (2.60)       (9.08)      n.a.
  Multi-Packs                                  -4.56        -3.11        -1.07        -7.11      41.29
                                               (4.89)      (10.76)       (3.64)       (9.00)    (9.74)

 Observations                                   6,210        2,568         6,256       1,744     792

Notes: The values for the reference groups are the impacts on availability for the groups (for
example, availability of taxed beverages declined by 5.06 percentage points in large grocery
stores). These groups serve as the comparison for the other columns. The values in the other
columns represent the differential impacts for the store type compared to reference groups,
estimated as the interaction between the store type indicators and the differences-in-differences
interaction term. Standard errors, which are robust to clustering at the store level, are in
parentheses, and sample sizes are in brackets. The sample sizes are store-beverage combinations.
Each row contains the results from a separate regression for the specified beverage category.
Additional variables that are included, but not shown, are a binary variable indicating that the
price is from after implementation of the tax, store fixed effects, and product fixed effects. Note,
we did not collect price information for any large containers of water.




                                                 59
Appendix Table A10: Variation in Impacts on Availability by Subgroup (Continuous Variables)
                                                   Taxed       Regular     Untaxed      Diet    Water
                                                  Beverages     Soda      Beverages     Soda
 Travel Time to Closest Untaxed Competitor
 Oakland x 2017                                      -7.68     -12.69       -5.21      -6.83    -15.29
                                                     (2.79)    (6.09)       (1.96)     (6.03)   (5.27)
 Oakland x 2017 x Time                               -0.83      -2.09       -0.41       0.20     -3.03
                                                     (0.96)    (1.94)       (0.75)     (2.22)   (2.24)

 Distance to Closest Untaxed Competitor
 Oakland x 2017                                      -7.71     -12.56       -5.22      -6.75    -15.70
                                                     (2.80)    (6.16)       (1.95)     (6.10)   (5.26)
 Oakland x 2017 x Distance                           -0.27      -0.96       -1.78      -0.87    -13.15
                                                     (2.65)    (6.10)       (1.82)     (6.01)   (6.40)

 Percentage of Households in Poverty
 Oakland x 2017                                      -7.48     -12.84       -5.73      -8.19    -18.26
                                                     (2.79)    (6.19)       (1.99)     (5.96)   (5.32)
 Oakland x 2017 x Population                         -0.36      -0.04       -1.96      -7.09     -7.26
                                                     (1.89)    (3.95)       (1.36)     (4.04)   (3.15)

 Percentage of Population African-American
 Oakland x 2017                                      -7.01     -12.03       -5.59      -8.09    -16.89
                                                     (2.85)    (6.10)       (1.98)     (5.91)   (5.48)
 Oakland x 2017 x Population                          2.70      7.44        -1.07      -0.93     -5.37
                                                     (1.85)    (3.90)       (1.16)     (3.63)   (3.02)

 Percentage of Population Hispanic
 Oakland x 2017                                      -7.72     -11.50       -5.61      -6.00    -16.37
                                                     (2.76)    (5.97)       (1.94)     (5.71)   (5.52)
 Oakland x 2017 x Population                         -2.05      -3.93       -2.25      -7.47     -2.50
                                                     (1.34)    (2.66)       (0.99)     (2.72)   (2.39)

 Observations                                        6,210      2,568       6,256       1,744     792

Notes: The triple interaction represents the change in the DiD estimate for a one-unit change in
the subgroup variable: (1) one-minute increase in the travel time between stores and the closest
untaxed competitor (excludes stores outside of Oakland but in other communities with a soda
tax, i.e., Albany, Berkeley, and San Francisco), (2) one-mile increase in the travel time between
stores and the closest untaxed competitor, (3) an increase of 10 percentage points in the local
population characteristic. Given that the subgroup values are centered at the mean, Oakland x
2017 is estimated at the mean value for the subgroups, which are 6.63 minutes and 1.91 miles for
all stores. The mean percentage of households in poverty is 17.45 percent. The mean percentage
African-American is 24.37 percent. The mean percentage Hispanic is 27.17 percent. Standard
errors, which are robust to clustering at the store level, are in parentheses. The sample sizes are
store-beverage combinations. Additional variables that are included, but not shown, are a binary
variable indicating that the price is from after implementation of the tax, store fixed effects, and
product fixed effects.

                                                60
Appendix Table A11. Variation in Impacts on Beverage Purchases (Ounces) by Subgroup


                                                  African-
                               Full Sample        American         Hispanic     Below 185% FPL
 Taxed Beverages                  -11.33           -28.18           -20.51           -14.26
                                  (8.36)           (14.59)         (17.20)          (10.80)
                                 [2,720]            [2,720]         [2,720]         [2,720]

 Untaxed Beverages                10.07               30.09          -3.79             1.84
                                 (15.65)             (13.61)       (26.21)           (15.52)
                                 [2,726]             [2,726]       [ 2,726]          [ 2,726]

Notes: This table shows the difference-in-differences estimates for the ounces purchased for the
subgroups in the column headings for the products in the row headings. Standard errors, which
are robust to clustering at the store level, are in parentheses, and sample sizes are in brackets.
The rows contain the results of the second part of two-part regressions (GLM with a Poisson
distribution to estimate volume of beverages purchased). Additional variables that are included,
but not shown, are age, gender (indicator for female), whether the respondent is African-
American, whether the respondent is Hispanic, household size, whether household income is
below 185% of the FPL, whether the respondent is an Oakland resident, indicators for days of
the week, time of day, day of the study, whether the interview location is in Oakland, whether
the interview occurred after implementation of the tax, and store-type indicators.




                                                61
Appendix Table A12. Mean Consumption Before and After Implementation of the Beverage Tax
in Oakland

                            Residents of Oakland                 Residents of Comparison
                                                                      Communities
                 Pre-tax        Post-tax     Diff.          Pre-tax     Post-tax   Diff.       DiD
Adults
Added              18.10           19.25            1.15      28.04      28.17        0.13     1.02
 Sugars            (2.38)          (2.78)          (2.14)     (6.21)     (5.41)      (3.99)   (4.53)
                   [158]           [158]           [158]      [183]      [183]       [183]    [341]

Monthly
Frequency
Taxed              22.63           23.45            0.83      36.91      39.18        2.27    -1.44
  Beverages        (3.11)          (3.36)          (3.03)     (9.21)     (7.75)      (6.84)   (7.48)
                   [169]           [169]           [169]      [200]      [200]       [200]    [369]
Regular Soda       14.86           14.57           -0.29      18.19      20.58        2.39    -2.69
                   (2.32)          (2.48)          (2.01)     (4.59)     (5.09)      (3.58)   (4.10)
                   [178]           [178]           [178]      [205]      [205]       [205]    [383]
Sweetened           8.76           10.38            1.62      18.58      19.42        0.85     0.77
  Fruit Drinks     (1.56)          (1.68)          (1.77)     (4.61)     (4.40)      (5.42)   (5.71)
                   [179]           [179]           [179]      [207]      [207]       [207]    [386]
Untaxed           179.94          170.52        -9.42        192.13      154.35     -37.78     28.37
  Beverages       (15.19)         (12.15)      (20.13)       (14.70)     (12.81)    (12.99)   (23.95)
                   [153]           [153]        [153]         [176]       [176]      [176]     [329]
Diet Soda           2.34            2.72            0.38       3.24       4.03        0.80    -0.41
                   (0.55)          (0.79)          (0.68)     (0.80)     (1.34)      (1.39)   (1.55)
                   [187]           [187]           [187]      [213]      [213]       [213]    [400]

Bottled Water      59.51           56.21           -3.30      62.94      59.07       -3.87     0.57
                   (5.71)          (5.78)          (5.02)     (6.92)     (7.42)      (7.34)   (8.89)
                   [179]           [179]           [179]      [206]      [206]       [206]    [385]
Coffee             26.33           28.11         1.78         36.58      28.71        -7.87     9.65
                   (2.25)          (2.97)       (2.91)        (5.19)     (3.55)      (5.19)    (5.95)
                   [181]           [181]        [181]         [203]      [203]        [203]    [384]
Milk               28.42           32.49         4.07         35.33      31.69        -3.64     7.71
                   (3.72)          (4.88)       (4.15)        (3.56)     (4.00)      (4.38)    (6.03)
                   [179]           [179]        [179]         [202]      [202]        [202]    [381]
Juice              18.38           21.60         3.22         26.02      23.18        -2.84     6.06
                   (2.44)          (3.75)       (3.03)        (3.73)     (4.22)      (4.39)    (5.34)
                   [180]           [180]        [180]         [202]      [202]        [202]    [382]
Tap Water          60.47           47.80       -12.67         49.69      34.04       -15.65     2.98
                  (15.23)          (5.35)      (16.16)        (6.89)     (4.51)      (6.06)   (17.26)
                   [174]           [174]        [174]         [205]      [205]        [205]    [379]

Children

                                                     62
Added              11.94        14.23         2.29       13.49       15.88       2.39     -0.10
 Sugars            (1.72)       (2.84)       (2.06)      (1.87)      (2.64)     (2.37)    (3.14)
                   [148]        [148]        [148]       [170]       [170]      [170]     [318]

Monthly
Frequency
Taxed              21.81        22.42         0.61       21.90       21.02      -0.87      1.48
  Beverages        (3.52)       (3.82)       (3.23)      (3.65)      (3.05)     (3.16)    (4.52)
                   [158]        [158]        [158]       [182]       [182]      [182]     [340]
Regular Soda        9.36        10.76         1.40        7.96        9.82       1.86     -0.46
                   (1.70)       (2.54)       (2.42)      (1.19)      (1.28)     (1.30)    (2.75)
                   [172]        [172]        [172]       [197]       [197]      [197]     [369]

Sweetened          12.82        11.00        -1.82       14.39       12.07      -2.33      0.50
  Fruit drinks     (2.79)       (2.10)       (1.70)      (2.92)      (2.23)     (2.44)    (2.98)
                   [160]        [160]        [160]       [185]       [185]      [185]     [345]
Untaxed            162.47      152.11       -10.36      159.63      144.70     -14.93       4.57
  Beverages        (11.95)     (10.76)      (14.78)     (9.67)      (8.91)     (11.07)    (18.47)
                    [133]       [133]        [133]       [161]       [161]      [161]      [294]

Bottled water      42.33        38.97        -3.36       52.10       46.51      -5.58      2.22
                   (5.30)       (4.26)       (4.71)      (6.61)      (4.51)     (7.34)    (8.73)
                   [164]        [164]        [164]       [191]       [191]      [191]     [355]
Coffee              3.70         2.23        -1.46        5.47        8.43       2.96     -4.42
                   (1.08)       (0.60)       (1.08)      (1.40)      (2.98)     (3.23)    (3.40)
                   [165]        [165]        [165]       [194]       [194]      [194]     [359]
Milk               45.09        47.91         2.82       46.37       36.97      -9.41      12.23
                   (4.83)       (5.18)       (4.28)      (4.14)      (2.99)     (3.62)     (5.60)
                   [162]        [162]        [162]       [196]       [196]      [196]      [358]
Juice              21.10        23.35         2.25       23.66       25.16       1.50       0.75
                   (2.60)       (3.15)       (2.68)      (2.39)      (3.00)     (2.08)     (3.39)
                   [166]        [166]        [166]       [188]       [188]      [188]      [354]
Tap Water          51.73        44.03        -7.70       34.86       33.56      -1.30      -6.40
                   (9.37)       (6.53)      (10.10)      (4.85)      (4.67)     (5.05)    (11.29)
                   [162]        [162]        [162]       [184]       [184]      [184]      [346]


Notes: The figures are the unconditional mean values for the outcome variables (grams of added
sugars and frequency of consumption per month by beverage type) for adults and children by
time and location. Standard errors are in parentheses. Sample sizes are in brackets. Added sugars
are measured in grams, and beverage frequency is measured in times consumed per month.
DiD = difference-in-differences.




                                               63
Appendix Table A13. The Impact of the Beverage Tax on Consumption among Household
Survey Participants with Complete Beverage Records Before and After the Tax was
Implemented

                                                 Adults                Children

 Grams of Added Sugars                           -3.20                   0.26
                                                (3.726)                (3.105)
                                                 [341]                  [318]

 Frequency of Consumption (Times/Month)

 All Taxed Beverages                             -9.20                   1.70
                                                (6.513)                (4.049)
                                                 [341]                  [318]

 Regular Soda                                    -4.95                   1.48
                                                (4.122)                (2.327)
                                                 [341]                  [318]


 Sweetened fruit drinks                          -6.75                   0.45
                                                (5.212)                (2.582)
                                                 [341]                  [318]


 Energy Drinks                                                          -0.74
                                                                       (3.518)
                                                                        [156]


 Untaxed Beverages                               13.86                   4.52
                                                (16.947)               (14.312)
                                                 [329]                  [294]


 Diet Soda                                       -0.38                   0.21
                                                (1.786)                (0.443)
                                                 [329]                  [294]


 Bottled Water                                    6.79                  -2.50
                                                (8.713)                (6.509)
                                                 [329]                  [294]


 Coffee                                           1.81
                                                (4.923)
                                                 [327]


                                          64
 Juice                                                 1.07                    -2.85
                                                     (4.967)                  (3.819)
                                                      [329]                    [294]


 Milk                                                  4.62                     7.63
                                                     (5.833)                  (5.269)
                                                      [329]                    [294]


 Tap Water                                             2.83                     3.70
                                                     (6.545)                 (10.144)
                                                      [329]                    [294]


Notes: The figures represent the change in the outcome for households in Oakland relative to
those in the comparison communities. Standard errors are in parentheses. Sample sizes are in
brackets. The mean values before implementation of the tax are reported in italics below the
sample sizes. Added sugars are measured in grams, and beverage frequency is measured in times
consumed per month. All regressions were estimated with sample weights and standard errors
clustered at the store level.
n.a. = not applicable. We did not ask adults separate questions about consumption of energy
drinks; energy drinks are included in the questions about sweetened fruit drinks. We collected
information about coffee consumption among children, but very few responded that they drink
any coffee.




                                              65
Appendix Table A14. Variation in Impacts on Consumption by Subgroups
                                                                  Times consumed regular
                                       Grams of sugar per day        soda per month
                                       Adults         Children     Adults      Children
Individual Characteristics
Male                                     2.43          -1.93       -2.33          0.74
                                        (7.98)         (4.83)      (7.29)        (3.46)
                                         [72]          [158]        [85]         [183]
                                        24.52          12.48       16.30          8.38
African-American                        -1.89           6.31       -5.35          3.79
                                        (5.96)         (4.61)      (4.37)        (3.87)
                                        [160]          [144]       [181]         [175]
                                        23.70          18.52       16.50         11.47
Hispanic                                 2.01           1.22       -0.54          0.65
                                       (4.845)         (4.46)      (4.77)        (4.09)
                                         [84]           [76]        [89]          [81]
                                        18.10          11.46       14.58          7.82
Below FPL                                5.63           4.73        0.79          3.15
                                        (6.61)         (3.99)      (5.17)        (4.35)
                                        [128]          [117]       [140]         [136]
                                        35.89          16.07       23.40         10.05
Below 185% of the FPL                    3.57           4.92        0.03          1.52
                                        (4.58)         (2.96)      (3.50)        (2.97)
                                        [202]          [194]       [231]         [228]
                                        27.05          12.88       18.65          9.02
Household Member Receives SNAP           3.98          -8.12       -1.80         -6.42
 Benefits                               (6.83)         (5.52)      (7.47)        (2.90)
                                        [125]          [120]       [140]         [142]
                                        27.56          12.30       20.27         10.79
Household Member Receives WIC           -7.87          -9.87       -14.26        -9.98
 Benefits                              (10.29)         (7.44)      (11.92)       (4.55)
                                         [46]           [39]         [48]         [50]
                                        28.75           9.73        19.26         5.65
Sample Adults Have a                    -2.87           1.73       -4.45         -0.34
 High School Education or less          (6.84)         (3.12)      (5.71)        (2.89)
                                         128            122         148           142
                                        31.59          14.84       24.74         12.28
Child is Over Age 10                     n.a.           9.45           n.a.       9.09
                                         n.a.          (7.48)          n.a.      (8.39)
                                         n.a.          [121]           n.a.      [142]
                                         n.a.          22.27           n.a.      12.57
Attitudes Toward the Tax and SSBs
Sample Adult Supports Tax at            -4.17           n.a.       -2.35          n.a.
 Baseline                              (4.363)          n.a.       (3.01)         n.a.
                                        [159]           n.a.       [172]          n.a.

                                           66
                                    14.47     n.a.    9.45      n.a.
Sample Adult Agrees that SSBs are   -4.37     n.a.    -4.43     n.a.
 Bad for Health                     (3.85)    n.a.    (4.10)    n.a.
                                    [324]     n.a.    [360]     n.a.
                                    20.05     n.a.    14.51     n.a.

Sample Adult is Trying to Drink     -4.70     n.a.    -5.57     n.a.
 Fewer SSBs                         (3.87)    n.a.    (4.31)    n.a.
                                    [303]     n.a.    [339]     n.a.
                                    22.66     n.a.    15.91     n.a.
Cross-border shopping
Never Shops Outside Oakland         -5.31     n.a.    -15.30    n.a.
                                    (7.74)    n.a.    (7.20)    n.a.
                                     [87]     n.a.     [100]    n.a.
                                    20.52     n.a.     13.63    n.a.
Lives Far from nearest untaxed      -4.65     2.89    -3.54     1.73
  competitor (Top Quartile Based    (1.94)   (3.56)   (2.70)   (3.11)
  on Distance)                       [40]     [39]     [46]     [46]
                                    21.37     9.58    19.42     6.62

Notes: See Table 7.




                                       67
68
Appendix Figure A1. Impact of the Tax on Consumption of Added Sugars from SSBs (Adults)




Notes: The solid line shows the impact of the tax for various levels of baseline consumption of
added sugars. The shaded portion represents the 95 percent confidence interval for the impacts.




                                               69
Appendix Figure A2. Impact of the Tax on Consumption of Added Sugars from SSBs (Children)




Notes: The solid line shows the impact of the tax for various levels of baseline consumption of
added sugars. The shaded portion represents the 95 percent confidence interval for the impacts.




                                               70
Appendix Figure A3. Impact of the Tax on Monthly Consumption of Regular Soda (Adults)




Notes: The solid line shows the impact of the tax for various levels of baseline monthly
consumption of regular soda. The shaded portion represents the 95 percent confidence interval
for the impacts.




                                              71
Appendix Figure A4: Impact of the Tax on Monthly Consumption of Regular Soda (Children)




Notes: The solid line shows the impact of the tax for various levels of baseline monthly
consumption of regular soda. The shaded portion represents the 95 percent confidence interval
for the impacts.




                                              72
                  APPENDIX B


METHODS FOR ESTIMATING HETEROGENEITY OF IMPACTS




                      73
I. Methods

    a. Heterogeneity of the impact of the tax on prices and availability

        We estimate the differential impacts of the tax on prices by store type, chain versus
independent stores, product size, characteristics of the local population, and travel time to the
closest untaxed competitor. We estimate these impacts by including interaction terms of the DiD
term (Oaklands * Postt) and the given subgroup variable. For example, we estimate the
differential impact of the tax for chain stores relative to independent retailers by interacting an
indicator variable for chain stores with the DiD term in the model. We estimate the differential
impact of the tax by travel time to the closest untaxed competitor by interacting the continuous
travel time variable with the DiD term. 1
        We examine the differential impacts by type of store because they may have different
elasticities of supply and face different elasticities of demand. For example, people may have
relatively inelastic demand when shopping at a convenience store because they are not willing to
walk several blocks to an alternative store for just a few items. Large supermarkets may face
much more elastic demand because their customers are more likely to drive and can more easily
visit a competing store that offers lower prices.
        We also test whether pass-through differs for chain retailers versus independent retailers.
Managers of chain stores may have less discretion to set prices than owners of small,
independent stores if the chain stores require uniform pricing across stores (DellaVigna &
Gentzkow, 2017).
        We estimate the differential impact by product size, given that the elasticities of supply
and demand may vary across them. Consumers may not be price elastic for a single serving (e.g.,
a 20-ounce bottle) but may be more price-sensitive regarding 2-liter bottles or multi-packs (e.g.,
12-packs of 12-ounce cans), which may be purchased as part of a larger weekly trip for which
they drive.
        We also investigate the extent to which pass-through of the tax varies based on the
distance of the taxed store from the closest rival store selling untaxed beverages. This distance


1
  In this case, we define travel time to the closest untaxed competitor (a continuous variable) as zero for the
comparison stores in untaxed areas. Thus, we include the interaction between the DiD term and travel distance--but
not the interactions between travel distance and Oakland and travel distance and the post period because they are
identical to the travel time variable and the triple interaction, respectively.

                                                       74
estimates the ease to which that store's clientele can cross the border to evade the tax. Stores
closer to rivals selling untaxed beverages may pass through less of the tax than stores farther
from such competitors. Cawley and Frisvold (2017) and Cawley et al. (2018a) found evidence of
such a pattern in Berkeley and Philadelphia, respectively, while Cawley et al. (2018c) did not
find that the distance to the nearest untaxed competitor influenced the pass-through rate in
Boulder. We measure the ease of cross-border shopping as the travel time (for a vehicle in
minutes) from the store to the nearest untaxed competitor.
        We further estimate whether the pass-through rate varies by the characteristics of the
neighborhood surrounding the store. Given that individuals travel different distances, on average,
to convenience stores compared with grocery stores, we define the area of the neighborhood
differently for different store types. We focus on three characteristics of the local population: the
percentage of households in poverty, the percentage of the population that is African-American,
and the percentage of the population that is Hispanic. Whether the pass-through rate varies with
the local poverty rate is of interest for two reasons. First, Lin et al. (2011) find that the elasticity
of demand for regular soda is greater for individuals with greater incomes. Second, it sheds light
on how the burden of the tax differs across neighborhoods and whether the tax could be
regressive.
        We also examine heterogeneity in the impacts of the tax on beverage availability to
determine whether changes in availability might vary by store type, container size, time and
distance to untaxed beverages, and local population characteristics.
    b. Heterogeneity of the impact of the tax on purchases

        We estimate whether the relative change in purchases varied by the characteristics of
consumers. We focus on three characteristics: whether the consumer is African-American,
Hispanic, and living in a household that is below 185 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL),
a cutoff used for many federal program (e.g., the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
[SNAP] and the National School Lunch Program). We estimate the differential changes in
purchases for these groups by including interaction terms of the DiD term (Oaks * Postt) and the
given subgroup variable. For example, we estimate the change for households living below 185
percent of the FPL relative to those living above it by interacting an indicator variable for those
living below with the DiD term in the model.

    c. Heterogeneity of the impact of the tax on consumption
                                                   75
       To examine heterogeneity on the impact of the tax on consumption for adults and
children, we estimate the regressions for the consumption outcomes (equation 3) interacting 
with the following indicators: Hispanic ethnicity, African-American, household is below 185
percent of the FPL, member of household receives SNAP benefits, member of household
receives Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)
benefits, adult has a high school education or less, adult never shops for beverages outside of
Oakland at baseline, adult supports the tax at baseline, adult agrees that SSBs are bad for health
at baseline, adult is trying to consume fewer SSBs at baseline, and child is over 10 years of age.
We examine the impact of the tax by race, ethnicity, income, education, and public assistance to
determine whether any subgroups changed their consumption as a result of the tax. We also
examine the impact of the tax for those reporting that they do not shop outside of Oakland at
baseline because cross-border shopping is one way that individuals can avoid the impact of the
tax on their consumption of taxed beverages; thus, those not shopping for beverages outside of
the city could be more likely to reduce consumption as a result of the tax. Similarly, those who
supported the tax, who realized that SSBs are bad for their health, or who were trying to
consume fewer SSBs might be more likely to reduce their consumption of taxed beverages.
Finally, we are interested in whether older children, who are more likely to purchase beverages
on their own (and many of whom directly responded to the survey) and consume more SSBs on
average, changed their consumption of taxed and untaxed beverages.
       We also split the sample of Oakland households into two groups based on how far they
lived from the border. We estimate the impact of the tax separately for respondents whose
address was in the top quartile by distance to the city border (in effect, those who lived in the
middle of the city). Those living farther from the city border could have less opportunity to shop
outside of the city at untaxed stores, and thus could be more likely to reduce their consumption
of taxed beverages.
       Finally, we estimate the relationship between the impact of the tax and baseline
consumption level. Individuals who consume greater amounts of taxed beverages could be more
likely to reduce their consumption because they have more to gain in terms of health effects or
simply because they have more room to improve; conversely, they could be less likely to
improve if their consumption patterns are more ingrained. We estimate the relationships between
baseline consumption and the impact of the tax by adding spline terms for baseline consumption

                                                 76
with five knots to equation (3). We selected knots based on visual inspection of the distribution
of baseline consumption for each outcome and to ensure that each spline term was supported by
adequate numbers of observations.




                                                77
