                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS AND ACADEMIC PUBLISHING

                                      Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                           Tho Pham
                                       Oleksandr Talavera

                                      Working Paper 26240
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26240


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2019, Revised October 2019




Standard disclaimer applies. We are grateful to seminar participants at Cardiff University,
University of Reading, University of Birmingham, IÉSEG School of Management, and Kyiv
School of Economics for comments. We also thank Ideas.repec.org for sharing data. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Tho Pham, and Oleksandr Talavera. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Conference Presentations and Academic Publishing
Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Tho Pham, and Oleksandr Talavera
NBER Working Paper No. 26240
September 2019, Revised October 2019
JEL No. A11,I23,O29

                                         ABSTRACT

We quantify the contribution of conferences to publication success of more than 4,000 papers
presented at three leading economics conferences over the 2006-2012 period. We show a positive
link between conference presentation and the publishing probability in high-quality journals.
Participating in major conferences is also associated with improved metrics for other measures of
academic success such as the number of citations or abstract views. While the results are broadly
similar across fields, annual meetings of the American Economic Association are particularly
valuable in these dimensions. We also find that female authors appear to gain less from
conferences than male authors.

Yuriy Gorodnichenko                             Oleksandr Talavera
Department of Economics                         University of Birmingham
530 Evans Hall #3880                            Edgbaston
University of California, Berkeley              Birmingham
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                         B15 2TT
and IZA                                         United Kingdom
and also NBER                                   oleksandr.talavera@gmail.com
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu

Tho Pham
University of Reading
Department of Economics
Reading RG6 6UR
United Kingdom
anhthodav@gmail.com
           "ASSA is the premiere event to expose your work with colleagues and hear about the

           latest research emerging in the field. Economists from around the world take advantage

           of this unique opportunity to share, collaborate, and learn...all in one place." American

           Economic Association1

           "The Annual Conference is our flagship event. It brings together hundreds of academic and

           professional economists to present the latest developments in economics and showcase their

           real-world application." Royal Economic Society2

           "The EEA Annual Congress, which takes place at the end of August - early September, is a

           main event among the Association's activities." European Economic Association3




1      Introduction
Every year, thousands of economists flock to conferences organized by prominent professional

societies such as the American Economic Association (AEA), the European Economic Association

(EEA), and the Royal Economic Society (RES). While participating in these gatherings is

undoubtedly valuable, what exactly participants and, perhaps more importantly, presenters get from

these events remains unclear. A growing number of studies have investigated the benefits of

conferences and found a positive link between conference attendance and research productivity (e.g.,

Blau et al., 2010). Conferences also provide researchers with opportunities to expand their

collaboration (Campos et al., 2018) and advertise their works (Leon & McQuillin, 2018). However,

the publish-or-perish imperative of academic life likely dictates participation in these highly




1
    https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/about (Accessed on 29 January 2019)
2
    https://www.res.org.uk/event-listing/annual-conference.html (Accessed on 29 January 2019)
3
    https://www.eeassoc.org/index.php?page=12 (Accessed on 29 January 2019)


                                                        2
prestigious conferences and yet to what extent these annual rituals advance researchers in their

attempts to publish in scholarly journals is poorly measured and understood.

       In this study, we attempt to quantify the contribution of conference participation to

publication outcomes and other metrics of academic success. To this end, we assemble a

comprehensive dataset that contains information related to conference attendance, paper statistics,

and author statistics of papers presented at the annual conferences organized by AEA, EEA, and

RES during the 2006-2012 period.

       After documenting some facts for papers presented in a major conference and non-presented

papers, we examine how our results change after we control for a variety of author and paper

characteristics. We show that publication in any journal is not positively associated with conference

participation. At the same time, being presented at any of the considered conferences is positively

related to an increased probability of being published in a high-quality journal [where the quality is

measured with the rankings by the Association of Business Schools (ABS)]. The predicted increase

in the probability is large: participating in an AEA/EEA/RES conference is associated with an 1.3-

2.1 percentage point increase in probability of publication in an excellent or top-tier journal such as

American Economic Review, Econometrica, Journal of Political Economy, Review of Economics

and Statistics, and similar journals when the unconditional probability of publishing in these journals

is 2.8-5.2% in our sample. We document considerable heterogeneity in the contribution of

conferences to publication outcomes: participating in an AEA conference predicts a 4.8 percentage

point (!) increase in the probability of publishing in a top-tier journal while the corresponding figures

for EEA and RES conferences are close to zero. Interestingly, participating in a major conference is

associated with longer publication times (approximately six additional months) for mid-rank

journals but there is no difference to publication in a top-tier journal or a low-rank journal.

       Despite differences in how various fields of economics operate, we do not observe much

variation in how conferences contribute to publication outcomes e.g. macroeconomics vs. applied

                                                3
microeconomics. Likewise, we find no discernable contribution from sharing a session with a

prominent ("star") scholar, that is, a greater attendance from having a famous economist in a session

does not spill over into a greater probability of publication in any journal. Furthermore, there is a

"prime time" for presentation, that is, some times/days of a conference (e.g., the last session of the

last day) predict lower publication probabilities. We also study how conferences contribute to

citations and abstract views, proxies for impact and visibility, and we find that conference

participation is associated with increased values for these two statistics.

          Finally, we examine whether publication success rates after presenting in a major conference

are similar for female and male authors. This part of our analysis is important given that economics

is a male-dominated field and available evidence (AEA 2019) suggests that female economists can

find the field rather hostile. We document that presenting a paper authored by a female author does

not predict a higher probability of publication in a top economics journal. In contrast, the probability

for male authors is statistically and economically large. While we cannot interpret this evidence as

causally establishing discrimination, the difference in success rates is troubling given other facts on

the academic environment in economics.

          This study contributes to emergent literature on the production and dissemination of research

(e.g., Ductor et al., 2014; Iaria et al., 2018; Waldinger, 2016) 4 and is particularly related to studies

investigating the relationship between conference attendance and publication outcomes. For

instance, some papers in medical sciences (e.g., Galang et al., 2012; Winnik et al., 2012) find a

positive (albeit small in terms of size) correlation between abstract presentation at a conference and

publication likelihood. In a more recent study, Reinartz and Urban (2017) examine the link from a

different perspective: sorting conference quality based on the publication success of presented



4
    See also Boudreau et al. (2017), Belenzon and Schankerman (2013), Ding et al. (2016), McCabe and Snyder

(2015), Levin and Stephan (1991), Pinkowitz (2002).


                                                      4
papers.5 Our main contribution to this literature is in (1) providing comprehensive coverage of

economics conferences; (2) examining channels of how conferences might lead to publications; and

(3) investigating the link between conference presentation and paper impact and visibility; (4)

exploring potential heterogeneity in outcomes along a range of dimensions (gender, seniority, fields,

conferences, etc.).

          The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we will describe the data collecting

and assembling processes. We also discuss the summary statistics of our assembled samples in this

section. Section 3 presents the empirical specifications and result discussions. Finally, conclusion is

provided in Section 4.




2 Data and sample
2.1 Data collection and construction

This section describes the processes of collecting and assembling data used in the analysis. In

particular, we explain how we collected and screened the conference program database. Next, we

describe the process of collecting and assembling IDEAS/RePEc dataset which has information on

citations and publication outcomes. Finally, we discuss how we match these two databases.

2.1.1     Conference program data

The collection and construction of the conference program dataset are as follows. First, we used a

Python script to extract information from available online programs of three leading economic

conferences in the U.K., Europe, and the U.S. namely the Royal Economic Society Conference, the

Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, and the American Economic Association




5
    While not focusing on conference presentation, Blau et al. (2010) find that the workshop participation is

positively related to subsequent publication rates and successful grant applications.


                                                        5
Annual Meeting over the 2006-2012 period. We restrict our analysis to these seven years because of

availability of conference programs online and long lags in the publication process. The returned

information includes (1) presentation date and time, (2) assigned session of the presentation, (3)

presentation title, and (4) information on authors or presenters.

           Second, using title matching algorithm, we linked a given paper presented in a conference to

one version of a paper listed in IDEAS/RePEc. If the paper was never listed in IDEAS/RePEc, then

the search result returned an empty link. In some cases, there are variations between the papers' titles

listed in the conference program and the ones available in IDEAS/RePEc, thus the algorithm was

not able to match downloaded links with presented papers. We hand-checked all these cases to create

the most complete list of IDEAS/RePEc links of presented papers.6 The matched links then allowed

us to extract each paper's RePEc handle, which is an important field to match conference program

data with the IDEAS/RePEc statistics later.7

           Third, we kept only papers that were presented in the parallel/contributed/general sessions

(e.g., this excludes presidential addresses). Due to missing data for papers presented in the European

Meeting of the Econometric Society (ESEM) sessions in 2010, we excluded all papers presented in

ESEM sessions in all years to ensure consistency.8 We further cleaned the conference program data

by excluding (1) papers that were presented several times in the same conference and (2) papers that

were assigned in a session but titles were not confirmed. The details of the number of presented




6
    We performed a wide spectrum of checks to ensure the papers listed in IDEAS/RePEc and the papers presented

at the conference(s) are the same. For example, the checks include (1) checking the papers' acknowledgement

and (2) comparing the abstracts of papers listed in IDEAS/RePEc with the ones from the conferences.
7
    A RePEc handle is a unique id assigned by RePEc to each listed paper based on the archive code, the series

code, and the item code.
8
    Our results are quantitatively similar if we include these papers in the analysis.


                                                            6
papers and matched links for each conference by year are given in Table 1. In total, we found

matched IDEAS/RePEc links for approximately 70% of conference papers.

2.1.2      IDEAS/RePEc statistics

We assembled our IDEAS/RePEc statistics using different data sources. First, the related work

information that links the different versions of the same work to each other was collected. Second,

we extracted the monthly downloads and abstract views as well as the citation statistics for all

available papers. Third, the authorship information which also contains publication-related

information, i.e. published year or the journal where the work was published was obtained.

           We then performed the following steps to merge these statistics. First, we merged downloads

and abstract views of individual documents to obtain the monthly download and abstract view

statistics for all RePEc handles (not just the papers in our conference program database). Second,

using the related work information, we constructed a dataset of related works that contains all

pairwise combination of different versions of the same work. This allows us to aggregate the monthly

downloads, abstract views, and citations for each paper. Third, we assembled a data set of publication

statistics including (1) name and RePEc handle of the journal where the paper was published in, (2)

the journal ranking in the Association of Business Schools' Academic Journal Guide 2015 (ABS

ranking), and (3) year of publication.9 Fourth, we created a monthly citation dataset based on the

one provided by RePEc, which gives the citation analysis for IDEAS/RePEc distributed

documents.10 Finally, we matched monthly download, abstract view, and citation statistics of each

paper with the monthly ranking of each author of the paper.




9
    Details on the ABS ranking can be found at https://charteredabs.org/academic-journal-guide-2018/.
10
     The citation statistics in our data only account for the citations made by other IDEAS/RePEc listed documents.


                                                          7
2.1.3      Conference-related samples

After matching data from different sources as described in Section 2.1.2, a comprehensive panel

dataset that contains information for both presented and non-presented works of all IDEAS/RePEc

authors who have at least one work presented at any conference in the conference program sample

is assembled. This restriction is to ensure that we have a homogenous sample and also for

computational purposes. During the matching process, further screening is required to get the most

complete dataset for analysis. In particular, we screen data and check by hand information on journal

publications and co-authorship for (1) cases in which the number of authors is not consistent across

versions of the same work or missing and (2) cases in which the published years for published works

are missing. After screening, our data contains more than 7.4 million observations pertaining paper-

author-month.

           In the next step, we assemble two inter-related samples from this main dataset. The first

sample is cross-sectional data at the paper-author level (sample of conference authors' works).

Since our conference program data start in 2006, any publications prior to 2006 are not included.

We also exclude non-presented papers that were made available in IDEAS/RePEc after 2012 ­ the

last year in our conference program data. In addition, we exclude papers that were published in the

American Economics Review Papers and Proceedings, the Journal of the European Economic

Association Papers and Proceedings, and conference special issues of the Economic Journal as well

as those only available in IDEAS/RePEc after being published. This sample consists of 78,802

paper-author pairs.11




11
     Although we did our best to assemble the most complete data set for analysis, we cannot rule out the possibility

that the non-conference papers are posted in IDEAS/RePEc later than the conference ones i.e. non-conference

papers are posted at the stage closer to publications.


                                                           8
           The second sample is a panel dataset of conference papers (papers that were presented in

(at least) one of the conferences), which will be analyzed in the examination of the channels through

which conference presentation can affect presented papers' publishing prospects. In this analysis,

any papers of which the earliest version was listed in IDEAS/RePEc after being presented are

excluded. After this cleaning step, our sample contains information for 2,831 papers.

2.2      Data description

Table 2 presents summary statistics for the conference-, authorship-, and publishing-related

attributes of conference authors' papers in our data. Columns 1 and 2 show statistics for 55,125 non-

presented and 4,045 presented works respectively.12 The majority (about 94%) of presented works

were presented only once at a major conference. However, 239 papers were presented at two

conferences and 8 papers appeared in all three major conferences.

           Given the benefits of collaboration in promoting research productivity, it is not surprising to

observe the dominance of co-authored papers in the sample: most papers are co-authored by two

authors (42% of papers). Co-authored papers with three authors account for around 28% of

presented works and 24% of non-presented works. The shares for single-author papers are 18% and

21% for presented and non-presented works, respectively.

           There are tangible differences in the publishing outcomes between presented and non-

presented works. The proportion of presented papers that turn into publications is about 1.5 times

higher than that of non-presented papers (43.4% versus 28.5%). Comparing the shares of high-

quality publications, we also observe the significantly higher share among presented papers. In

particular, nearly 7% of the presented works were published in the ABS 4*-ranked journals, which




12
     Note that 4,045 papers account for papers that were listed first time in IDEAS/RePEc both before and after the

conference.


                                                          9
is more than 2.5 times higher than that of non-presented works. Similarly, the proportion of the ABS

4 publications among presented papers is about 2 times higher than that of non-presented works. The

gap in the proportion of the ABS 3-ranked publications is narrower: around 17.5% for presented

papers and 11.5% for non-presented ones. There is no significant difference in the share of lower-

ABS ranked or unranked publications: these types of publications account for around 9.5% of works.

           The statistics by conference are shown in columns 3-5 of the same table. While authorship-

related statistics are relatively similar across conferences, we observe some interesting publishing-

related statistics. First, we note the highest share of publications for AEA-presented papers, followed

by EEA-presented papers and RES-presented papers (49.2%, 41.9%, and 39.8%, respectively).

Second, 15% of AEA-presented papers were published in the ABS 4*-ranked journals but this figure

is only 3.6% for EEA-presented papers and 2.4% for RES-presented papers.13 Third, there is a

relatively small difference in the share of the ABS 4 publications across conferences (conditional on

presenting at any of the conferences, there is 10-13% probability of publication in an ABS 4 journal).

Given these shares for top-tier economics journals, we find that the proportions of ABS 3 and lower

or unranked publications among AEA-presented works are significantly lower than that among

EEA- and RES-presented works.

           Table 2 also reports monthly statistics for downloads, abstract views, citations, and the

number of versions. On average, a paper presented at a major conference has about two versions that

are made available in IDEAS/RePEc, while a non-presented paper has 1.6 versions. This pattern is

consistent with the view that authors of papers selected for a major professional conference have




13
     These figures do not account for conference papers and proceedings/special issues. There is also a possibility

that a presented paper that was published in an ABS 4* journal but not included because the paper's title has

changed. However, this possibility is rather small, since we have already checked and validated cases when a

found paper has slightly different title with the presented one.


                                                         10
larger networks. The degree of "visibility" (downloads, abstract views) is, on average, higher for

presented works than for non-presented works.14 For instance, a typically presented paper is

downloaded about 2.1 times per month and its abstract is viewed about 7 times per month, while the

corresponding figures for non-presented works are 1.6 and 6 respectively. The number of monthly

citations for presented works is roughly double that of non-presented works.15 Consistent with our

results above, AEA-presented papers have better statistics than EEA- or RES-presented papers. For

example, the number of monthly citations for EEA- or RES-presented papers is approximately half

that for AEA-presented papers.




3       Empirical analysis
Evidence presented in the previous section suggests that participating in a major conference has the

potential to boost publication outcomes. In this section, we provide a regression-based analysis of

whether and how conferences contribute to publications and other measures of academic success.




14
     There are cases when non-presented papers also have a high degree of visibility. For instance, abstract of the

paper "Does marriage make people happy, or do happy people get married?" was viewed 2,412 times in October

2012.
15
     There is dramatic heterogeneity in monthly downloads, abstract views, and citations across papers. There is a

thick right tail in these distributions with extreme observations. For instance, in March 2013, the paper entitled

"Female Empowerment: Impact of a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines" presented at the 2008 AEA

conference was downloaded 1,340 times and its abstract was viewed 1,473 times. Similarly, in April 2013, the

paper entitled "Fatter attraction: anthropometric and socioeconomic matching on the marriage market" presented

in EEA session at the 2010 EEA conference and the 2011 RES conference received in total 1,246 abstract views.

See Appendix Table 1 for additional moments.


                                                         11
3.1      Publishing probability

To investigate the link between conference presentation and research outcomes, we first examine

the impact of conference presentation on the likelihood of being published. We employ the following

linear probability model:

, =  + 1 ,a,c + ,  +  +                                                                                       (1)

where p and a index papers and authors; , is the dummy variable which takes value

of 1 if paper p of author a is published, and 0 otherwise; Conference is a dummy variable which

takes value of 1 if paper p of author a is presented at conference c, and 0 otherwise; X is a vector of

control variables;  is author a fixed effect. To account for possible correlation of the error term,

we cluster standard errors by author and date of the first posting.

           Clearly, selection of papers to a leading professional conference is not random. While we

cannot isolate the causal effect of conference presentation on publication outcomes, we strive to

control for characteristics that are likely central for the publication process and conference selection

so that we can remove obvious sources of endogeneity. First, one might expect that the quality of

authors is a strong predictor of whether a paper is selected for a conference. Because we have a

history of conferences and a wide range of papers with overlapping research teams, we can control

for author fixed effects thus mitigating a major endogeneity concern. Second, we control for the

average number of (monthly) citations (as of March 2017), which proxies the quality of a given

paper. While the number of citations might be influenced by publication status, we use citations to

obtain a conservative estimate of the predictive power of conference participation for publication

outcomes.16 Third, we use fixed effects for dates (month/year) when the first version of a paper




16
     We find that pre-conference citation count is not a significant predictor of selection into a major conference

(Appendix Table 2).


                                                         12
appears. These fixed effects are important for non-parametrically controlling for trends in the

publication process and conference selection as well as various age effects. Fourth, we control for

the connectedness and breadth of a paper's team of authors by using the number of authors on the

paper (e.g., Borijas and Doran, 2015) and the number of versions the paper has (typically, versions

correspond to different working paper series). We add these controls progressively to illustrate the

contribution of each block of variables.

       Table 3 reports results for the pooled sample and publication in any journal ranked by the

ABS. When we use no controls [column (1)], participating in a major conference is associated with

the probability of publication being higher by 14.7 percentage points, a large increase relative to the

unconditional probability of 30%. However, once we control for the connectedness and breadth of

research teams [column (2)], the "conference effect" diminishes dramatically: conference

presentation is associated with only a 3.5 percentage point increase in publication probability.

Adding further controls such as author and post-date fixed effects [column (4)] reduces the estimate

further and, in fact, the estimate is negative when the full list of control is included [column (5)].

These results suggest that selection into major conferences is evidently not random and that, after

controlling for even imperfect measures of paper quality, participation in a conference has

effectively no predictive power for publication in any academic journal. In other words, conferences

appear to have little, if any, value added for generating publications.

       Fortunately for conference organizers and participants, these striking results mask important

heterogeneity in the quality of publication outcomes. Indeed, journals vary widely in prestige and

impact so that measuring success with any publication might provide a misleading picture of how

conferences contribute to academic achievements. To quantify variation in the quality of publication

outcomes, we modify the baseline specification as follows:

   , =  + 1 ,a,c + ,  +  +                                                                   (2)



                                               13
where Publication ABS rank R is a dummy variable equal to one if paper  by author  was published

in a journal with ABS rank , and zero otherwise. Because the ABS ranking has five ranks (1, 2, 3,

4, and 4*), we estimate five separate regressions for specification (2).17 We use the same set of

controls as in specification (1).

           Consistent with our conjecture, we find that participating in a major conference has different

predictions for where a conference paper might be published (Table 4)18. For example, when we

have no controls for paper quality [column (1)], we observe that participating in a major conference

does not predict a higher probability of publications in low-tier journals (unranked, ranked 1 or 2 by

the ABS). At the same time, participation predicts higher probabilities of publication in high-quality

journals (ranked 3, 4, or 4* by the ABS). We observe this pattern across all columns thus suggesting

that irrespective of the set of controls used in estimation ­ participating in a major conference is

associated with a higher probability of publication in a high-quality journal. For example, even after

controlling for an extensive list of observable characteristics [column (5)], participating is associated

with 1.3 percentage point higher probability of publication in the premier (4*) tier of journals. This

is a large increase given that the unconditional probability of publication in a 4* journal is only 2.8%

in our sample. Also note that the distribution of coefficients across rows in a given column

rationalizes the estimates in Table 3: for example, the small coefficients in column (3) of Table 3

stems from the fact that participating in a major conference is associated with a lower probability of

publication in a low-rank journal and a higher probability of publication in a high-rank journal so

that the probability of publication in any journal is approximately zero.




17
     To increase the number of observations for the low-tier publications, we group un-ranked journals and ABS 1

journals. Our results are quantitatively similar without this bundling.
18
     Columns in Table 4 correspond to columns in Table 3, e.g., the list of controls in column (5) of Table 4 is

identical to the list of controls in column (5) of Table 3.


                                                          14
       Interestingly, participation in conferences is associated with longer periods between when a

paper is posted publicly for the first time and when this paper appears in a journal (Table 5). For any

publication [column (1)], participating in a conference appears to delay publication by 5.95 months.

However, there is heterogeneity in lags across journal ranks. For low-rank journals (un-ranked and

ABS 1 rank) and top-tier journals (ABS 4* rank), there is no statistical difference in publication

times between papers presented in a major conference and papers not presented in such conferences.

In contrast, it is publications in the middle of the ranks that appear to drive the coefficient for any

publication: these journals appear to take about 5 to 6 months longer to publish papers presented in

a major conference. Obviously, these delays are not necessarily causal. Instead, these estimates could

indicate that authors of papers selected for an AEA/EEA/RES conference try their luck in a top-tier

journal before sending their paper to a journal where the paper ends up. This conjecture appears to

be roughly consistent with review times in top-tier journals (4 to 6 months). The no-difference result

for low-rank journals (ABS 1 rank and un-ranked) is also arguably consistent with this conjecture:

if authors understand that their paper is of poor quality and hence has a weak upside, they send the

paper straight to a low-rank journal.

      One concern related to the linear probability model is its predictive power. Thus, as a

robustness check, we implement a machine learning technique, namely the Least Absolute Shrinkage

and Selection Operator (LASSO), to re-estimate models (1) and (2). The aim of using this method

is to minimize the residual sum of squares subject to a penalty () on the absolute size of coefficient

estimates (Ahrens et al., 2018). More coefficients are set to zero then dropped with increasing .

Thus, the variance will decrease at the expense of increasing bias, but this trade-off will help improve

the degree of prediction accuracy of the model.

      Results from our analysis using LASSO are presented in Appendix Table 4. Missing

coefficient means the coefficient estimate is dropped from the final model. In general, findings from

LASSO approach are similar to the ones obtained from the linear probability model and the estimated

                                               15
coefficients are comparable. In particular, we find that conference presentation does not play an

important role in determining the likelihood of publication in any journal, which is corresponding to

the close-to-zero estimated coefficient in the previous analysis. Similarly, Conference is dropped

from the estimation with publication in ABS 3 journals, indicating that conference participation is

not one of the main determinants of ABS 3 publications (but it does not reduce the likelihood of

ABS 3 publications neither). Further, presenting a paper in a major conference will reduce the

probability of publication in ABS 1 and 2 journals by 1.4-1.2 percentage points, respectively. In

contrast, conference presentation will help increase the likelihood of being published in high-quality

journals (ABS 4 and 4*) by 1.4-1.5 percentage points.




3.2   Variation across conferences

Similar to journals, conferences vary dramatically in selectivity, prestige, and attendance. For

example, 13,450 people registered to attend AEA in 2019 while 1,283 and 526 people registered for

EEA in 2018 and RES in 2018. Thus, one might expect variation in how successful conferences are

in "placing" papers in journals. To investigate this potential heterogeneity, we modify our

specifications (1) and (2) to include a separate dummy variable for each conference.

       Consistent with our earlier results, we find (Table 6) that when no control variables are added

[column (1)], conference participation is associated with a higher probability of publication in any

journal. The magnitude of the estimated coefficients then diminishes when we control for various

characteristics. While the patterns are qualitatively similar to the pooled results, there is a

quantitative difference in outcomes across conferences. Specifically, participating in AEA

conferences seems to be most beneficial: the estimated coefficients are systematically larger for

AEA conferences than for EEA conferences and RES conferences and, in turn, EEA conferences

have larger coefficients than RES conferences. For example, when no controls are added [column



                                              16
(1)], AEA participation is related to an increase of 19.3 percentage points in the likelihood of being

published while the corresponding figures for EEA and RES participation are 12 percentage points

and 8 percentage points, respectively. The absolute difference in estimated coefficients across

conferences shrinks as we include greater number of controls, to the point where we cannot reject

the null of equal coefficients on conference dummy variables.

       However, similar to the pooled results, there is considerable variation in the estimated

coefficients across conferences and journals (Table 7). For example, participating in a major

conference has zero predictive power for publication in a low-rank journal (ABS 1 rank and un-

ranked) irrespective of whether a paper is presented in AEA, EEA, or RES. For top-tier (ABS 4*

rank) journals, coefficients on EEA and RES dummy variables are effectively zero. In contrast, the

coefficient on AEA dummy variable remains large even after controlling for a number of paper

characteristics: participating in an AEA conference is associated with 4.8 percentage higher

probability of publication in a 4* journal, which is approximately double (!) of the 2.8 percent

unconditional probability of publishing in a 4* journal. Furthermore, the estimated coefficients for

4* journals suggest that the pooled "4* effects" reported in Table 4 are entirely driven by AEA.

Interestingly, the differences across conferences are much more muted for excellent journals (4 in

ABS ranking) than for top-tier (4*) journals.

3.3   Variation across fields

In this section, we examine whether conference participation has differential predictive power for

publication outcomes across fields of economics. Indeed, economics is a heterogeneous social

science with fields operating in different publication regimes and methodological standards. With a

risk of oversimplification, we consider the following major fields of economics: microeconomic

theory, macroeconomics (which includes international economics and financial economics), applied

microeconomics (which includes labor economics, public finances, industrial organization, health

economics, law and economics), development and environment (which also includes agricultural

                                                17
economics, comparative economics, and urban economics), and econometrics (which also includes

mathematical economics and other quantitative subfields). While this classification is obviously

crude, it provides an approximation for differences across fields. Whenever a paper falls into

multiple fields, we classify the paper as being in field X if one of its Journal of Economic Literature

(JEL) codes is in field X. In other words, our classification is not mutually exclusive.

        We estimate specifications (1) and (2) by each major field separately and report the results

in Table 8. Because we can recover JEL codes for about 70% of the papers registered in the

IDEAS/RePEc database, we also report results for papers in any field with a non-missing JEL code

[column (1)] as well as results for papers with missing JEL codes [column (7)]. We find that results

for papers with JEL codes are broadly similar to the results for all papers (Tables 3 and 4) and, thus,

we conjecture weak (if any) selection effects from using only papers with non-missing JEL codes.

The general patterns are similar across fields: after controlling for paper characteristics, participating

in a major conference is associated with a lower probability of any publication (the first row of Table

8), but the sign of the correlation changes when we examine publication in top-tier journals (the last

row of Table 8). At the same time, the magnitudes of estimated coefficients do vary. For example,

presenting a paper in the development/environment field is associated with a 2.7 percentage point

increase in the probability of publication in a top-tier journal while the corresponding figure for

microeconomic theory is only 0.9 percentage point.

3.4   Prime time

What is the best time to present a paper? In an ideal world, researchers should discover the true value

of a presented study irrespective of whether they are tired after a long day, sleepy in the morning

after a jet lag, or fresh and bright after a large cup of coffee. However, casual observations of many

conferences suggest that, for example, presenting in the last slot of the last day of a conference

typically entails a smaller audience and, thus, presumably a lower impact. As a result, one might

conjecture that there exists a "prime time" for presenting a paper that maximizes its chances of

                                                18
publication. To learn if certain conference slots have predictive power for future publication

outcomes, we modify our baseline specification as follows:

, =  +   , ,,, + ,  +  +                                                                     (3)

where ,,, is a dummy variable which equals to one if paper p with authors

a was presented in conference c at time slot . To ensure we have enough observations per slot, we

create morning and afternoon slots for each day of a conference. For example, AEA conferences last

three days and so we have six slots: morning of day #1, afternoon of day #1, morning of day #2,

afternoon of day #2, morning of day #3, and afternoon of day #3. RES also runs 3-day conferences

but the morning of the first day does not have plenary sessions and, hence, we have five time slots.

EEA has 5-day conferences but the morning of the first day has no sessions. As a result, EEA

conferences have nine slots.

       We find that AEA and RES indeed have the lowest probability of publication in any journal

presented in the last slot of a conference (right column in Figure 1). There is generally an inverted-

U profile for estimated coefficients with the highest probability being the morning of the second

day. EEA does not exhibit this pattern for the probability of publication in any journal: the estimated

profile is generally flat. For publications in top-tier (ABS 4* rank) journals (the middle column of

Figure 1), AEA shows a downward-sloping profile with the highest probability estimated for the

morning of the first day (7.8%!) and the lowest probability for the afternoon of the last day

(approximately zero percent). RES has a qualitatively similar profile but there is no clear

monotonicity. While we do not observe any statistically significant coefficients in the EEA profile

for publications in top-tier journals, we see that mornings of the first three days of the conference

tend to have positive point estimates. Finally, the probability of publication in a low-rank (ABS 1

rank and un-ranked) journal shows the greatest variation across conferences: AEA has an inverted-

U profile, RES has an upward-sloping profile, and EEA has a downward-sloping profile. This



                                               19
evidence appears to suggest that, indeed, the time/day when a paper is presented predicts how well

the paper will fare in journals.

3.5      Who benefits?

3.5.1      Prominent author effect

Azoulay et al. (2010), Borjas and Dojan (2015), Oettl (2012), and others emphasize the importance

of star scholars in generating academic output and impact. Whether a star scholar's ability to draw

attention spills over to others is an open question. For example, it is not clear if being in the same

conference session with a prominent scientist increases chances of publication in a scholarly journal.

To shed some light on the matter, we augment the baseline specification with the indicators of

whether a prominent scholar is (1) in the paper's author team (Paper with Top 1%) and (2) in the

author team of other papers in the same session (Session with Top 1%). Paper with Top 1% equals

to one if at least one of the authors of the paper is in the top 1% of IDEAS/RePEc Top Economist

ranking. Similarly, Session with Top 1% equals to one if at least one of the authors of another paper

in the session where paper  is presented is in the top 1% of the Top Economist ranking.19

, =  + 1 ,, + 2 ,, ×    1%,,

                            +,  +  +                                                                     (4.1)

, =  + 1 ,, + 2 ,, ×    1%,

                            +,  +  +                                                                     (4.2)

where the rest of the specifications is identical to specification (1).

           We find that presenting in a session with eminent scholars generally has statistically

insignificant predictive power for publication outcomes for other papers in a conference session



19
     We also experimented with top ten percent of the IDEAS/RePEc Top Economist Ranking and got quantitatively

similar results.


                                                       20
(Table 9). For example, when we pool data across conferences (Panel A), the incremental increase

in the probability of any publication [column (1)] in a session with a star academic is only 0.2

percentage points (standard error 2.4%). The corresponding increase for a top-tier publication is 1.9

percentage points (standard error 1.6%). From previous results, we know that differences for top-

tier publications are almost entirely driven by AEA conferences. When we focus on these

conferences (Panel B), we find that there is a small, insignificant association between top-tier

publications and sharing a session with a prominent academic. Thus, although stars can attract

crowds, a large attendance does not seem to translate into high chances of publication in scholarly

journals. The good news for lesser-known scholars is that sharing a session with a star does not

crowd-out publication chances (that is, 2 is not negative).

       While there is no significant benefit from sharing a session with a star scholar, having a

prominent author in the author team can be beneficial (Table 10). There is a predicted 4.2 percentage

point increase in the probability of being published in any journal for presented papers which have

star author(s), while lesser-known authors appear to gain little in terms of publication outlook. This

increase for top authors is even higher when we consider the likelihood of top-tier publications (4.8

percentage points) and again lesser-known authors have approximately no change in publication

probability (estimated coefficient 2 is not positive). However, the effect varies across conferences

and publication outcomes. For example, papers that have top authors and were presented at AEA

conferences experience a higher probability of publications in lower-rank journals only, and lesser-

known authors have elevated probabilities of publication in a top-tier journal too. EEA-presented

papers authored by a star scientist are more likely to be published in a scholarly journal while we do

not predict increased probabilities for lesser-known authors. Finally, outcomes for RES-presented

papers do not seem to differ across authors with different statures in the profession.




                                               21
3.5.2   Gender effect

The difference between female and male economists in research productivity and career

advancement has been documented in a number of studies (see, e.g., Albert et al., 2016; Ginther

and Hayes, 2003; Ginther and Kahn, 2004; Kahn, 1993; Maske et al., 2002). Contributing to

the existing literature, in this section, we aim to examine the extent to which the benefit of

conference presentation on publishing for female authors is different from that for male

authors.

        To answer this question, we use webtools gemderize.io and namsor.com to classify

authors' gender based on their first names (the former service) and their full names (the latter

service). Out of 5,170 authors in our sample, the gender classifications obtained from these

tools return the similarity of 95%. For the remaining authors whose names are either unisex or

the gender classifications provided by two services are different, we manually establish gender

of authors by going through their photos or biographies in the institutional and personal

webpages. Consistent with economics being a male-dominated field, we indeed observe the

prevalence of male economists in our sample: the ratio of female to male authors is about 1:4.

        The results obtained from re-estimating models (1) and (2) on the female and male sub-

samples are presented in columns (1)-(2) of Table 11. We find that participation in a major

conference does not predict a higher probability of publications any academic journal or in

low-tier journals (unranked, ranked 1 or 2 by the ABS) for both female and male authors. The

effect on publications in high-quality journals, however, is different for female and male

authors. On the one hand, presented papers by male authors experience a 1.6 percentage points

higher likelihood of being published in top journals. On the other hand, the probability of being

published in the high-quality journals for female authors' presented papers is next to zero.

        One might argue that this result does not necessarily reflect the different effects of

conference presentation for female and male economists but is rather driven by the difference


                                               22
in their research productivity that has been documented in the literature. To partially address

this concern, we adopt the Coarsened Exact Matching technique to match female authors with

their male counterparts based on various productivity-related metrics. The matching process is

done as follows. In the first step, we match female authors whose works were presented in one

of the conferences in 2006 with male authors whose works were also presented in 2006 based

on (1) the number of downloads the author received in 2006; (2) the number of co-authors

(registered in IDEAS/RePEc) by 2006; and (3) the number of distinct works the author had by

2006. Next, in any given year starting from 2007, we perform matching for female authors

whose works were presented in that year but not in previous years with male authors whose

works were presented in the same year but not in previous years. After matching, we get a

sample of 2,293 authors with the female/male ratio of 1:3. The estimated results for the matched

samples are reported in columns (3)-(4) of Table 11. Again, we observe that conference

participation only helps male researchers in placing their works in the high-quality journals.

Female researchers, although are not disadvantaged (i.e., the effect of conference presentation

is not negative), do not benefit (at least in terms of publishing attempt) from participating in a

major conference neither.

       Obviously, these estimates are not causal, and we cannot unambiguously attribute the

differences in outcomes for female and male authors to discrimination. However, our statistics

paint a potentially troubling picture: female authors appear to gain less at the top end of journal

hierarchy after presenting their work in major conferences. Even after controlling for basic

heterogeneity in research profiles of authors, we find that, after presenting a paper at a major

conference, male authors have higher probabilities of publication in top academic outlets than

their female counterparts.




                                                23
3.6       Other outcomes

So far, we have found evidence for the positive impact of conference presentation on the probability

of publishing (in the high-rank journals). Of course, conference participation can contribute to other

measures of success such the quality and impact of the papers. We use the number of citations as a

proxy for impact and the number of abstract views as a proxy for visibility.20 To quantify the

predictive power of conference participation, we employ the following specification:

(1 + ), =  + 1 ,a,c + ,  +  +                                                                              (5)

where Outcome is either (1) Citations which is the average number of a paper's monthly citations or

(2) Abstract views which is the average number of monthly abstract views.21 The results in Table 12

show a consistent pattern: presented papers are likely to be cited and viewed more often, regardless

of whether or not we use controls in specification (5). In particular, the abstracts of presented papers

are viewed more often than that of non-presented papers by at least 9%. Similarly, conference

presentation is associated with an increase of about 4% in the number of citations received monthly.

           To assess the timing of the estimated boost in abstract views and citations, we consider the

following panel regression:

                                            
(1 + ),, =  + =- s , ,- + , ,  +  +  +  (6)



where  is the time of conference,  is calendar month,  is time fixed effect,  is paper fixed

effect. ,, is either monthly abstract views (Abstract views) or monthly citations

(Citations) of paper p presented at conference c. As before, we control for various characteristics 

that can also affect the visibility and impact level of a paper. This includes (1) Age which is the



20
     Results are similar if we use the number of downloads as the indicator of visibility.
21
     We use log (1 + ) as the dependent variable rather than log () because many papers have no citations (about

21%).


                                                          24
natural logarithm of the paper's age; (2) New version which equals to one if a new version of the

paper is made available and zero otherwise; (3) and Share of influential authors which is the ratio

of the number of the authors in the top ten percent of the Top Economist ranking in a given month

to the total number of authors. This model is estimated on the panel data sample of conference

papers.

          The results presented in Figure 2 confirm the positive effect of conference participation on

paper visibility and impact. In the conference month, a paper would receive a 6 percentage points

boost in the number of abstract views compared to the number of monthly abstract views received

before. The increase in the following month is about 4 percentage points. There is also a difference

in the average level of monthly abstract views between pre- and post-conference period. These

findings suggest the important role of conferences in promoting research. However, in this analysis,

we do not observe any significant boost in the number of monthly citations after the conference.

This is rather expected since the research impact through citations requires a considerable time to be

reflected.




4   Conclusion
In this study, we quantify the role of conferences on improving the publishing prospects of presented

works. We use a comprehensive dataset containing information on research portfolios of scholars

whose works were presented at three leading economic conferences in the US, the UK, and Europe.

More specifically, our data is assembled from multiple sources including (1) official programs of

the AEA Meetings, the EEA Annual Conferences, and the RES Annual Conferences over the 2006-

2012 period; and (2) IDEAS/RePEc statistics on the conference papers, conference authors as well

as statistics on other works (but not presented at conferences) of those authors.

          Our results show a significantly positive association between conference presentation

(especially at AEA conferences) and the probability of being published in a high-quality journal. We

                                                25
also find a strong correlation between conference presentation and research visibility: the number of

average monthly abstract views and citations of a presented paper is at least 4-9 percentage points

higher than that of non-presented ones. These findings underscore the importance of conference

presentations for research productivity and promotion. While our focus on narrow outcomes (is a

paper published in a scholarly journal or not?) does not necessarily provide a complete picture of

the conferences' value, our results clearly indicate that academic institutions should have effective

mechanisms to encourage and support researchers to present in the high-quality conferences. By

doing so, both researchers and universities can benefit from improved research performance (more

publications in high-quality journals) and increased research dissemination (higher visibility).

       Our analysis and subsequent work should also help design better professional conferences in

the future. For example, one of the striking results is that AEA conferences tend to be much more

successful in predicting top-tier publications than other major conferences. Whether this difference

is due to the much greater attendance of AEA meetings or some other forces is an open question. In

any case, other conferences can presumably emulate the design of AEA conferences to achieve better

outcomes. We also observe potential frictions: spillovers from star scholars to other papers in a

session appear rather limited (if present at all); gains for lesser-known authors might be smaller than

for well-known authors; and where a paper is placed in a conference schedule seems to have

predictive power for publication outcomes. Perhaps, the most disturbing finding is that female

authors seem to gain from conference presentations less than male authors. Rationalizing these facts

as well as establishing causal effects of conference presentations requires conscious efforts from

conference organizers to implement randomized control trials or perhaps provide more information

for other research designs (e.g., regression discontinuity) to develop a better understanding of what

exactly conferences deliver to participating scholars.




                                               26
References
        Albert, C., Davia, M.A. and Legazpe, N., 2016. Determinants of research productivity in

Spanish Academia. European Journal of Education, 51(4), pp.535-549.

        American Economic Association (AEA), 2019. AEA Professional Climate Survey: Main

Findings. March 19, 2019. Available at https://www.aeaweb.org/resources/member-docs/climate-

survey-results-mar-18-2019.

        Azoulay, P., Graff Zivin, J.S. and Wang, J., 2010. Superstar extinction. The Quarterly

Journal of Economics, 125(2), pp.549-589.

        Belenzon, S. and Schankerman, M., 2013. Spreading the word: Geography, policy, and

knowledge spillovers. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(3), pp.884-903.

        Blau, F.D., Currie, J.M., Croson, R.T. and Ginther, D.K., 2010. Can mentoring help female

assistant professors? Interim results from a randomized trial. American Economic Review, 100(2),

pp.348-52.

        Borjas, G.J. and Doran, K.B., 2015. Which peers matter? The relative impacts of

collaborators, colleagues, and competitors. Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(5), pp.1104-

1117.

        Boudreau, K.J., Brady, T., Ganguli, I., Gaule, P., Guinan, E., Hollenberg, A. and Lakhani,

K.R., 2017. A field experiment on search costs and the formation of scientific collaborations. Review

of Economics and Statistics, 99(4), pp.565-576.

        Campos, R., Leon, F. and McQuillin, B., 2018. Lost in the Storm: The Academic

Collaborations That Went Missing in Hurricane ISSAC. The Economic Journal, 128(610), pp.995-

1018.




                                              27
       Ding, W.W., Levin, S.G., Stephan, P.E. and Winkler, A.E., 2010. The impact of information

technology on academic scientists' productivity and collaboration patterns. Management Science,

56(9), pp.1439-1461.

       Ductor, L., Fafchamps, M., Goyal, S. and van der Leij, M.J., 2014. Social networks and

research output. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(5), pp.936-948.

       Galang, M.T., Yuan, J.C.C., Lee, D.J., Barao, V.A., Shyamsunder, N. and Sukotjo, C., 2011.

Factors influencing publication rates of abstracts presented at the ADEA annual session &

exhibition. Journal of Dental Education, 75(4), pp.549-556.

       Ginther, D.K. and Hayes, K.J., 2003. Gender differences in salary and promotion for faculty

in the humanities 1977­95. Journal of Human Resources, 38(1), pp.34-73.

       Ginther, D.K. and Kahn, S., 2004. Women in economics: moving up or falling off the

academic career ladder?. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(3), pp.193-214.

       Iaria, A., Schwarz, C. and Waldinger, F., 2018. Frontier knowledge and scientific production:

evidence from the collapse of international science. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2),

pp.927-991.

       Kahn, S., 1993. Gender differences in academic career paths of economists. American

Economic Review, 83(2), pp.52-56.

       Leon, F. and McQuillin, B., 2018. The Role of Conferences on the Pathway to Academic

Impact: Evidence from a Natural Experiment. Journal of Human Resources, pp.1116-8387R.

       Levin, S.G. and Stephan, P.E., 1991. Research productivity over the life cycle: Evidence for

academic scientists. The American Economic Review, 81(1), pp.114-132.

       Maske, K.L., Durden, G.C. and Gaynor, P.E., 2003. Determinants of scholarly productivity

among male and female economists. Economic Inquiry, 41(4), pp.555-564.


                                             28
        McCabe, M.J. and Snyder, C.M., 2015. Does online availability increase citations? Theory

and evidence from a panel of economics and business journals. Review of Economics and Statistics,

97(1), pp.144-165.

        Oettl, A., 2012. Reconceptualizing stars: Scientist helpfulness and peer performance.

Management Science, 58(6), pp.1122-1140.

        Pinkowitz, L., 2002. Research dissemination and impact: Evidence from web site downloads.

The Journal of Finance, 57(1), pp.485-499.

        Reinartz, S.J. and Urban, D., 2017. Finance conference quality and publication success: A

conference ranking. Journal of Empirical Finance, 42, pp.155-174.

        Waldinger, F., 2016. Bombs, brains, and science: The role of human and physical capital for

the creation of scientific knowledge. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(5), pp.811-831.

        Winnik, S., Raptis, D.A., Walker, J.H., Hasun, M., Speer, T., Clavien, P.A., Komajda, M.,

Bax, J.J., Tendera, M., Fox, K. and Van de Werf, F., 2012. From abstract to impact in cardiovascular

research: factors predicting publication and citation. European Heart Journal, 33(24), pp.3034-

3045.




                                              29
Tables
                            Table 1. Conference program statistics
               American Economic             European Economic
                                                                        Royal Economic Society
                   Association                   Association
 Year                      Matched                       Matched                      Matched
               Papers                        Papers                       Papers
                            Links                         Links                        Links
                (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)         (6)
 2006           451          240              675          451              191         126
 2007           584          298              674          403              231         159
 2008           590          284              812          502              267         175
 2009           659          367              761          438              188         121
 2010           662          355              756          483              254         190
 2011           722          409              679          364              496         325
 2012           730          411              780          419              461         321
Notes: This table shows the number of papers presented in each conference ­ year and the number of
IDEAS/RePEc links that are collected.




                                               30
                                         Table 2. Summary statistics
                                          Non-presented                Paper presented at a conference
                                             papers                  Any      AEA         EEA        RES
                                               (1)                   (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)
 No. of papers                               55,125                 4,045     1,252      2,092       956

 No. of conference presentations
    1 conference                                                    3,798
    2 conferences                                                    239
    3 conferences                                                     8
 No. of authors
    Single author                              11,584                715          193         395          175
    2 authors                                  22,809               1,697         532         871          394
    3 authors                                  13,456               1,114         356         556          279
    4 authors                                  4,777                 383          122         201          79
    5 authors                                  1,553                 93           34          45           23
    More than 5 authors                         946                  43           15          24            6
 Publications                                  15,694               1,757         616         878          381
 Journal rankings
    ABS 4*                                     1,389                 272          190         75           23
    ABS 4                                      2,672                 401          163         182          91
    ABS 3                                      6,350                 711          193         392          175
    ABS 2                                      3,253                 271          40          170          72
    ABS 1 or Un-ranked                         2,030                 102          30          59           20
 Monthly statistics
    No. of version
         Mean                                  1.560                1.977        2.111       1.963        1.865
         St.Dev.                               0.920                1.220        1.281       1.234        1.103
    Downloads
         Mean                                  1.612                2.137        2.695       1.920        1.934
         St.Dev.                               4.071                5.147        6.752       4.334        3.994
    Abstract views
         Mean                                  5.989                6.928       8.809        6.213        6.138
         St.Dev.                               11.815               11.371      14.337       9.989        9.733
    Citations
         Mean                                  0.155                0.305        0.528       0.217        0.206
         St.Dev.                               1.462                1.822        2.433       1.480        1.353
Notes: This table summarizes statistics of conference authors' works. Columns 1-2 show statistics for all (distinct)
presented and non-presented works, respectively. Columns 3-5 show statistics for papers presented at American
Economic Association (AEA), European Economic Association (EEA), and Royal Economic Society (RES)
conferences, respectively. No. of papers is the number of distinct presented and non-presented works. No. of
conferences is the number of conferences where a given paper was presented at. No. of authors is the number of
authors for a given paper. Publications is the number of works that were published in a journal. Journal rankings
is the journal rank in the Association of Business Schools' Academic Journal Guide 2015 (ABS 2015 ranking).
Number of versions is the monthly statistics of versions of each paper available in IDEAS/RePEc. Downloads,
Abstract views, and Citations are the monthly downloads, abstract views, and new citations that a paper gets,
respectively.




                                                        31
                    Table 3. Conference participation and publication outcomes
                                      (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 Conference                         0.147***        0.035***       0.002          -0.027***       -0.038***
                                   (0.016)         (0.011)         (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.008)
 Log(1+Citations)                                                                                   0.278***
                                                                                                   (0.015)
 No. of versions (Base = 1)
    2                                               0.441***        0.419***        0.397***        0.371***
                                                   (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.014)
     3                                              0.612***        0.607***        0.580***        0.528***
                                                   (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.016)         (0.015)
     4                                              0.696***        0.711***        0.682***        0.611***
                                                   (0.014)         (0.015)         (0.017)         (0.016)
     5                                              0.784***        0.820***        0.787***        0.687***
                                                   (0.016)         (0.017)         (0.018)         (0.018)
     6                                              0.793***        0.852***        0.827***        0.706***
                                                   (0.019)         (0.018)         (0.019)         (0.020)
 No. of authors (Base = 1)
    2                                               0.004          -0.000          -0.014***       -0.020***
                                                   (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.004)
     3                                              0.020***        0.011*         -0.018***       -0.028***
                                                   (0.007)         (0.006)         (0.005)         (0.005)
     4                                              0.016           0.007          -0.030***       -0.043***
                                                   (0.011)         (0.009)         (0.008)         (0.007)
     5                                              0.018           0.006          -0.038***       -0.055***
                                                   (0.015)         (0.013)         (0.013)         (0.012)
     6                                             -0.007          -0.009          -0.052***       -0.075***
                                                   (0.018)         (0.016)         (0.016)         (0.016)

 Author FE                           No              No              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Post Date FE                        No              No               No             Yes             Yes
 Observations                      78,802          78,802           78,625          78,621          78,621
 R-squared                         0.008           0.385            0.474           0.498           0.511
Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation and the probability of being
published in any journal. Conference equals to one if the paper is presented in one of the conferences and zero
otherwise. Citations is the average number of citations that the received monthly. No. of versions is the number
of versions of the paper. No. of authors is the number of the paper's authors. Column 1 reports results for the
estimation without control variables. Columns (2)-(5) report results when control variables are added. Standard
errors are clustered by author and date of the first posting. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance
level, respectively.




                                                      32
          Table 4. Conference participation and publication outcomes by journal quality
 Journal quality                (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)
    1                         -0.009***         -0.018***         -0.018***         -0.023***        -0.021***
                              (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)          (0.003)

     2                         0.004            -0.012**          -0.020***         -0.025***        -0.023***
                              (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.005)          (0.005)

     3                         0.057***          0.015**          -0.001            -0.014*          -0.017**
                              (0.009)           (0.008)           (0.007)           (0.007)          (0.007)

     4                         0.050***          0.025***          0.019***          0.017***         0.012**
                              (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.005)           (0.005)          (0.005)

     4*                        0.045***          0.028***          0.024***          0.021***         0.013***
                              (0.006)           (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.005)          (0.005)

 Author FE                       No                No              Yes               Yes               Yes
 Post Date FE                    No                No               No               Yes               Yes
 Controls                        No               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
 Control for citations           No                No               No                No               Yes
 Observations                  78,802            78,802           78,625            78,621            78,621
Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation and the probability of being
published in the ABS 1-4* journals. The reported coefficients are for Conference variable which equals to one if
the paper is presented in one of the conferences and zero otherwise. Full table of results is reported in Appendix
Table 3. Column 1 reports results for the estimation without control variables. Columns (2)-(5) report results when
control variables are added. Standard errors are clustered by author and date of the first posting. *, **, and ***
denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                       33
                                             Table 5. Publication time
                                                            Publication quality
                        Any               ABS 1            ABS 2          ABS 3              ABS 4            ABS 5
                         (1)                (2)              (3)            (4)                (5)              (6)
Conference            5.948***           5.241            5.325***       5.795***           6.020***         2.214
                     (0.560)            (4.084)          (1.718)        (0.788)            (1.328)          (1.457)
Log(1+Citations) -11.172***            -14.974*         -13.465***     -11.573***         -11.102***       -11.544***
                     (0.814)            (7.945)          (3.787)        (1.237)            (1.419)          (1.477)
No. of versions (Base = 1)
   2                 -5.098            -17.929**         -9.633            4.663          -10.886          -23.199***
                     (4.471)            (9.036)          (7.352)          (3.792)          (7.422)          (7.552)
   3                 -1.392            -18.889**         -4.589            7.966**         -6.990          -19.118**
                     (4.575)            (9.474)          (7.424)          (3.896)          (7.365)          (7.469)
   4                  1.525            -15.179           -3.359           11.942***        -1.336          -16.839**
                     (4.538)            (9.577)          (7.448)          (3.876)          (7.605)          (7.658)
   5                  4.688             -7.279           -2.292           13.603***        -0.633          -15.744**
                     (4.651)           (11.672)          (7.901)          (4.057)          (7.605)          (7.649)
   6                  9.319**          -17.339            2.818           16.443***         7.962          -12.713
                     (4.716)           (11.037)          (7.976)          (4.144)          (7.827)          (7.746)
No. of authors (Base = 1)
   2                  2.096***           1.785            4.102**          2.139**          3.507**         -2.157
                     (0.589)            (2.765)          (1.603)          (0.843)          (1.490)          (2.719)
   3                  3.626***           0.836            6.261***         3.708***         5.296***        -1.017
                     (0.670)            (3.116)          (1.768)          (0.980)          (1.729)          (2.902)
   4                  4.216***           6.492            4.338**          4.095***         5.522***        -0.500
                     (0.780)            (3.944)          (1.901)          (1.146)          (1.941)          (3.205)
   5                  5.865***           6.697            6.103*           4.077**          6.788**          6.263
                     (1.041)            (4.266)          (3.100)          (1.627)          (2.917)          (4.813)
   6                  3.542***          -0.643            9.711***         2.850*          -1.599            1.883
                     (1.317)            (4.157)          (2.978)          (1.709)          (3.928)          (3.551)

Observations            24,755            1,603            3,573             8,979            3,705            2,153
R-squared               0.379             0.622            0.508             0.477            0.557            0.572
   Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation and the publication time which is
   duration (in months) between the first posting date and the date the paper appears in the journal. Column 1 reports
   results for publications in any journal. Columns (2)-(6) report results for publications in ABS1-4* journals,
   respectively. Conference equals to one if the paper is presented in one of the conferences and zero otherwise.
   Citations is the average number of citations that the received monthly. No. of versions is the number of versions
   of the paper. No. of authors is the number of the paper's authors. Standard errors are clustered by author and date
   of the first posting. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                          34
           Table 6. Conference participation (by conference) and publication outcomes
                                       (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)
 AEA conference                      0.193***         0.056***        0.036***         0.004           -0.023*
                                    (0.022)          (0.014)         (0.013)          (0.013)          (0.012)
 EEA conference                      0.120***         0.022*         -0.013           -0.033***        -0.035***
                                    (0.016)          (0.013)         (0.010)          (0.010)          (0.010)
 RES conference                      0.080***         0.018          -0.016           -0.037**         -0.042***
                                    (0.022)          (0.016)         (0.014)          (0.015)          (0.015)
 Log(1+Citations)                                                                                       0.277***
                                                                                                       (0.015)
 No. of versions (Base = 1)
    2                                                 0.441***        0.419***         0.397***         0.371***
                                                     (0.014)         (0.014)          (0.014)          (0.014)
     3                                                0.612***        0.607***         0.580***         0.528***
                                                     (0.014)         (0.014)          (0.016)          (0.015)
     4                                                0.695***        0.710***         0.681***         0.611***
                                                     (0.014)         (0.015)          (0.016)          (0.016)
     5                                                0.783***        0.819***         0.786***         0.687***
                                                     (0.016)         (0.017)          (0.018)          (0.018)
     6                                                0.792***        0.852***         0.826***         0.706***
                                                     (0.019)         (0.018)          (0.019)          (0.020)
 No. of authors (Base = 1)
    2                                                 0.004          -0.000           -0.014***        -0.020***
                                                     (0.005)         (0.004)          (0.004)          (0.004)
     3                                                0.020***        0.011*          -0.018***        -0.028***
                                                     (0.007)         (0.006)          (0.005)          (0.005)
     4                                                0.016           0.007           -0.030***        -0.043***
                                                     (0.011)         (0.009)          (0.008)          (0.007)
     5                                                0.018           0.005           -0.038***        -0.055***
                                                     (0.014)         (0.013)          (0.013)          (0.012)
     6                                               -0.007          -0.009           -0.052***        -0.075***
                                                     (0.018)         (0.016)          (0.016)          (0.016)
 Author FE                             No               No             Yes              Yes              Yes
 Post Date FE                          No               No              No              Yes              Yes
 Observations                        78,802           78,802          78,625           78,621           78,621
 R-squared                           0.009            0.385           0.474            0.498            0.511
Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation by conference and the probability
of being published in any journal. AEA conference, EEA conference, and RES conference equal to one if the paper
is presented in the AEA, EEA, and RES conferences, respectively; and zero otherwise. Citations is the average
number of new citations that the received monthly. No. of versions is the number of versions of the paper. No. of
authors is the number of the paper's authors. Column 1 reports results for the estimation without control variables.
Columns (2)-(5) report results when control variables are added. Standard errors are clustered by author and date
of the first posting. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                        35
   Table 7. Conference participation (by conference) and publication outcomes (by quality)
Journal quality     Conference           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
      1               AEA             -0.006***        -0.008***        -0.002           -0.004*          -0.003
                                      (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)
                        EEA            0.002            0.001           -0.002           -0.003           -0.003
                                      (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)
                        RES           -0.004           -0.005*          -0.006***        -0.008***        -0.007***
                                      (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)

         2              AEA           -0.034***        -0.053***        -0.026***        -0.031***        -0.026***
                                      (0.006)          (0.006)          (0.006)          (0.006)          (0.006)
                        EEA            0.020***         0.006           -0.015**         -0.021***        -0.020***
                                      (0.008)          (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.007)
                        RES            0.011            0.001           -0.017*          -0.020**         -0.019**
                                      (0.010)          (0.010)          (0.010)          (0.010)          (0.010)

         3              AEA            0.028**         -0.024**         -0.020*          -0.034***        -0.041***
                                      (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.011)          (0.012)
                        EEA            0.064***         0.027**          0.006           -0.002           -0.003
                                      (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.010)          (0.010)          (0.010)
                        RES            0.051***         0.027*           0.001           -0.011           -0.012
                                      (0.016)          (0.014)          (0.014)          (0.014)          (0.014)

         4              AEA            0.074***         0.042***         0.022**          0.019**          0.008
                                      (0.011)          (0.010)          (0.009)          (0.009)          (0.009)
                        EEA            0.034***         0.012            0.013*           0.012*           0.011
                                      (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.007)
                        RES            0.045***         0.031***         0.033***         0.030***         0.029**
                                      (0.013)          (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.012)          (0.012)

    4*                  AEA            0.137***         0.115***         0.072***         0.068***         0.048***
                                      (0.014)          (0.013)          (0.013)          (0.013)          (0.012)
                        EEA            0.005           -0.010*           0.001           -0.001           -0.002
                                      (0.006)          (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.005)
                        RES           -0.013**         -0.022***        -0.005           -0.006           -0.009*
                                      (0.006)          (0.006)          (0.005)          (0.006)          (0.005)

Author FE                                No               No              Yes              Yes              Yes
Post Date FE                             No               No               No              Yes              Yes
Controls                                 No              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Control for citations                    No               No               No               No              Yes
Observations                           78,802           78,802           78,625           78,621           78,621
Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation by conference and the probability
of being published in the ABS 1-4* journals. The reported coefficients are for AEA conference, EEA conference,
and RES conference which equal to one if the paper is presented in the AEA, EEA, and RES conferences,
respectively; and zero otherwise. Column 1 reports results for the estimation without control variables. Columns
(2)-(5) report results when control variables are added. Standard errors are clustered by author and date of the first
posting. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                         36
                                   Table 8. Conference participation and publication outcomes by journal quality and field
                                                                                                                                          Development
                                    Any JEL           Micro Theory         Econometrics             Macro            Applied Micro                              Missing JEL
                                                                                                                                          Environment
 Journal quality                       (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)                 (6)                   (7)
    Any                            -0.043***            -0.067***            -0.059***            -0.048***            -0.040***           -0.037**              -0.023
                                   (0.008)              (0.018)              (0.015)              (0.014)              (0.011)             (0.016)               (0.019)

     1                             -0.024***            -0.027***            -0.016**             -0.030***            -0.018***            -0.009               -0.004
                                   (0.004)              (0.007)              (0.007)              (0.005)              (0.005)              (0.009)              (0.009)

     2                             -0.024***            -0.025**             -0.018*              -0.030***            -0.022***            -0.035***            -0.021**
                                   (0.006)              (0.011)              (0.010)              (0.008)              (0.007)              (0.011)              (0.010)

     3                             -0.019**             -0.036**             -0.037**             -0.022*              -0.013               -0.035**             -0.017
                                   (0.008)              (0.017)              (0.015)              (0.013)              (0.012)              (0.017)              (0.014)

     4                              0.012*               0.012               -0.007                0.024**              0.005                0.012                0.024**
                                   (0.006)              (0.011)              (0.010)              (0.010)              (0.008)              (0.012)              (0.011)

     4*                             0.015***             0.009                0.020**              0.011                0.011                0.027**             -0.000
                                   (0.006)              (0.008)              (0.010)              (0.008)              (0.007)              (0.011)              (0.007)

 Author FE                            Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Post Date FE                         Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Controls                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Control for citations                Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Observations                        55,116               14,152               14,767               24,949               26,728               11,680               22,394
Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation and the probability of being published by journal quality and field. The reported coefficients are
for Conference variable which equals to one if the paper is presented in one of the conferences and zero otherwise. Columns (1)-(7) reports results for the estimations for papers
in any field, in the field of Micro Theory, Econometrics, Macroeconomics, Applied Microeconomics, Development and Environment Economics, and papers whose JEL codes
are missing, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by author and date of the first posting. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                                                        37
                                             Table 9. Spill-over effect
                                                                 Publication quality
                                     Any           ABS 1         ABS 2       ABS 3            ABS 4          ABS 4*
Author FE                            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes
Post Date FE                         Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes
Controls                             Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes
Control for citations                Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes
Observations                        78,621         78,621        78,621      78,621           78,621         78,621
                                      (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)              (5)            (6)
Panel A: Any conference
Conference                        -0.038***      -0.006***     -0.023***      -0.014**        0.014**       0.011**
                                  (0.008)        (0.002)       (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.006)       (0.005)
Conf.×Session with Top 1%          0.002          0.004         0.004         -0.021         -0.013         0.019
                                  (0.024)        (0.006)       (0.014)        (0.021)        (0.019)       (0.016)
R-squared                          0.511          0.104         0.179          0.231          0.191         0.279
Panel B: AEA
Conference                        -0.022*        -0.005***     -0.031***      -0.033**        0.015         0.046***
                                  (0.013)        (0.002)       (0.006)        (0.013)        (0.011)       (0.014)
Conf.×Session with Top 1%         -0.004          0.010         0.027         -0.037         -0.033         0.007
                                  (0.031)        (0.009)       (0.017)        (0.025)        (0.025)       (0.028)
R-squared                          0.511          0.104         0.179          0.232          0.191         0.280
Panel C: EEA
Conference                        -0.038***      -0.002        -0.020***      -0.005          0.011        -0.003
                                  (0.010)        (0.003)       (0.008)        (0.010)        (0.007)       (0.005)
Conf.×Session with Top 1%          0.018         -0.013***     -0.020          0.034          0.032         0.006
                                  (0.044)        (0.004)       (0.028)        (0.040)        (0.033)       (0.020)
R-squared                          0.511          0.104         0.179          0.231          0.191         0.279
Panel D: RES
Conference                        -0.042***      -0.008***     -0.020*        -0.013          0.031***     -0.009*
                                  (0.015)        (0.003)       (0.010)        (0.014)        (0.012)       (0.005)
Conf.×Session with Top 1%         -0.048         -0.001        -0.024          0.015         -0.034        -0.001
                                  (0.066)        (0.005)       (0.022)        (0.062)        (0.045)       (0.027)
R-squared                          0.511          0.104         0.178          0.231          0.191         0.279
 Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation and the probability of being
 published, controlling for the spill-over effect of having a star scholar in the session (specification 4.1). Columns
 (1)-(6) report results for publications in any journal and in ABS 1-4* journals, respectively. Panels A-D report
 results for presentation in any conference, in AEA, EEA, and RES conferences, respectively. Conference equals
 to one if the paper is presented and zero otherwise. Session with Top 1% equals to one if the paper is presented in
 the session of which any author of other papers has been in top one percent of the IDEAS/RePEc Top Economist
 ranking and zero otherwise. Standard errors are clustered by author and date of the first posting. *, **, and ***
 denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                         38
                                      Table 10. Prominent author effect
                                                                Publication quality
                                   Any           ABS 1          ABS 2       ABS 3            ABS 4          ABS 4*
Author FE                          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes
Post Date FE                       Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes
Controls                           Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes
Control for citations              Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes
Observations                      78,621         78,621         78,621      78,621           78,621         78,621
                                    (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)              (5)            (6)
Panel A: Any conference
Conference                       -0.043***     -0.024***       -0.022***     -0.015**        0.014***      0.007
                                 (0.008)       (0.004)         (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.005)       (0.004)
Conf.×Paper with Top 1%           0.042*        0.027**        -0.004        -0.015         -0.013         0.048***
                                 (0.023)       (0.011)         (0.010)       (0.019)        (0.020)       (0.017)
R-squared                         0.511         0.137           0.179         0.231          0.191         0.280
Panel B: AEA
Conference                       -0.031**      -0.015***       -0.032***     -0.036***       0.017*        0.040***
                                 (0.013)       (0.005)         (0.006)       (0.013)        (0.010)       (0.011)
Conf.×Paper with Top 1%           0.033         0.033**         0.028**      -0.022         -0.035         0.034
                                 (0.029)       (0.014)         (0.012)       (0.025)        (0.023)       (0.025)
R-squared                         0.511         0.136           0.179         0.232          0.191         0.280
Panel C: EEA
Conference                       -0.042***     -0.022***       -0.019**      -0.005          0.011        -0.005
                                 (0.010)       (0.005)         (0.008)       (0.010)        (0.007)       (0.004)
Conf.×Paper with Top 1%           0.056*        0.020          -0.029         0.017          0.019         0.022
                                 (0.032)       (0.024)         (0.019)       (0.039)        (0.035)       (0.025)
R-squared                         0.511         0.136           0.179         0.231          0.191         0.279
Panel D: RES
Conference                       -0.043***     -0.030***       -0.018*       -0.010          0.027**      -0.012**
                                 (0.016)       (0.006)         (0.010)       (0.015)        (0.011)       (0.005)
Conf.×Paper with Top 1%          -0.028        -0.019*         -0.053**      -0.030          0.038         0.037
                                 (0.065)       (0.010)         (0.021)       (0.055)        (0.059)       (0.033)
R-squared                         0.511         0.136           0.178         0.231          0.191         0.279
 Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation and the probability of being
 published, controlling for the effect of having a star scholar in the author team (specification 4.2). Columns (1)-
 (6) report results for publications in any journal and in ABS 1-4* journals, respectively. Panels A-D report results
 for presentation in any conference, in AEA, EEA, and RES conferences, respectively. Conference equals to one
 if the paper is presented and zero otherwise. Paper with Top 1% equals to one if at least one of the authors of the
 paper has been in top one percent of the IDEAS/RePEc Top Economist ranking and zero otherwise. Standard
 errors are clustered by author and date of the first posting. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance
 level, respectively.




                                                          39
                                           Table 11. Gender effect
                                   Unmatched sample                           Matched sample
                                Female          Male                     Female            Male
 Journal quality                  (1)            (2)                        (3)             (4)
 Any                           -0.050***      -0.021***                  -0.052***       -0.028***
                               (0.014)        (0.008)                    (0.016)         (0.010)
 1                             -0.020***      -0.018***                  -0.016**        -0.021***
                               (0.006)        (0.004)                    (0.007)         (0.005)
 2                             -0.016*        -0.021***                  -0.016          -0.021***
                               (0.009)        (0.005)                    (0.011)         (0.007)
 3                             -0.015         -0.010                     -0.031**        -0.021**
                               (0.013)        (0.008)                    (0.015)         (0.009)
 4                              0.001          0.016***                   0.007           0.019**
                               (0.008)        (0.006)                    (0.010)         (0.007)
 4*                             0.003          0.016***                   0.008           0.018***
                               (0.007)        (0.005)                    (0.008)         (0.006)
 Author FE                        Yes            Yes                       Yes             Yes
 Post Date FE                     Yes            Yes                       Yes             Yes
 Controls                         Yes            Yes                       Yes             Yes
 Control for citations            Yes            Yes                       Yes             Yes
 Observations                   11,452         79,546                     7,219           28,959
 R-squared                       0.290          0.268                     0.284           0.285
Notes: This table presents the comparison of the link between conference presentation and the probability of being
published between female (Columns (1) and (3)) and male authors (Columns (2) and (4)). Columns (1)-(2) report
results for unmatched samples. Columns (3)-(4) report results for matched samples. The reported coefficients are
for Conference variable which equals to one if the paper is presented in one of the conferences and zero otherwise.
*, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                       40
                         Table 12. Conference participation and paper visibility and impact
                                   Abstract views                                                    Citations
                    (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)
Conference       0.158***      0.003         0.022           0.092***          0.093***       0.043***       0.045***      0.040***
                (0.025)       (0.018)       (0.013)         (0.011)           (0.008)        (0.006)        (0.005)       (0.006)
No. of versions (Base = 1)
   2                           0.432***       0.432***       0.447***                         0.099***      0.099***       0.094***
                              (0.014)        (0.010)        (0.009)                          (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)
   3                           0.725***       0.719***       0.739***                         0.199***      0.194***       0.187***
                              (0.017)        (0.012)        (0.011)                          (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.005)
   4                           0.933***       0.932***       0.950***                         0.274***      0.263***       0.255***
                              (0.019)        (0.014)        (0.013)                          (0.008)       (0.007)        (0.007)
   5                           1.110***       1.101***       1.121***                         0.391***      0.370***       0.362***
                              (0.025)        (0.020)        (0.019)                          (0.015)       (0.013)        (0.013)
   6                           1.275***       1.261***       1.277***                         0.460***      0.442***       0.437***
                              (0.036)        (0.026)        (0.024)                          (0.023)       (0.018)        (0.018)
No. of authors (Base = 1)
   2                           0.059***       0.060***       0.088***                         0.021***      0.023***       0.021***
                              (0.012)        (0.010)        (0.009)                          (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)
   3                           0.084***       0.082***       0.145***                         0.037***      0.041***       0.036***
                              (0.015)        (0.012)        (0.011)                          (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.004)
   4                           0.060***       0.075***       0.164***                         0.040***      0.050***       0.045***
                              (0.019)        (0.014)        (0.013)                          (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.005)
   5                           0.050*         0.100***       0.200***                         0.050***      0.067***       0.060***
                              (0.026)        (0.021)        (0.019)                          (0.009)       (0.008)        (0.008)
   6                           0.042          0.095***       0.212***                         0.064***      0.089***       0.083***
                              (0.035)        (0.031)        (0.028)                          (0.017)       (0.014)        (0.014)

Author FE          No             No            Yes            Yes               No             No            Yes               Yes
Post Date FE       No             No             No            Yes               No             No             No               Yes
Observations     78,802         78,802         78,625         78,621           78,802         78,802         78,625            78,621
R-squared        0.004          0.269          0.443          0.488            0.011          0.234          0.402             0.410
           Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation and the average abstract views
        and citations received by a paper (specification (5)). Conference equals to one if the paper is presented in one of
        the conferences and zero otherwise. Abstract views is the average number of abstract views that the paper received
        monthly. Citations is the average number of citations that the paper received monthly. No. of versions is the
        number of versions of the paper. No. of authors is the number of the paper's authors. Columns (1)-(4) report
        results for the estimations with average abstract views. Columns (5)-(8) report results for the estimations with
        average citations. Standard errors are clustered by author and date of the first posting. *, **, and *** denote 10%,
        5%, and 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                                41
Figures
                    Figure 1. Publication outcomes and time/day of presentation




   Notes: This figure presents results for the link between conference presentation by conference time and the
probability of being published. The employed specification is:

                , =  +   , ,,, + ,  +  + 
                                                
                                          

    where ,,, equals to one if paper p with authors a was presented in conference c at
time slot  (presented in the horizontal lines). The list of control variables includes (1) Log(1+Citations) of which
Citations is the average number of citations that the received monthly; (2) No. of versions is the number of versions
of the paper; and (3) No. of authors is the number of the paper's authors. The solid black, red, and blue lines show
the estimated coefficients on ,,, in the estimations with publications in any journal (left
column), in ABS 4* journals (center column), and in ABS 1 journals (right column) as the outcome, respectively.
The dashed lines indicate 1.96 standard error confidence intervals.




                                                        42
   Figure 2. Dynamics of citations and abstract views before and after a major conference.




   Notes: This figure presents results for the following specification:
                                               

           (1 + ),, =  +  s ,,- + ,,  +  +  + 
                                             =-
    where  is the time of conference c where paper p was presented at,  is calendar month. The list of control
variable includes (1) Age which is the natural logarithm of the paper's age; (2) New version which equals to one
if a new version of the paper is made available and zero otherwise; (3) and Share of influential authors which is
the ratio of the number of the authors in the top ten percent of the Top Economist ranking in a given month to the
total number of authors. Outcome is the number of either monthly abstract views or citations.
The estimated coefficients on ,,- are represented by the solid blue line and the solid black line
for estimations with the number of abstract views and citations respectively. The dashed lines indicate confidence
intervals at 5% significant level. In the horizontal axis, C refers to conference. The red vertical line represents the
conference month.




                                                         43
    Appendix
                                  Appendix Table 1. Papers' monthly statistics
                       Presented papers                                       Non-presented papers
                       Min Mean Max                SD         N               Min Mean Max               SD         N
                       (1)    (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)             (6)   (7)     (8)          (9)        (10)
No. of version         1      1.977 18             1.220      373,528         1     1.560 15             0.920      7,106,429
Downloads              0      2.137 1,340          5.147      373,528         0     1.612 841            4.071      7,106,429
Abstract views         0      6.928 1,473          11.371     373,528         0     5.989 2,412          11.815     7,106,429
Citations              0      0.305 402            1.822      373,528         0     0.155 971            1.462      7,106,429
        Notes: This table presents statistics for the monthly statistics of the paper in our sample. Number of versions
    is the monthly statistics of versions of each paper available in IDEAS/RePEc. Downloads, Abstract views, and
    Citations are the monthly downloads, abstract views, and new citations that a paper gets, respectively




                                                            44
                       Appendix Table 2. Probability of presentation
                        2008         2009           2010          2011       2012
   Author FE            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes
   Age FE               Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes
                        (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)
   Panel A. AEA
   Log(1+Citations)                  -0.006         -0.012        0.004      -0.004
                                     (0.012)        (0.008)       (0.006)    (0.006)
   Version              0.023        0.024*         0.014         0.014**    0.022*
                        (0.018)      (0.014)        (0.011)       (0.007)    (0.012)
   No. of authors
   2                    0.070***     0.096***       0.090***      0.038**    0.020
                        (0.024)      (0.027)        (0.030)       (0.016)    (0.014)
   3                    0.104*       0.103**        0.077***      0.070***   0.021
                        (0.053)      (0.039)        (0.027)       (0.024)    (0.018)
   4                    0.010        0.013          0.071*        0.102**    0.007
                        (0.068)      (0.061)        (0.037)       (0.043)    (0.033)
   5                    -0.058*      -0.055         0.076         0.042      0.034
                        (0.034)      (0.042)        (0.051)       (0.056)    (0.049)
   6                    -0.075       -0.072         0.126*        -0.096     -0.055**
                        (0.071)      (0.054)        (0.070)       (0.061)    (0.021)

   Observations         928          976            1,183         2,030      2,056
   R-squared            0.176        0.262          0.260         0.254      0.225
   Panel B. EEA
   Log(1+Citations)     -0.029*      -0.014         -0.005        -0.011     -0.002
                        (0.015)      (0.010)        (0.007)       (0.007)    (0.007)
   Version              0.023        0.022          0.030*        0.013      0.036***
                        (0.017)      (0.015)        (0.017)       (0.008)    (0.013)
   No. of authors
   2                    0.078***     0.053***       0.062***      0.055***   0.011
                        (0.026)      (0.015)        (0.021)       (0.017)    (0.015)
   3                    0.128***     0.078**        0.069***      0.060***   0.006
                        (0.038)      (0.032)        (0.026)       (0.022)    (0.021)
   4                    0.150        0.059**        0.072*        0.079**    0.007
                        (0.090)      (0.029)        (0.040)       (0.032)    (0.027)
   5                    0.042        -0.013         0.010         0.128**    -0.051
                        (0.064)      (0.022)        (0.041)       (0.052)    (0.032)
   6                    -0.056       0.092***       0.036         -0.028     -0.016
                        (0.077)      (0.030)        (0.057)       (0.029)    (0.046)

   Observations         1,023        1,725          2,112         2,740      2,310
   R-squared            0.277        0.301          0.287         0.284      0.267
(continued on the next page)




                                             45
    Panel C. RES
    Log(1+Citations)           0.045            -0.012            -0.012           0.003             0.014*
                               (0.028)          (0.011)           (0.012)          (0.006)           (0.007)
    Version                    -0.033           -0.013*           0.015            -0.002            0.003
                               (0.039)          (0.007)           (0.011)          (0.008)           (0.005)
    No. of authors
    2                          0.107*           0.107***          0.077***         0.050**           0.052***
                               (0.053)          (0.039)           (0.022)          (0.022)           (0.016)
    3                          0.046            0.155**           0.075**          0.049**           0.060***
                               (0.056)          (0.063)           (0.037)          (0.022)           (0.020)
    4                          0.143            0.106**           0.066*           0.105**           0.016
                               (0.102)          (0.052)           (0.034)          (0.047)           (0.022)
    5                          0.243            0.218             0.062            0.080             0.074*
                               (0.183)          (0.135)           (0.097)          (0.061)           (0.044)
    6                          0.209***         0.058             0.027            -0.047**          0.075
                               (0.075)          (0.048)           (0.055)          (0.023)           (0.051)

    Observations               427              490               848              1,879             2,699
    R-squared                  0.312            0.312             0.319            0.271             0.233
    Notes: This table reports results for the link between pre-conference quality and probability of being accepted
to a conference. Samples for estimation are assembled as follows. For each conference ­ year, a paper is
considered as "potentially accepted" for presentation if it satisfies all criteria: (1) was listed in IDEAS/RePEc
prior the submission deadline of this year's conference, (2) was listed after the 2005 conference's submission
deadline, and (3) was not presented in the past conferences. Columns (1)-(5) show results for the samples of
"potentially accepted" papers to conferences in 2008-2012, respectively. Panels A-C show results for the samples
of "potentially accepted" papers to AEA, EEA, and RES conferences, respectively. Citations is the natural
logarithm of one plus number of total citations received by the paper over 12 months prior to the submission
deadline. Version is the number of versions that a paper has prior to the submission deadline. No. of authors which
is the number of authors of the paper. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                        46
Appendix Table 3. Conference participation (by conference) and publication outcomes (by quality)
   Author fixed effect                No             No          Yes        Yes         Yes
   Post Date fixed effect             No             No          No         Yes         Yes
                                       (1)            (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)
                                 Panel A. ABS 1
   Conference                    -0.009***      -0.018***   -0.018***   -0.023***   -0.021***
                                 (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
   Log(1+Citations)                                                                 -0.057***
                                                                                    (0.004)
   No. of versions (Base = 1)
   2                                            0.056***    0.055***    0.052***    0.057***
                                                (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
   3                                            0.059***    0.061***    0.057***    0.068***
                                                (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.004)
   4                                            0.059***    0.065***    0.061***    0.076***
                                                (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.006)
   5                                            0.053***    0.062***    0.058***    0.078***
                                                (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
   6                                            0.037***    0.043***    0.041***    0.066***
                                                (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
   No. of authors (Base = 1)
   2                                            -0.004**    -0.003      -0.005**    -0.004*
                                                (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
   3                                            -0.002      -0.002      -0.006**    -0.004
                                                (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
   4                                            -0.002      -0.005      -0.010***   -0.008**
                                                (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
   5                                            0.014*      0.007       0.001       0.004
                                                (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
   6                                            0.007       -0.007      -0.013      -0.008
                                                (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)

   R-squared                     0.000          0.025       0.126       0.133       0.136
                                 Panel B. ABS 2
   Conference                    0.004          -0.012**    -0.020***   -0.025***   -0.023***
                                 (0.005)        (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
   Log(1+Citations)                                                                 -0.058***
                                                                                    (0.005)
   No. of versions (Base = 1)
   2                                            0.099***    0.093***    0.090***    0.095***
                                                (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
   3                                            0.117***    0.116***    0.112***    0.123***
                                                (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
   4                                            0.109***    0.117***    0.113***    0.128***
                                                (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.008)
   5                                            0.102***    0.121***    0.117***    0.138***
                                                (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)
   6                                            0.071***    0.089***    0.085***    0.110***
                                                (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.010)
   No. of authors (Base = 1)
   2                                            -0.001      -0.001      -0.003      -0.002
                                                (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.002)
   3                                            -0.003      -0.004      -0.008***   -0.006**
                                                (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
   4                                            0.003       -0.004      -0.010**    -0.007*
                                                (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
   5                                            -0.002      -0.012*     -0.020***   -0.016**
                                                (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
   6                                            0.000       -0.016*     -0.022**    -0.017*
                                                (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)

   R-squared                     0.000          0.048       0.170       0.177       0.179
  (continued on the next page)


                                                    47
                               Panel C. ABS 3
 Conference                    0.057***       0.015**    -0.001     -0.014*     -0.017**
                               (0.009)        (0.008)    (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.007)
 Log(1+Citations)                                                               0.070***
                                                                                (0.011)
 No. of versions (Base = 1)
 2                                           0.180***    0.168***   0.160***    0.153***
                                             (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.007)     (0.006)
 3                                           0.251***    0.246***   0.236***    0.223***
                                             (0.008)     (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.008)
 4                                           0.270***    0.275***   0.265***    0.247***
                                             (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.011)
 5                                           0.283***    0.300***   0.287***    0.262***
                                             (0.015)     (0.014)    (0.015)     (0.015)
 6                                           0.258***    0.290***   0.281***    0.250***
                                             (0.018)     (0.017)    (0.018)     (0.018)
 No. of authors (Base = 1)
 2                                           -0.001      0.000      -0.006*     -0.007**
                                             (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
 3                                           0.013***    0.009**    -0.003      -0.006
                                             (0.005)     (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)
 4                                           0.012*      0.008      -0.009      -0.012*
                                             (0.007)     (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)
 5                                           0.022**     0.013      -0.008      -0.012
                                             (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.010)     (0.010)
 6                                           0.005       0.004      -0.017      -0.023
                                             (0.015)     (0.014)    (0.014)     (0.014)

 R-squared                     0.002         0.116       0.219      0.230       0.231
                               Panel D. ABS 4
 Conference                    0.050***      0.025***    0.019***   0.017***    0.012**
                               (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)
 Log(1+Citations)                                                               0.107***
                                                                                (0.010)
 No. of versions (Base = 1)
 2                                           0.069***    0.067***   0.063***    0.053***
                                             (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
 3                                           0.120***    0.120***   0.114***    0.094***
                                             (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)
 4                                           0.158***    0.157***   0.151***    0.124***
                                             (0.008)     (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.008)
 5                                           0.197***    0.195***   0.188***    0.149***
                                             (0.012)     (0.011)    (0.012)     (0.011)
 6                                           0.214***    0.221***   0.215***    0.168***
                                             (0.016)     (0.015)    (0.015)     (0.015)
 No. of authors (Base = 1)
 2                                           0.006***    0.004      0.002       -0.001
                                             (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)
 3                                           0.001       0.001      -0.004      -0.008**
                                             (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
 4                                           0.000       0.004      -0.001      -0.006
                                             (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)
 5                                           -0.025***   -0.018**   -0.023***   -0.030***
                                             (0.008)     (0.007)    (0.008)     (0.008)
 6                                           -0.026***   -0.012     -0.015      -0.024***
                                             (0.010)     (0.009)    (0.009)     (0.009)

 R-squared                     0.004         0.070       0.176      0.183       0.191
(continued on the next page)




                                                 48
                                  Panel E. ABS 4*
 Conference                       0.045***      0.028***           0.024***        0.021***        0.013***
                                  (0.006)       (0.005)            (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)
 Log(1+Citations)                                                                                  0.215***
                                                                                                   (0.012)
 No. of versions (Base = 1)
 2                                                0.036***         0.034***        0.031***        0.011***
                                                  (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)
 3                                                0.062***         0.060***        0.057***        0.017***
                                                  (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.003)
 4                                                0.089***         0.084***        0.080***        0.025***
                                                  (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.006)
 5                                                0.134***         0.125***        0.121***        0.043***
                                                  (0.012)          (0.011)         (0.010)         (0.010)
 6                                                0.179***         0.176***        0.172***        0.078***
                                                  (0.017)          (0.016)         (0.016)         (0.014)
 No. of authors (Base = 1)
 2                                                0.007***         0.001           -0.001          -0.005***
                                                  (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)
 3                                                0.014***         0.009***        0.006**         -0.002
                                                  (0.002)          (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)
 4                                                0.004            0.005           0.001           -0.009***
                                                  (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)
 5                                                0.011            0.017***        0.013*          -0.000
                                                  (0.007)          (0.006)         (0.007)         (0.006)
 6                                                -0.018**         -0.003          -0.009          -0.027***
                                                  (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.007)

  R-squared                          0.005          0.053          0.222           0.228           0.279
  Observations                       78,802         78,802         78,625          78,621          78,621
   Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation and the probability of being
published in the ABS 1-4* journals. Conference equals to one if the paper is presented in one of the conferences
and zero otherwise. Citations is the average number of citations that the received monthly. No. of versions is the
number of versions of the paper. No. of authors is the number of the paper's authors. Column 1 reports results for
the estimation without control variables. Columns (2)-(5) report results when control variables are added. Panels
A-E show results for publications in ABS 1-4* journals, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by author and
date of the first posting. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively.




                                                       49
Appendix Table 4. Conference participation (by conference) and publication outcomes (by quality) -
                                                       LASSO
                                   Any           1             2            3             4            4*
                                   (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
   Conference                                    -0.014        -0.012                     0.015        0.014
   Log(1+Citations)                0.289         -0.055        -0.050       0.077         0.111        0.215
   No. of versions (Base = 1)
   2                               0.396         0.064         0.101        0.162         0.054        0.010
   3                               0.553         0.074         0.126        0.230         0.096        0.016
   4                               0.630         0.082         0.130        0.250         0.124        0.024
   5                               0.703         0.084         0.136        0.262         0.150        0.042
   6                               0.705         0.073         0.108        0.239         0.162        0.072
   No. of authors (Base = 1)
   2                                             -0.001        0.003                                   -0.004
   3                                             0.003                      0.004         -0.005
   4                               -0.007        0.004         -0.002                     -0.010       -0.005
   5                                             0.006                                    -0.008       -0.005
   6                               -0.049        -0.005        -0.005                     -0.023       -0.023
     Notes: This table presents results for the link between conference presentation and the probability of being
  published in any journal and in the ABS 1-4* journals (Columns 1-6) using LASSO (Least Absolute Shrinkage
  and Selection Operator) method for estimation. The optimal penalty level is chosen based on the Extended
  Bayesian Information Criterion (EBIC). Conference equals to one if the paper is presented in one of the
  conferences and zero otherwise. Citations is the average number of citations that the received monthly. No. of
  versions is the number of versions of the paper. No. of authors is the number of the paper's authors. Author fixed
  effect is controlled for. Missing coefficient means the coefficient estimate is not selected into the model.




                                                          50
