                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   OVERCOMING CONTRACTUAL INCOMPLETENESS:
                        THE ROLE OF GUIDING PRINCIPLES

                                        David Frydlinger
                                         Oliver D. Hart

                                       Working Paper 26245
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26245


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




Frydlinger: Managing Partner, Cirio law firm (email: David.Frydlinger@cirio.se); Hart:
Department of Economics, Harvard University (email: ohart@harvard.edu). We would like to
thank Hal Bretan, Sylvain Chassang, Tim Cummins, Tore Ellingsen, Christoph Engel, Maija
Halonen, Louis Kaplow, Henrik Lando, Klaus Schmidt, Andrei Shleifer, Kathy Spier, Jonathan
Wight, and Christian Zehnder for helpful suggestions, and Angie Acquatella and Erica
Moszkowski for research assistance. We have benefited from the comments of participants at the
Mini-Conference on Relational Contact Management, Copenhagen Business School (2018), the
research seminar in law, economics and organization at Harvard Law School (2019), the
Symposium in Honor of Martin Hellwig (2019), the NBER working group in organizational
economics (2019), the 13th International Conference, Challenges of Europe, Croatia (2019), the
University of Bristol contract theory workshop (2019), and SIOE (2019). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26245.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by David Frydlinger and Oliver D. Hart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Overcoming Contractual Incompleteness: The Role of Guiding Principles
David Frydlinger and Oliver D. Hart
NBER Working Paper No. 26245
September 2019
JEL No. D23,D86,K12

                                         ABSTRACT

We consider a buyer and seller who contract over a service. The contract encourages investment
and provides a reference point for the transaction. In normal times the contract works well. But
with some probability an abnormal state occurs and the service must be modified. The parties
expect each other to behave "reasonably", but given self-serving biases their views of
reasonableness may not coincide, leading to aggrievement and deadweight losses. The adoption
by the parties of guiding principles such as loyalty and equity in their contract can help. We
provide supporting evidence in the form of case studies and interviews.


David Frydlinger
Cirio Law Firm
Cirio Advokatbyrå AB
Box 3294, 103 65
Stockholm
Sweden
David.Frydlinger@cirio.se

Oliver D. Hart
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 220
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ohart@harvard.edu
1. Introduction

A growing number of organizations world-wide, such as the Canadian Government, Dell, Intel and the
Swedish telecommunications operator Telia Company, have begun to adopt an alternative approach to
contract negotiations and contract management in their outsourcing and supply chain deals, and in
other complex transactions1. In this new approach, emphasis is placed on shared goals, the adoption of
guiding principles, and structured communication. These organizations report significantly improved
results and that the new approach has helped them to overcome obstacles and frictions that have been
well-known for a long time but hard to deal with through traditional contracts.2 One of the authors of
the current paper (Frydlinger) has assisted several organizations to apply this alternative approach to
contracting.

The goal of this paper is to explain how and why the new approach works, and why traditional ones do
not. In a nutshell, our answer is that in complex relationships contracts are inevitably incomplete. Each
party will expect the other to behave "reasonably" or "fairly" in interpreting or completing the contract,
but given self-serving biases the parties may have different views of what is reasonable or fair. This can
lead to bad feelings and counter-actions, causing deadweight losses. We argue that the parties can
mitigate these deadweight losses by incorporating guiding principles, such as loyalty and equity, and
structured communication processes, into their formal contract. We suggest that these guiding
principles, which are fundamental social norms, can be `activated' through ex ante and ex post
communication3. We argue that a contract that specifies standard elements such as the price and the
nature of the good or service to be traded can, in combination with the adoption of guiding principles,
perform better than either a standard contract alone, or the adoption of guiding principles alone. The
contract will also perform better than one based on standard mechanism design theory.

Before describing our model, let us expand on some of these points. Contractual incompleteness has the
implication that events not covered by the contract may occur, and that the contract may be open to
more than one interpretation4. In both cases the parties will have some discretion as to how to fill in the
gaps of the contract. If the final outcome is seen as unfair by one or both of the parties, there will be bad
feeling or "aggrievement", in the words of Hart and Moore (2008). Aggrievement can lead to several
types of deadweight losses. First, the aggrieved party may engage in "shading" behavior (see Hart and
Moore (2008)): he (or she) punishes the other party by withholding favors because he is angry, even
though this does not increase his own payoff. Second, the aggrieved party may "shirk": he performs
within the letter rather than the spirit of the contract so as to recover some of the profit he feels


1
  This approach is based on research carried out at the University of Tennessee. See Vitasek et al. (2013).
2
  See, for example, Vitasek (2016) regarding Dell, Vitasek and DiBenedetto (2018a) regarding Island Health and
Hospitalists (Canadian Government), Vitasek et al. (2017) regarding Intel, and Vitasek and DiBenedetto (2018b)
regarding Telia Company.
3
  Throughout this paper, by "communication" we mean not only the transmission of information from one party to
another, but also the discussion and realization of a common understanding about various matters, including
guiding principles.
4
  For a discussion of different types of contractual incompleteness, see Ayres and Gertner (1992) and Hart and
Moore (1999).

                                                                                                             3
entitled to, at the expense of the other party (the assumption is that he would not shirk if he felt well-
treated). Third, the aggrieved party may have to "eat" his aggrievement and incur psychic costs5. Finally,
the parties may have to expend time and resources "placating" the aggrieved party in order to eliminate
the aggrievement and any counter-actions.

In all of these cases there will be deadweight losses going forward in the relationship. Moreover, we
suggest that aggrievement and the resulting deadweight losses will be higher in bad states of the world
where parties are below their reference payoffs. That is, if things are going well, a party may be less
concerned and react less negatively if he does not receive the "best" outcome6.

One approach to reduce these deadweight losses is for the parties to hire sophisticated lawyers, who
can help them to write contracts that anticipate more events and are less open to interpretation. In
practice this is often a fool's errand. We argue that a better approach--and one that is increasingly
being adopted--is for the parties to accept a certain degree of incompleteness and incorporate guiding
principles, such as loyalty and equity, and structured communication processes, into their formal
contract.

To make these ideas precise, we develop a very stylized model. Needless to say, the model is much
simpler than the commercial deals referred to above. In addition, it focuses on just one negative
consequence of contractual incompleteness--the occurrence of events not covered by the contract--and
just one deadweight loss--shading. Nevertheless, later in the paper, we will argue that the model provides
a useful way to think about real deals. In the model, Buyer  and Seller  meet at date 0, and plan to
trade at date 1. Imagine that  is putting on a concert and that  is providing band services. A contract
specifying the price and (many aspects of) the quality of the music is written at date 0. 's costs are
verifiable, but there is moral hazard and so it is efficient to make  the residual claimant on costs. Given
this assignment, a first-best effort choice is achieved and there is no hold-up problem.

Much of the time (with probability 1 - ), this contract delivers a desirable outcome. However, with
probability  an abnormally bad state occurs. Imagine that this is a state where the usual trumpeter that
 was planning to hire for the band is unavailable. (The abnormal state covers many possibilities like this
and that is why we will suppose that it cannot be contracted on.) So a replacement must be found at
short notice. If is an independent contractor, the replacement is 's choice (she has residual decision


5
  See Hart and Moore (2008).
6
  For a discussion of this idea, and some supporting evidence, see Lando (2019). The practitioners whom we
interviewed (see Section 5) also agreed that conflicts are more serious in bad states of the world, although they
may still occur in good states. In emphasizing deadweight losses arising from aggrievement we do not wish to deny
the existence of other sorts of deadweight losses, e.g., those resulting from bargaining (emphasized by Coase
(1937) and Williamson (1975), and analyzed by Bajari and Tadelis (2001)). Bargaining costs are hard to formalize
not least because it would seem that they can be eliminated through the use of sophisticated mechanisms
(Chakravarty and MacLeod (2009) argue that standard form construction contracts provide such a mechanism).
Also it is easier to explain how the guiding principles discussed below reduce aggrievement costs as opposed to
bargaining costs.



                                                                                                               4
rights over the band composition). Under standard assumptions of rationality and self-interest,  would
threaten to choose the cheapest replacement (consistent with the contract), but if another trumpeter is
more efficient the parties will renegotiate. Since we will assume that there is symmetric information,
the first-best is achieved.

In Section 3 we explain why we do not believe that things will work as smoothly as this in practice. The
reason is that the contract creates reference payoffs. Since the abnormal state is unusual, each party's
reference payoff will be biased toward his payoff in the normal state. If the abnormal state occurs, at
least one party will be below his reference payoff and will expect the other party to behave fairly.
However, in the absence of communication the parties may have different views of what is fair. An
implication of this is that  may be upset and angry if  threatens to choose a cheap but bad trumpeter:
his reasoning will be that the least  could do is to mitigate 's losses by choosing a good (albeit worse
than the original) trumpeter.  may be even more upset if he is pressured to pay for a good trumpeter
("extortion"). We follow Hart and Moore (2008) in supposing that an aggrieved party will retaliate by
withholding (noncontractible) cooperation ("shading"). This creates deadweight costs.

In Section 4 we argue that there is a way to reduce deadweight costs. Ideally the parties would change
their reference points so that each party's reference payoff in the abnormal state equals their payoff in
that state. We do not believe that this is feasible. Instead we argue that the parties can at least partially
align their preferences when bad things happen by adopting guiding principles. (In practice
communication can also have the important effect of aligning reference payoffs by creating a shared
vision. We do not model that here.) In our formal analysis we focus on one guiding principle, loyalty. By
this we mean a principle that obliges each party to treat the other party's interest as having a
comparable importance to their own. We formalize this by supposing that through communication and
discussion at dates 0 and 1 the parties can transform their payoffs so that each party puts weight on
the other party's payoff, where 0 <  < 17. However, communication and discussion are not costless.
The higher  is,the higher are the costs that must be incurred in discussion and communication.

We solve for the optimal contract under communication. Since communication helps only in the
abnormal state, our analysis yields the plausible result that communication is worthwhile only if the
abnormal state is somewhat likely. To put it another way, in routine situations where unexpected events
are rare, a standard contract may suffice.

As noted, the commercial deals referred to above are much more complex than the simple concert
example on which we base our model. In addition, those deals involve several other components than
the guiding principle of loyalty. We believe, however, that our model can be used to identify some
central aspects and consequences of contractual incompleteness and also that our simplified solution ­
communication about and based on activated guiding principles ­ captures an essential reason why the
referred to organizations have been able to reduce deadweight losses and overcome contractual



7
 For a discussion of how the adoption of social preferences can increase efficiency when parties cannot write fully
contingent contracts, see Chassang and Zehnder (2016).

                                                                                                                  5
incompleteness. We elaborate on these points in Section 5, where we report on some case studies and
interviews.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we set up the model and describe the optimal contract
under standard assumptions of rationality and self-interest. In Section 3 we explain why we do not think
that the standard solution will work in practice, given the parties' behavioral biases. In Section 4 we
analyze how adoption of a loyalty principle can help. In Section 5 we describe some interviews and case
studies that provide some support for our analysis. In Section 6 we discuss the use of complementary
principles, such as equity. Finally, Section 7 concludes. In an appendix we consider how things change if
 purchases 's operations and turns  into an employee.



2. Model

Buyer  is putting on a concert. Seller is providing the band. and  contract at date 0 and the
concert takes place at date 1. There is no discounting, and the parties are risk neutral and wealth
unconstrained.

There are two states of the world. In the normal state  which occurs with probability 1 - , the usual
trumpeter, Eve, is available to play in the band. 's revenue =  and 's cost=  . In the abnormal state
A, which occurs with probability , Eve is unavailable because she has broken her finger. There are two
alternative trumpeters, Adam and George. Since these are late replacements, it is reasonable to suppose
that they are more expensive than Eve and of worse quality. Denoting incremental cost and value by
,  , respectively, we have:

                                   Cost relative to Eve        Value relative to Eve

                  Adam                   5 > 0                       5 < 0
                 George                  7 > 0                       7 < 0



After Eve has been replaced, 's revenue = + 9 and 's cost= +9 , where i= or.

The following numerical example is useful: 5 =-10, 5 =8, 7 =-14, 7 = 6.

All relevant variables are observable but only some are verifiable. We suppose that  and  are
nonverifiable (and nontransferable), while and +  are verifiable and transferable (but  is not
verifiable). However,  depends on 's effort , which is private information, and which has a personal
cost to  equal to  ("moral hazard"). In contrast , , and do not depend on . S's effort might
represent time spent identifying and negotiating with appropriate musicians after the contract is signed
and before the concert takes place: a high ex ante effort reduces ex post costs. We assume that () is
decreasing in  and exhibits diminishing returns:  D < 0,  DD > 0,  D (0) = -, lim   D ()=0.
                                                                                  IK



                                                                                                        6
Asweshallsee, theassumptionthat, , and are independent of  implies that the hold-up
problem is easily avoided in this model.

Later in the paper we will introduce some further ("shading") actions that  and  can engage in, which
will affect costs and benefits. Since these actions play no role under the classical assumptions of this
section, we postpone discussion of them.

It is worth justifying some of these assumptions. First, in many situations it is difficult to verify the value
of a service to a buyer either because the buyer purchases services from several sellers and it is hard to
keep them apart, or because the benefit is non-monetary. Second, it would be easy to generalize the
analysis to the case where value is verifiable but there is moral hazard on the buyer's side. In contrast,
we assume that cost is verifiable, but subject to moral hazard on the seller's side, because this is
realistic8.

We suppose that it is still worth going ahead with the concert in the abnormal state:  - (0) +
(5 - 5 , 7 - 7 ) > 0.




Figure 1 provides a time-line.


                     0                                0+                                1


               B and S sign                     S chooses e                     N or A realized
               initial contract                                                 In A, Adam or
                                                                                George chosen
                                                                                to replace Eve
                                                  Figure 1


For most of the paper we will focus on the case where, in order to solve the moral hazard problem,  is
allocated all the costs. In Appendix 2, however, we consider the case where bears all the costs.


8
 Note that we suppose that, although final cost in the abnormal state  + is verifiable, the incremental cost 
of hiring Adam or George rather than Eve is not. This is to rule out contracts of the form:  bears cost c, while 
bears incremental cost . One interpretation is that the final terms of Eve's contract have not yet been settled
when she breaks her finger, and so the cost of having her (what 's cost would have been if it was not necessary to
replace Eve) can never be established. A similar assumption about the nonverifiability of incremental cost is made
by Bajari and Tadelis (2001).



                                                                                                                 7
Without loss of generality assume that George is cheaper than Adam: 7 < 5 . The interesting case is
where there is an ex post conflict of interest: George is a worse trumpeter than Adam, that is, 7 <
5 .

To simplify the exposition, we will confine our attention throughout to the case where Adam is more
efficient than George, 5 - 5 > 7 - 7 . The analysis where George is more efficient than Adam
is very similar (although less interesting).

Assume():5 - 5 > 7 - 7 .

Note that () is satisfied in our numerical example.

The first-best

A social planner chooses Eve's replacement in state  in an efficient manner, and chooses  to maximize
expected net surplus. Ex post surplus is given by

(2.1)  - () in state ,

and by

(2.2)  - () + 5 - 5 in state ,

and so expected net surplus is

(2.3)  - () -  + (5 - 5 ).

The planner maximizes (2.3) with respect to . The first-order condition is

(2.4)  D () = -1.

Denote the solution by Z[ . Note that since the abnormal state affects value and cost independently of
, the probability  of the abnormal state does not affect the first-best effort level.

Substituting Z[ in (2.3), we can write the first-best level of net surplus as

(2.5)  - (Z[ ) - Z[ + (5 - 5 ).



A simple contract that achieves the first-best under classical assumptions

In what follows we will suppose that state  cannot be contracted on: Eve's unavailability is only one of
many things that can go wrong. We will also assume that choosing Eve's replacement qualifies as a
"residual control right" or "residual decision right" in the sense of Grossman-Hart (1986), and that  has
this right (  and are separate entities). Furthermore, Adam and George are both feasible choices for
, in the sense that neither violates the date 0 contract. In Appendix 2 we consider the case where 
purchases 's operations, acquiring residual control rights, and  becomes an employee.

                                                                                                        8
In spite of the fact that the parties cannot contract on state , there is a simple way to achieve the first-
best under "classical" assumptions that the parties are self-interested and rational: write an incomplete
contract and renegotiate if state occurs.

Proposition 1. Under classical assumptions, a contract that specifies the price of band services, and that
 will bear all the costs, and that permits renegotiation ex post, achieves the first-best.

Proof: Let  and  agree on a price  for the band and that  will bear all of the costs, () in state 
and  () +  in state  (which recall are verifiable). In state  everything proceeds smoothly: Eve plays
in the band and  pays . The payoffs are given by:

(2.6) 's ex post payoff in state  =  - , 's ex post payoff in state  =  - ().

In state ,  must replace Eve. 's incentive is to choose George since he is cheaper. However, George is
worse for . Since Adam is more efficient than George, the parties will renegotiate (there is symmetric
information and so renegotiation is costless). Assume (without loss of generality) that the parties have
equal bargaining power. Then in state , the payoffs are given by:
                                                         _
(2.7) 's ex post payoff in stateA =  -  + 7 + ` a5 - 5 - (7 - 7 )b,

                                                             _
(2.8) 's ex post payoff in state  =  - () - 7 + ` a5 - 5 - (7 - 7 )b.

The parties' ex-ante expected payoffs are given by
                                                     _
(2.9) 's expected payoff =  -  +  c7 + ` a5 - 5 - 7 + 7 bd,

                                                                 _
(2.10) 's expected payoff =  - () -  +  c-7 + ` a5 - 5 - 7 + 7 bd.

Under rational expectations,  will choose  to maximize (2.10), which yields the first-order condition

(2.11)  D () = -1.

The first-best is achieved.   Q.E.D.

Assume that there is a competitive market for sellers at date 0, and that the market-clearing expected
return for a seller is . Then price  will satisfy

                                          _
(2.12)  - (Z[ ) - Z[ +  c-7 + ` a5 - 5 - 7 + 7 bd = ,

and so 's expected payoff equals

(2.13)  -  (Z[ ) -  Z[ + (5 - 5 ) - .

In other words,  receives the first-best level of surplus minus .



                                                                                                             9
At the risk of belaboring the point, note that, in contrast to the standard literature, although the above
contract is incomplete (state  cannot be contracted on), there is no underinvestment in. The reason
is that  and the incremental payoffs ,  are independent of . Hence, the contract for band
services at price  avoids the hold-up problem and provides  with socially optimal investment
incentives (choice of ). Note that if no contract at all were written at date 0 there would be a hold-up
problem. At date 1 and  would bargain over the gains from trade  - () in state  and  - () +
5 - 5 in state . If they split these 50:50, 's ex ante payoff will equal
         _      _           _
(2.14)   `
              - `  () + ` (5 - 5 ) - ,

and so  will satisfy the first-order condition
         _ D
(2.15)   `
            ()      = -1,

which implies  < Z[ .

3. Why we think that the classical contracting solution will not work in practice

In this section we explain why the simple contract of Section 2 is unlikely to work in practice. In our view
a key factor is that the contract creates reference points. The creation of reference points has both
positive and negative elements. On the positive side, the contract nails things down in the normal state
and avoids disagreement there. But, on the negative side, the contract-created reference points may
cause problems in the abnormal state.

Specifically, we suppose that each party has a reference payoff based on the probability distribution of
payoffs under the contract (as in Kszegi and Rabin (2006)). When a party is below his reference payoff
he will become sensitive to the actions of the other party, expecting the other party to behave "fairly",
and being disappointed or aggrieved if this does not happen. Aggrievement will lead to the withdrawal
of (noncontractible) cooperation, or "shading" in the language of Hart and Moore (2008), with
consequent deadweight losses. One difference from Hart and Moore (2008) is that we suppose that a
party is aggrieved and shades only if he does not receive a "fair" outcome and is below his reference
payoff.

In our context, examples of shading might be  not providing beer for the band members during the
interval, not cleaning or heating the changing room adequately, or being slow to pay; or  refusing to
play an encore, being rude to customers, or turning up late9. We will suppose that such shading actions
always exist.

In our model, what puts a party below his reference payoff is the occurrence of the abnormal state .
We should emphasize that we suppose that the event "Eve breaks her finger" is exogenous and not
something that either party could have controlled or prepared for. Thus, we take the view that neither
party will blame the other for the fact that  has occurred. For this reason a party does not feel

9
 Although some of these actions could in principle be contracted on, at least ex post, in practice they are often
discretionary.

                                                                                                                    10
aggrieved about the fact that the abnormal state has occurred per se. Rather, because the party is
below his (or her) reference payoff, he expects the other party to behave in a fair manner and will shade
if he feels that the other party does not.

Our basic position is that absent communication at date 0 the parties may have different views of what
is fair. In fact we suppose that a party below his reference point has an extreme self-serving bias (as in
Hart and Moore (2008)): he feels entitled to the best outcome under the existing contract. Note that a
party does not feel entitled to his reference payoff: he merely feels entitled to the best payoff consistent
with the contract to the extent that this is below his reference payoff. In Section 4 we will discuss how
communication can be used to align the parties' preferences.

We model shading as in Hart and Moore (2008). We suppose that a party who feels entitled to a payoff
 but receives a payoff  D < , will be aggrieved by  -  and will retaliate by shading on performance in
such a way that the other party's payoff falls by ( - ), where 0 <  < 1 is an exogenous parameter
("negative reciprocity"). The party doing the shading neither gains nor loses (significantly) from shading:
the only effect is on the party who is the recipient of the shading. Shading is noncontractible.

Note that, since 0 <  < 1, it never pays one party to hand over money to the other party to reduce
shading: a transfer of t reduces shading by  but costs t>.

In what follows the contract will continue to provide  with first-best effort incentives and so we will set
 = Z[ and write (Z[ ) = .

Since  is an unusual state, the parties' reference payoffs will be weighted toward their payoffs in the
normal state . To simplify we suppose in the body of the paper that the parties' reference payoffs
equal their ex post payoffs in state :

(3.1) 's reference payoff =  - , 's reference payoff =  - .

In Appendix 1 we consider the case where reference payoffs equal expected payoffs10.

If renegotiation proceeds as in Section 2, we know from (2.7) that
                                                           _
(3.2) 's ex post payoff in stateA =  -  + 7 + ` a5 - 5 - (7 - 7 )b= -  +
_
    a(5 - 5 ) + (7 + 7 )b,
`

and so  is below his reference payoff by
        _
(3.3) - a7 + (7 - 5 ) + 5 b,
        `




10
  In the case analyzed in the body of the paper, where reference payoffs equal payoffs in the normal state, it will
turn out that aggrievement and shading are the same as in Hart and Moore (2008). However, this is no longer the
case if reference payoffs equal expected payoffs since aggrievement is bounded above by the difference between
expected payoffs and actual payoffs. See Appendix 1.

                                                                                                                 11
a positive amount since 7 < 0, 5 < 0, 7 < 5 .  may be below or above her reference payoff
after renegotiation depending on the parameters.

In our numerical example, 5 =-10, 5 =8, 7 =-14, 7 = 6,  is below his reference payoff by 13.

Since  is below his reference payoff, he will feel that  should have chosen Adam in the first place to
help him out (this is the best outcome under the existing contract, and yields a payoff that is below his
payoff in the normal state). This would have put  -5 below his reference point. Thus,  will be
               _
aggrieved by       a5 - 7 + 5 - 7 b , the difference between the loss he bears and the loss that he
               `
                                                      _
thinks he should have borne, and will shade by ` a5 - 7 + 5 - 7 b.

In our numerical example, if  had chosen Adam directly,  would have been 10 below his reference
payoff. Hence he is aggrieved by 3 and shades by 3.

But the situation may be worse than this.  may regard 's threat to hire George unless  agrees to
renegotiate as coercive, particularly if  asks for more than the incremental cost of choosing Adam
rather than George, that is, anything above 5 - 7 .  may then refuse to renegotiate out of
principle, leaving the outcome as George. In this case the deadweight loss is 5 - 5 - 7 + 7 +
(5 - 7 ), where the first term reflects the fact that George is less efficient than Adam and the
second term that 's final payoff =  -  + 7 , whereas he feels entitled to -  +5 .

In the rest of this section, we suppose that  is prepared to make the minimum payment 5 - 7
necessary to persuade  to choose Adam rather than George, but no more. However, he will be
aggrieved that he has to make this payment since he feels entitled to Adam, and will shade by (5 -
7 )11. In our numerical example,  is aggrieved by 2 and shades by 2.

There is one small lacuna that needs to be dealt with. The above discussion implicitly assumes that

(**) 5 - 7 > a5 -  7 b.

(**) ensures that, absent a payment from ,  will choose George rather than Adam: the cost reduction
from doing so exceeds the shading cost  would impose. We assume (**) in the rest of the paper.

To sum up, given the above assumptions, we may conclude that in state  the efficient outcome Adam
will occur but  will have to pay (5 - 7 ) to  , and will be aggrieved and will shade by (5 -
7 ).

We can now compute the parties' payoffs.

(3.4) 's ex post payoff in stateA =  -  + 5 -(5 - 7 ),


11
  We rule out the possibility that parties feel entitled to (further) price changes to make up for their losses; for
example, (resp. , )might feel entitled to a price increase (resp., price decrease) because her cost (resp., his
value) has risen (resp., fallen) as a result of Eve's breaking her finger. But see Section 6.

                                                                                                                       12
(3.5) 's ex post payoff in state A (ignoring shading) =  -  () -  7 .

Hence 's expected payoff net of effort and shading costs equals

(3.6)  - () -  - 7 - (5 - 7 ).

Since  maximizes (3.6), we can confirm that  will choose  = Z[ .

The price  adjusts so that 's expected payment equals . Thus

(3.7)  - (Z[ ) - Z[ - 7 - (5 - 7 )  = .

's expected payment equals

(3.8)  -  + a5 - 5 + 7 b =

          - (Z[ ) - Z[ + (5 - 5 ) - (5 - 7 ) -  .

Finally, expected shading costs or deadweight losses are given by

(3.9)  = (5 - 7 ).

In other words, contrary to the classical approach, the first-best is not achieved.

In Appendix 1, we extend the analysis to the case where each party's reference payoff is given by his or
her expected payoff (as in Kszegi and Rabin (2006))12. We show that qualitatively things do not change.
Indeed for small  they do not change at all.



 4. How communication leading to the adoption of guiding principles can help

 In this section we suggest a way for  and  to improve matters. While still being important to
 safeguard investments (in this case, the seller's choice of effort, ), the contract can be written to
 ensure alignment of preferences, thereby avoiding shading behavior. As a matter of fact, in many
 situations, we would argue that such alignment is the best and maybe the only way to ensure good
 performance.

Specifically,  and  could write a contract that specifies the service, quality and price but that also
includes a number of guiding principles of fairness that the parties commit to apply in case of
unexpected events. For simplicity, in this section, we will focus on one such principle, a principle of
loyalty. In our general discussion in Section 6, however, we will consider also the role of other principles.



12
  Of course, a critical question is why each party's reference payoff in state  does not equal his payoff in state .
In this case there would no aggrievement or shading and the first-best would be achieved. It is a basic assumption
of our analysis that a perfect state-contingent adjustment of reference points is (psychologically) infeasible.

                                                                                                                  13
 By a principle of loyalty, we mean a principle that obliges each party to treat the other party's interest
 as having a comparable importance to their own. Applying this principle could mean that a party should
 refrain from taking an action that costs the other party more than it benefits the first party. It could
 also mean that a party should bear a risk if that party is in the best position to avoid or mitigate it.

 The loyalty principle, as we use this term, is a widely shared social norm, which can be `activated' to
 alter the parties' payoff preferences. To activate such a principle will require an ex ante communication
 process and to use it in case of unexpected events ex post will similarly require communication. Ex
 ante, this can be done in practice by the parties entering into discussions about what the principle
 means, how it applies in different private and professional situations, and whether using the principle
 would be beneficial for  and  in their relationship. Once the principle is `activated', it can be
 incorporated into the formal contract as well, which is important in order to make it part of the parties'
 reference points.

 Assume that  and  agree on band services and price as before; but they also agree that, in case of
 unexpected events not dealt with under the contract, they will meet, discuss and apply the principle of
 loyalty (as defined above). What would happen, under these conditions, if Eve breaks her finger and
 George and Adam are the available alternatives?

As noted above, the loyalty principle asks each party to treat the other party's interest as having a
comparable importance to their own. One way to formalize this is to suppose that each party's payoff
becomes their own private payoff plus timestheother party's payoff, where 0 <  < 1. Note that
under these conditions  will not be prepared to reduce the price (unless  = 1) since she prefers a
dollar in her pocket to a dollar in 's, and for the same reason  will not agree to a price increase.
Consistent with this, we maintain our assumption that neither party expects or feels entitled to a price
change.

With each party putting weight  on the other party's payoff,

(4.1) 's ex post payoff in state  =  +  -  + ( -  - ),

(4.2) 's ex-post payoff in state  =  -  -  + ( +  - ).

Communication is, of course, not costless. We suppose that achieving the weight costs an amount (in
time and energy) at date 0 equal to () where (0) = 0,   0,  > 0, lim  () = . (There
                                                                               q_
could be a fixed cost of communication but for simplicity we do not consider this.) The assumption that
lim  () =  captures the idea that it is prohibitively costly to make a party fully internalize another
q_
party's preferences. For simplicity, assume that the communication cost is borne entirely by .

We will make two further assumptions: first, the level of communication, and hence the choice of , can
be specified in the date 0 contract (this is not very realistic, but it simplifies matters); second, loyalty
preferences are not activated until after communication takes place. The second assumption implies
that each party evaluates the contract according to their pre-loyalty preferences. It is worth emphasizing
this point. If we assumed that loyalty affected preferences before the contract was signed, then loyalty

                                                                                                         14
would increase the total surplus available even if actions stayed the same. In contrast, in our
formulation, loyalty affects surplus only because it changes behavior.

As we have emphasized above, in practice, aligning preferences is also likely to require communication
(and the incurring of communication costs) ex post at date 1. For simplicity, we ignore this.

We will suppose that reference payoffs equal payoffs in the normal state. Note that a similar argument
to that in Appendix 1 shows that for small  nothing changes if we suppose instead that reference
payoffs equal expected payoffs.

Consider state . Whatever happens, will be below his reference payoff. 's inclination previously was
to choose George, while  wanted Adam. Now, however, with the payoff in (4.2),  will choose Adam
directly as long as

(4.3) 5 - 5 > 7 - 7 ,

that is,

(4.4)  > (5 - 7 )/ a5 - 7 b.

Under these conditions, renegotiation will not be required and there will be no aggrievement by . On
the other hand, if (4.4) is not satisfied, renegotiation will take place.  will have to pay  an amount
to make  indifferent between Adam and George:(5 -  ) - (5 -  ) = 7 - 7 , that is,
 =  (7 - 7 -  (5 - 5 ))/(1 - ). Since  puts weight  on  D s payoff,
payingtocausestobeaggrievedby(1 - ) = (7 - 7 -  (5 - 5 )) and  will
shade by (7 - 7 - (5 - 5 )).

It is worth rehearsing what the effect of loyalty is on aggrievement and shading. First, for high 
 picks Adam and shading is zero. Second, even if  is inclined to pick George the amount  needs to pay
 to switch to Adam goes down, given that putssomeweightonD preferences.Finally, every dollar
that pays causes less aggrievement than before since  puts some weight on 's payoff.

We can combine the cases where (4.4) does and does not hold: In state ,  pays 
             _
(4.5)  = (_w)a7 - 7 - (5 -  5 ), 0b,

and shading equals

(4.6) (7 - 7 - (5 -  5 ), 0).

 Expected shading costs or deadweight losses are given by

 (4.7) = a7 - 7 - (5 -  5 ), 0b.

 It is easy to see that  is decreasing in  and that, when  = 0, =(5 - 7 ), as in Section 3.


                                                                                                     15
 Let us compute ex ante payoffs. As we have noted, each party evaluates the contract according to their
 pre-loyalty preferences. Thus, if  anticipates paying  to  at date 1, this gets full weight rather than
 weight (1 - ), and similarly for  . Hence
                                                  1
 (4.8) 's expected payoff= -  + ( - (1-q)[a -  - ( -  ), 0b])-(),

 and
                                                        _
(4.9) 's expected payoff= - () -  - (5 - (_w)[a7 - 7 - (5 -  5 ), 0b])

                                 - za7 - 7 - (5 -  5 ), 0b{,



from which we can confirm that S chooses  = Z[ . In a competitive market for sellers,
willadjustsothatthe right-hand side of (4.19) equals . B's expected payoff therefore equals

(4.10)      -  (Z[ ) - Z[ + (5 - 5 ) -  - () -  .

That is, B's expected payoff equals expected net surplus minus the sum of deadweight losses and
communication costs minus.

So far we have taken  to be exogenous. Since  is contractible, in an optimal contract it will be chosen
efficiently to minimize  + (), the sum of deadweight losses and communication costs. Thus,  will
be chosen to minimize

(4.11) () +  a7 - 7 - (5 - 5 ), 0b.

SinceMax(7 - 7 - (5 -  5 ), 0) is decreasing in , it follows from a standard revealed
preference argument that the optimal value of  is increasing in  . Also the optimal value of  converges
to zero as convergestozero.

The first-order condition for (4.11) is

(4.12) D () = a5 - 7 b0 <  < (5 - 7 )/a5 - 7 b,

(4.13)   D ()  a5 - 7 b if  = 0, D () < a5 - 7 b if  = (5 - 7 )/a5 - 7 b.

It follows from (4.13) that, if we replace () by a(), wherea > 0issufficientlysmall,then the
optimal value of  >0. Proposition2sumsupourresults.

Proposition 2. The optimal value of  is increasing in and   0as   0. If we replace () by
a(), wherea > 0, then, forsufficientlysmalla,the optimal value of  >0.

Proposition 2 tells us that communication will be small if the abnormal state is unlikely. To put it another
way, in routine situations where unexpected events are rare, a standard contract may suffice.

                                                                                                         16
Proposition 2 also tells us that  > 0 if communication costs are small relative to the magnitude of the
                                                                                                       _
transaction .(Note that multiplying () by aisequivalenttomultiplyingvaluesandcostsby a . )

 (4.12) sheds light on how conflicts of interest affect . Suppose that 5 - 7 increases, that is,
conflicts of interest about quality increase. Then the right-hand side of (4.12) rises, which suggests that 
will rise. However, it is also possible that we are at a corner solution:  = ( -  )/a -  b. In
this case  will fall. The intuition is that an increase in the amount by which  favors Adam makes it
more likely that  will choose Adam for a given . Thus, it may be possible to reduce .

One caveat should be noted. We have derived Proposition 2 for the case where reference payoffs are
payoffs in the normal state. If reference payoffs are expected payoffs, then  is increasing in  only in a
range. Once  becomes very high, the abnormal state becomes (approximately) the reference point and
communication is not needed (see Appendix 1).

So far we have argued that communication can be a valuable supplement to a contract. An important
question to ask is, would it ever make sense to rely on communication and loyalty alone and dispense
with a contract altogether?

It is not completely obvious how to analyze the no contract case since we have assumed that reference
points and payoffs are determined through the contract. One approach is to follow Hart and Moore
(2008), and assume that absent a contract each party feels entitled to 100% of the ex post surplus from
the transaction. Note that the loyalty principle will not change this since each party prefers a dollar in
their pocket to a dollar in the other party's pocket, although other principles, such as equity, which we
discuss in Section 6, could be important.

In the absence of a contract the parties will bargain over the gains from trade:  -  in the normal state
and  -  + 5 - 5 in the abnormal state. If the parties have equal bargaining power ex post, they
will compromise on a 50:50 split13. It follows that each party will be aggrieved by the half of the gains
they do not get times (1-) and so will shade by  times this amount. In the normal state this means
that the deadweight losses from shading will be (1 - )( - ), where  depends on 's choice of
effort; and in the abnormal state they will be (1 - )( -  + (5 - 5 )). Hence deadweight losses
are given by

(4.14) ... = (1 - )(1 - )( - ) + (1 - )( -  + (5 - 5 ))

             = (1 - )[(v - c) + (5 - 5 )].

Modifying (2.14), we can see that  will choose her effort to maximize:

         _     _                               _
(4.15) `  - ` ()^ (1 +  - (1 - )) + ` (1 +  - (1 - ))(5 - 5 ) - ,


13
  Experiments by Ellingsen and Johannesson (2004) suggest that a fair-minded  mightbewillingtogrant more
than 50% of the ex post surplus to compensate forhereffortinvestment. In our setting this effect is likely to be
mitigated since  oesnotobserve's effort.

                                                                                                             17
yielding
           _
(4.16)     `
               (1 +  - (1 - )) D () = -1.

Obviously, compared to the case where loyalty is combined with a contract, we have under-investment.
But more than this, shading costs are greater for any level of  . To see this, compare the deadweight
losses without a contract, ... , given by (4.14), with the deadweight losses with a contract,  , given by
(4.7).

Proposition 3. Fix  < 1and.Assume  + 7 >(0)+5 . Then ... >  .



Proof:
               S<OE             SOE
Let ... =             ,and  =         . It suffices to show that ... > .
                ·               ·

From (4.14),
(4.17)... = (1 - )[( - c) + (5 - 5 )],

which is greater than

(4.18)         (1 - )[( - c) +  (5 - 5 )].

Also, from (4.7),

(4.19)      = (7 - 7 - (5 -  5 ), 0).

Hence, since the expression in (4.18) is positive, it suffices to show (dividing by ) that

(4.20)     (1 - )[( - c) + (5 - 5 )] > 7 - 7 - (5 -  5 ).

But we have assumed  + 7 >(0)+5  c+5 .From this it follows that

(4.21) + 5 - c - 5 >5 - 7 .

But it can easily be seen that this implies (4.20).

Q.E.D.




Note that to prove the result we need an extra assumption, borrowed from Hart and Moore (2008,
Section 4), that the value-cost intervals for Adam and George in the abnormal state overlap:  +
7 > +5 .

The intuition behind Proposition 3 is that in the abnormal state, in the absence of a contract, the parties
argue about the total surplus -  + (5 - 5 ), while in the presence of a contract they argue about

                                                                                                         18
the cost difference 5 - 7 , which is lower. The proof of Proposition 3 is "brute-force" since it
compares shading with and without a contract in the abnormal state. Given that, with a contract,
shading is less in the normal state (it is zero), and effort is higher, there will be many situations where
 + 7 <(0)+5 , and yet the conclusion of Proposition 3 still holds.

Proposition 3 implies the following. Start with a situation where there is no contract and let  be optimal
for this situation. Replace this with an optimal contract but keep  fixed. Then  rises to the first-best
level and deadweight losses fall by Proposition 3 (note that  is independent of ). Now choose the
optimal  for the new situation. This can only improve matters. The conclusion is that a contract plus
loyalty dominates loyalty alone.

It is worth drawing out a further implication. The no communication-no loyalty model of Section 3 is a
special case where  =0. Thus the argument in the proof shows that in that world a contract is better
than no contract14.



5. Connecting the model to commercial deals

The concert example, which forms the center-piece of our paper, is quite special in the sense that the
deal has low complexity and (realistically) a relatively low likelihood of an abnormal state. Further, the
deadweight losses in the model ­ shading behavior by not providing beer during the interval, not
cleaning or heating the changing rooms, refusing to play an encore, being rude to customers, or turning
up late, and so on­ are rather innocuous. Finally, the model describes a one-shot situation, whereas the
outsourcing and supply chain deals that we are really interested in are multi-shot.

We have argued that, even in the simple concert scenario, the parties will often fail to achieve an
efficient outcome given that the contract itself creates reference points and noncontractible shading
behavior when these reference points are not met. Our view is that the problems will typically be much
larger in complex commercial settings such as outsourcing or supply chain deals, where the probability




14
   Throughout this section we have supposed that, having agreed to the guiding principles, the parties will uphold
them. There are two justifications for this. The first is that the principles are not legally enforceable but are upheld
because there is a psychic cost to each party of breaching them. In this case the analysis would hold only in a "self-
enforcing" range (for an analysis along these lines, see Hart (2009)). The second justification is that the principles
are enforceable: a court may be able to determine (possibly from the parties' interactions) that one party has not
been loyal (or equitable) to the other, even if the court does not know exactly what a loyal (or equitable) outcome
is. Indeed some recent court decisions suggest that courts are willing and able to enforce guiding principles (see,
e.g., Supreme Court of Canada, Bhasin v. Hrynew 2014 SCC 71). We return to some of these issues in Section 6.



                                                                                                                     19
of an abnormal state occurring at some point is quite high15 16. In our model, when parties are below
their reference payoffs, they become aggrieved if their counter-parties do not behave reasonably in
their eyes, and this can lead to shading. However, as we made clear in the introduction, shading is only
one form of deadweight loss triggered by aggrievement: we focused on it for ease of modeling. Other
forms, which in practice may be as important, are shirking (a party cuts back on noncontractible
performance to increase his payoff at the expense of the other party), or the time and resources
devoted to overcoming the aggrievement. In some cases parties may have to "eat" the aggrievement,
another form of deadweight loss.

In applying the model to the real world, we will therefore interpret the deadweight losses broadly.

As mentioned in the introduction, there are companies and organizations that have applied the so-called
Vested model, which includes the adoption of guiding principles such as loyalty and equity, in order to
overcome contractual frictions.17 Below we report on three case studies and two other deals about how
the Vested approach has worked. The Vested model and the contracts-as-reference-points theory were
developed in parallel and the case studies were not written with the concepts of aggrievement and
shading in mind. For this reason, we conducted a follow-up interview with participants in one of the
cases. For various reasons, we chose not to obtain interviews in the other two cases,18 but instead
conducted interviews with customers and suppliers in two deals where Vested was adopted at some
point, but that are not yet case studies. In the interviews we looked for examples of shading and other
deadweight losses prior to the adoption of the collaborative approach and the guiding principles, and
evidence as to how these deadweight losses were reduced after the guiding principles were adopted.19
In summary the interviews involve (1) Canada's Vancouver Island Health Authority and South Island
Hospitalists, regarding a contract on professional labor services (this deal has been written up as a case);
(2) Accenture and ISS regarding facilities management services in Holland; (3) PwC and ISS also regarding


15
  A countervailing force is that, as is well-known from the game theory and relational contracting literatures,
repeated play can lead to cooperative behavior. However, cooperative behavior is typically only one of several
possible outcomes. We discuss the difference between our approach and the relational contracting literature in
Section 7.

16
   In Appendix 1, we consider the case where reference payoffs are given by expected payoffs. Under these
conditions, if the probability of an abnormal state is close to 1, aggrievement and shading are low because the
abnormal state becomes the new reference point. However, this conclusion is obtained under the assumption that
payoffs in the abnormal state are always the same. The conclusion will not hold if there is uncertainty about payoffs
in the abnormal state, which is very likely to be the case.

17
   See Vitasek at al. (2013).
18
   As regards the Dell-FedEx deal referred to below, this deal was originally made in 2012, which led us to believe
that the parties would not have a clear memory of problems prior to and after their Vested deal. As regards the
Telia-Veolia deal referred to below, Veolia was one of twenty suppliers prior to the deal, while it was the sole
supplier after the deal. Thus the deal does not permit an "apples to apples" comparison.
19
   The interviews were conducted in June 2019 together with Kate Vitasek, a faculty member of the University of
Tennessee.

                                                                                                                   20
facilities management in Holland. The case studies where we did not carry out interviews involve Dell
and FedEx, and Telia and Veolia.

Vancouver Island Health Authority and South Island Hospitalists20

Vancouver Island Health Authority contracted with South Island Hospitalists, a group of doctors in British
Columbia, to provide inpatient care for patients. A hospitalist is a physician who works solely in a
hospital and cares for patients with medical problems that are too complicated for many family
physicians. Prior to 2016 Island health Authority and the Hospitalists had a conventional contract, but it
was not working well, and the relationship was severely strained. One issue was how to manage
variation in the demand for health services (numbers of patients cared for by Hospitalist physicians on
any given day). The contract included provisions on how volume changes would affect the hours
allocated for Hospitalist services. In 2010, the service delivery model changed ­ consistent with other
hospitals across Canada ­ whereby family practitioners no longer cared for their patients in hospitals. On
top of this, there was a shortage of family physicians in many communities, and an increasing number of
patients who were admitted to hospital did not have a family physician. As the Hospitalist model grew,
and fewer family physicians were involved in hospital care, and more patients were admitted without
family physicians, the Hospitalists were put under a great deal of pressure. Since they were not able to
respond quickly by hiring additional staff, at times workloads soared and many felt that they could not
devote adequate time to patients to provide safe, high quality care.

Physicians became fatigued. Although it was never statistically established, it was believed that
discharges became slower and admissions lasted longer (both from conscious and unconscious actions),
reducing the throughput of patients.

Some hospitalists eventually responded by refusing to accept the responsibility for admitting some
patients from the emergency room, which was a requirement to facilitate flow into the hospital. This led
to a heavy strain on the relationship, and the administration eventually temporarily suspended the
privileges of three hospitalists.

Our interpretation of this incident is the following. Although the contract did not preclude the Health
Authority's decision to reduce the use of community doctors (and remember this was not solely a health
authority decision and reflected a trend across Canada; also most family physicians no longer wanted to
provide inpatient care), the Hospitalists felt that the decision was unilateral and unanticipated, and
resulted in unreasonable expectations of the Hospitalists. They responded with a shading/shirking
action: by not agreeing to take patients from the emergency room they relieved their stress, and also
avoided ethical issues arising from not being able to devote adequate time to patients (a doctor can
ethically decline to accept new patients if he or she cannot provide an expected and consistent standard
of care both to these new patients and existing patients). On the other hand, the Health Authority
expected the Hospitalists to take care of the patients and at the same time deal with volume changes,
even significant ones, as they felt that there was enough flexibility in the contract. The result was that

20
  We conducted an interview with Jean Maskey, a doctor with South Island Hospitalists, and Kim Kerrone, Island
Heath Authority's Vice-President, Chief Financial Officer, Legal Services & Risk.

                                                                                                             21
the Authority was frustrated by the Hospitalists' actions. Both sides reacted in ways that they would not
have if everything was going well, and there were large consequent deadweight losses.

After 2016 the parties switched to a Vested contracting model. We will describe below how this
improved matters21.

Accenture and ISS22

Accenture is a multinational professional services company that provides services in strategy, consulting,
digital, technology and operations. ISS is a workplace experience and facility management service
provider. Accenture contracted with ISS to look after management of its Dutch facilities. Among other
things ISS provided catering services for Accenture.

Prior to entering their Vested contract, the parties had a performance-based contract whereby ISS was
compensated according to whether it met key performance indicators (KPIs). The contract was
incomplete in the sense that it gave Accenture some discretion in deciding whether the KPIs were met.
This led to tension in the relationship. Based on the interviews conducted, it seems as if Accenture used
this discretion opportunistically. Accenture was expecting ISS to perform above the minimum levels set
in the contract and tended to give more negative scores on the KPIs if ISS did not meet those
expectations. Accenture also made life difficult for ISS by requiring ISS to get quotes from several
suppliers for incremental work, even for small things.

According to our interviewees, ISS responded to this shading/shirking behavior by engaging in such
behavior itself: it "gamed the system," by ensuring high performance during the periods when the KPIs
were assessed. The interviewees felt that the tit-for-tat behavior by Accenture and ISS was frustrating
and quite inefficient.

An interviewee described one example of an incident that triggered tit-for tat behavior. The number of
customers eating meals increased. According to the contract ISS was entitled to a larger payment (the
number of "tickets" had risen). Accenture felt that it was unreasonable for ISS to receive more, since
they believed that ISS's costs had not increased. ISS disagreed.

In 2017 both parties agreed to adopt the Vested model, which improved matters, as we will describe
below.

PwC and ISS23

PwC is a global network of firms delivering assurance, tax and consulting services. PwC contracted with
ISS to manage its facilities in Holland. Among other things ISS provided catering and hospitality services
for PwC meetings. The meeting services yielded a high margin for ISS and were consequently expected
to be a large source of profit for them. At some point during the course of the contract, PwC needed to

21
   See also Frydlinger et al. (2019) for a discussion of how the Vested model improved the contractual relationship
between Island Health Authority and the Hospitalists.
22
   We conducted interviews with Boudewijn Hamersma from Accenture and Vivian van Eijsden from ISS.
23
   We conducted interviews with Kyrsa de Bruine from ISS and Marjolein Kurstjens from PWC.

                                                                                                                 22
cut costs and decided to reduce the number of meetings. ISS was given very short notice about this.
Obviously, this was very bad news for ISS: an important generator of profit was going to be eliminated.
Things were made worse for two reasons. First, Dutch law made it impossible for ISS to lay off workers
quickly. Second, ISS had recently negotiated with PwC to expand the services provided through the
addition of extra hosts. The parties had agreed to split the cost of this 50:50, with much of the return
coming from an anticipated high volume of meetings, which now would not materialize.

As with the Health Authority and the Hospitalists, PwC was within its contractual rights to make the
changes. But it is clear from conversations with participants that there was a great deal of
unhappiness/aggrievement on the ISS side. PwC eventually agreed to pay ISS's share of the cost of the
extra hosts, but they did not make up for ISS's lost profit. We could not find any sign that ISS
reciprocated negatively, although they probably had the ability to do so. So the source of the
deadweight loss in this example was ISS's aggrievement, which ISS had to "eat." One factor that may
have stopped ISS from retaliating is that the parties agreed to a Vested model shortly after this event
(partly because of the event). This improved the relationship, as we will describe below.

We now outline the Vested model. Organizations adopting the Vested approach use a structured step-
by-step process entering into commercial relationships, in which the parties sit in face-to-face meetings
and jointly create their deal and contract one step at a time. The process starts by the parties adopting a
shared vision for their relationship. Both parties must make a conscious effort to create an environment
of trust--one in which they are transparent about their high-level aspirations, specific goals, and
concerns. The parties also commit to six guiding principles: loyalty, equity, honesty, integrity, autonomy,
and reciprocity. (For modelling reasons we have focused on loyalty in our analysis, but we discuss the
equity principle in Section 6.) Those principles serve many functions. They will guide the parties
throughout the rest of the process, they are made contractually binding to prohibit tit-for-tat behavior,
and they also provide a framework for resolving potential misalignments when unforeseen
circumstances occur. The parties further break down their shared vision into more concrete strategic
goals or desired outcomes, and detailed objectives. Having set the foundation for the relationship in the
first steps, the parties hammer out the terms of the deal--for example, responsibilities, metrics and
pricing. It is crucial that all terms and conditions of the formal relational contract are aligned with the
guiding principles. With the right mindset, the development of the contract becomes a joint problem-
solving exercise rather than an adversarial contest. As a final step, the parties agree on structures and
processes to govern the relationship over time, involving well-defined communication processes to
ensure continuous alignment of interests and expectations. (In the case of Island Health Authority and
the Hospitalists, the contract specified a "two in a box" communication approach in which an
administrator was teamed with a hospitalist.)

All the components, from vision and guiding principles to the pricing model and governance processes,
are documented in the written and enforceable contract, together with more traditional contractual
clauses such as limitation of liability, indemnification, confidentiality, etc., all of which are, however,
aligned to the adopted guiding principles.




                                                                                                          23
From the interviews, it is clear that using the Vested methodology and adopting the guiding principles
have improved things significantly in the three deals above. Start with Vancouver Island Health
Authority and the Hospitalists: the parties report that the guiding principles have provided them with a
common language and a `platform' on the basis of which upcoming problems ­ unexpected events ­ can
be discussed and dealt with in a fair manner. Much of the tension that existed before seems to have
disappeared. Jean Maskey of the Hospitalists said: "I think the guiding principles are at the root of why
our relationship is no longer contentious. We are now talking about tough issues in a tight fiscal
environment in a healthy and more productive way. We work together toward mutual benefits in an
open and honest manner so that solutions are beneficial for the Health Authority, hospitalists, and most
importantly for the patients we care for. The guiding principles provide a `Home Base'. Because of trust
in the relationship, the administration are clearly giving the Hospitalists autonomy and we're both being
honest and respectful about our limitations and best practice for excellent patient centered care." The
parties report that they frequently bring out their statements of the guiding principles, discussing them
and, in our language, re-activating them.

One example of how the Vested model helped the parties to surmount challenges occurred when a
Canadian law legalizing medical assistance in dying went into effect. The joint Sustainability Team, which
focuses on recruiting and retention of Hospitalists and their workloads and scheduling, was put to the
test24. At the time the contract was developed in 2016 and 2017, the legislation had just been passed
and there were too many unknowns about how it would be implemented to incorporate it in the
contract. When the uncertainty was resolved, the sustainability team came up with a pilot project to
help the parties to incorporate this new scope of work fairly into their schedule and pricing model. In
the past there would have been battles about whether or not the new services were within the scope of
the existing contract or simply assumed to be part of the overall workload. Now there was a spirit of
"How can we fairly solve for this given our statement of intent? And how can we do this in a respectful
manner for the benefit of the patients and the system in which we work?"

Going through the Vested process and adopting the guiding principles positively changed things for
Accenture and ISS too. Both parties report that the guiding principles have given them "a language" to
talk about and deal with upcoming challenges. The guiding principles have facilitated communication.
And they have helped the parties to build trust, which has decreased the tension levels. Boudewijn
Hamersma from Accenture reports that "having the guiding principles we jointly agree on together
focuses on what we think is really important for a healthy relationship and how you should do your
business or have each other's business in mind". Vivian van Eijsden from ISS reports: "For me the
biggest change in moving to a Vested model is the way we interact with each other; now they trust ...
that I can be responsible for the money of Accenture. I no longer have to defend myself on every little
thing. For example, they just trust when we get quotes from subcontractors we're spending their money
wisely. That is a big thing." Both quotes indicate, importantly for this paper, how the parties are putting
weight on each other's interest and how this facilitates communication and solving of problems. The




24
     For more on this, see Frydlinger et al. (2019).

                                                                                                        24
gaming of KPIs and insistence on multiple quotes for even the smallest items seem to be things of the
past.

In the case of PwC and ISS, one interviewee highlighted the following as an example of how Vested can
improve matters. ISS subcontracted some security services to a security firm (SF). The contract allowed
the price charged by SF to rise by up to 2% a year if SF's costs increased. However, as a result of a
country-wide collective bargaining agreement SF's costs increased by more than 2%. SF asked for a
greater than 2% price increase and ISS agreed (even though its contract with SF was not a Vested one),
but only if it could pass on the increase in turn to PwC. PwC accepted the pass-through and our
interviewee attributed this to the fact that the PwC-ISS contract was a Vested one. If it had not been,
she thought that the price increase would not have been possible. The consequence might well have
been that ISS or SF would have found ways to recover some of their lost profit by "shirking."

We close this section by describing two case studies where we did not get interviews.

Dell and FedEx

Dell and FedEx (originally Genco) entered into a contractual relationship regarding return and repair
processes in 200525. While quite successful, the parties had a strained relationship, not least because
Dell constantly pushed for lower prices while at the same time demanding innovations and investments
from FedEx. In 2011, both parties were ready to leave the relationship. But instead, they renegotiated
their contract, using the Vested model. Three years into the term of the new contract, Dell's costs had
been reduced by about 44 percent, quality levels were at a record high, and repair expenditures were at
record lows. At the same time, the contract was very profitable for FedEx. The parties report that these
results came about as a result of using the collaborative process and approach to contracting26.

Dell and FedEx did not deliberately discuss and activate guiding principles such as loyalty, the simple
reason being that adopting such principles was at the time not an integral part of the Vested model. But
it seems that an important explanation for their success is indeed that such principles were activated
through the process. A FedEx executive said that earlier Dell and FedEx had not had transparent
dialogues, looking out for each other's interests. "But now, we at FedEx Supply Chain truly have a vested
interest in the success of Dell--and vice versa."27

Telia and Veolia

In the deals described so far, an existing contract was replaced by a new one. The deal between the
Swedish telecommunications operator Telia Company and Veolia, a facilities management company,
was different. Telia was looking for someone to manage its facilities, and Veolia was chosen as a result
of a competitive bidding process, which in the context of the Vested model is called a Request for




25
   Under this contract, FedEx is responsible for transporting and repairing defective Dell products.
26
   See Vitasek (2016).
27
   Vitasek et al. (2017), p. 21

                                                                                                        25
Partner process.28 The process was preceded by a pre-study, in which Telia realized that their existing
facility management suppliers were not at all satisfied with their relationships, that Telia was heavily
micromanaging them, and that there was no focus on innovation, which was an important matter for
Telia. Telia decided to adopt the collaborative approach described above, incorporating the guiding
principles, and used the approach to enter into a contract with Veolia as the so-called prime contractor.
Again, both Telia and Veolia report significantly better results, with cost savings above budget, improved
quality and increased innovation, and higher margin levels for Veolia29. The parties came to a point
where they started to view their deal as a joint, virtual, enterprise, to which they even gave a name ­
OneTech ­ suggesting that the loyalty principle has enabled the parties to adopt one another's view and
look out for one another's interests.30

One example of this is the way they view the economics of their deal. Outsourcing deals typically have
two structural components: a standard set of services provided on a continuous basis and separate
projects, which are agreed on a case-by-case basis in what is called a change management process.
These change management processes proceed through negotiations which are often not smooth
Coasian bargains, but instead are rife with friction and frustration.31 Telia and Veolia have been able to
move beyond this common challenge in outsourcing deals. One representative of Veolia said: "Shifting
to Vested means both Telia and Veolia now look at the financials across the whole portfolio of business
together and not just the price of individual projects or services. We are now making much smarter and
collaborative business decisions that ultimately motivate Veolia to make investments that will have a
high ROI (return on investment) for both (our italics) parties."32 This again seems to be the loyalty
principle in action, where the parties adopt one another's view and look out for one another's interests
when managing their virtual entity.

In summary, we have presented some evidence from three interviews (one of which was also a case
study) and two case studies. Obviously, one should be careful about drawing strong conclusions based
on such a small sample. But we believe that the reported results provide support for our claim that
shading and other deadweight losses occur under standard contracting and that adopting guiding
principles such as loyalty and equity (see Section 6) can mitigate these losses.

6. Other principles


28
   In the Request for Partner process, suppliers are assessed not only on offered solutions and price but also on
"softer" factors such a cultural compatibility and willingness to act in accordance with the guiding principles. In the
typical process, the customer initially selects a few suppliers, with which a number of workshops are held where
the parties, among other things, adopt a shared vision and the guiding principles, in addition to discussing scope
and how the customer's needs can be met. Also, the suppliers are asked to provide indicative cost levels, which are
made part of the customer's overall assessment. Thereafter, the customer chooses one or sometimes two
suppliers with which the rest of the Vested methodology is implemented, after which contracts are signed. For a
more detailed description of this approach, see Vitasek et al. (2019).
29
   Vitasek and DiBenedetto (2018b), p. 25.
30
   Vitasek and DiBenedetto (2018b), p. 25.
31
   See, for example, Deloitte (2016), where this change management process was reported as by far the most
common challenge in the outsourcing deals covered by the report. See also Chakravarty and MacLeod (2009).
32
   Vitasek and DiBenedetto (2018b), p. 21.

                                                                                                                    26
In the examples described above, not only loyalty but also other guiding principles were adopted. For
modelling reasons, we have focused only on the principle of loyalty in our analysis, but we believe that
other principles are also very important. One of them is the equity principle, deliberately activated and
adopted by Island Health/Hospitalists, Telia/Veolia and other parties to Vested deals. A principle of
equity means that costs, benefits and risks should be allocated in proportion to each party's effort
(where taking a risk can also be an effort). Equity is therefore not necessarily only about equal splits of
revenues or costs. Equity calls for a proportionate allocation of benefits, losses, etc. Applying this
principle could lead the parties to split the benefits of a joint investment in strict proportion to how
much each party has contributed to the investment.

A principle of equity seems particularly applicable in a situation where, contrary to our maintained
assumption, value and incremental cost are verifiable. In our concert example, equity could come into
play in a number of ways. Let us assume, for simplicity, that  and  agree, ex ante, on only the equity
principle. How should the decreased value (v) and increased cost ( ) be allocated? If we assume that
it has taken no effort to find and hire Eve's replacement,  and  would most likely agree on a 50:50
split of the losses, v- . Under these conditions there will be unanimity that the more efficient choice,
Adam, should be made, and there will be no shading. The first-best is achieved.

If we assume, instead, that finding Adam on short notice required a lot of effort from , an equitable
split would take this into account, allocating a larger proportion of the losses to .

Equitable splits are unlikely to proceed as smoothly under our assumption that value and incremental
cost are observable, but not verifiable, and where subjectivity and self-serving biases can come into
play. Yet people are often able to find amicable solutions on how to allocate losses, and compensate for
emotional damage and other problems, even if they would not be able to prove their case in court.
Thus, the equity principle is probably relevant in our setting too. Incorporating the equity principle into
the analysis is an important topic for future research.

There are also other principles that could be taken into consideration, for example a principle of
reciprocity, obliging each party to return good actions in kind; or a principle of autonomy, obliging each
party not to make threats or be coercive. An autonomy principle would apply not to the allocation of
losses, but rather to the process for coming to a decision and the allocation of responsibilities. In the
Island Health/Hospitalists case, one representative of the Hospitalists reported this principle to be of
significant importance, giving them freedom from the previous micromanagement by Island Health.

In practice, then,  and  could adopt a number of principles ex ante which would come into play ex
post to assist the parties in achieving outcomes that meet their reference points, thus avoiding shading.

A very important question that our analysis raises is, what is special about principles like loyalty or
equity? Why could the parties not use other principles? For example, why couldn't the parties adopt the
principle that in an abnormal state they will sort things out using the bargaining protocol underlying the
first-best contract described in Section 2 (50:50 bargaining using side-payments). This bargaining
outcome would become the new reference point and neither party would be aggrieved or would shade.
The first-best would be achieved. Other possibilities would be that the parties agree that if something

                                                                                                          27
unexpected happens  will make a take-it-or leave-it offer to  about how to proceed, or the parties will
play a Maskin-Tirole (1999) mechanism to make observable information verifiable.

Our (tentative) answer is that the principles of loyalty and equity are not just ad-hoc principles chosen
by the parties. They rest on strong social norms and are thus better described as being `activated' than
`chosen'. This makes them different from mechanisms such as take-it-or-leave-it offers or Maskin-Tirole
revelation games, which have no motivating power in themselves. The motivating power to apply
principles such as equity or loyalty does not rest only on the urge to fulfill a promise made. Making a
promise to fulfill a social norm has more force than making a promise to apply a principle not based on a
social norm, for example to receive a take-it-or-leave-it offer33.

There is evidence that social norms affect outcomes in economic transactions. First, it has been
convincingly shown in the laboratory and elsewhere that people have not only self-regarding motives
but also other-regarding motives.34 Second, the extent to which they exhibit other-regarding motives
will depend on the economic and social context. Fehr and Schmidt (1999) have shown that there is an
important interaction between the distribution of preferences in a given population and the strategic
environment: in some situations a minority of self-regarding players can hamper collaboration and in
other situations a minority of other-regarding players can induce the self-regarding players to
cooperate.



33
   Our emphasis on norms is related to the work of Macneil (1977, 1983) and Macaulay (1963). Macneil (1983) put
forward the view of contracts as "instruments of social co-operation", by which he meant instruments to mitigate
a tension between self-regarding and other-regarding preferences in commercial relationships. He specifically
pointed to two important social norms ­ reciprocity and solidarity (with a similar meaning to what we here call
loyalty) ­ serving this mitigation. The importance of such norms grows, according to Macneil, as a commercial
relationship shifts on a continuum from discrete exchanges to relationships of longer duration and higher
complexity. Macaulay (1963) showed that businesses often do not rely on their written contracts but instead on
social norms and industry standards to overcome challenges posed by incomplete contracts. While Macneil and
Macaulay pointed to the importance of informal social norms for contracts, we suggest that the parties can gain
from incorporating such social norms, in the form of guiding principles, in the written contract. This shift from the
informal to the formal resembles the trend shown by Hadfield and Bozovic (2016). Hadfield and Bozovic (2016)
show that, while many organizations still rely on informal norms and mechanisms, there is also a growing reliance
on the formal contract in what they call innovation-oriented commercial relationships, where the parties lack
background support from social ties or reputational mechanisms. Using an expanded view of contracts-as-
reference-points as compared to Hart and Moore (2008), they show, based on empirical studies, how the formal
contract can help the parties to get on the same page not only regarding what the parties are explicitly entitled to
under the contract but also, through ex post communication, concerning how unexpected events should be dealt
with. Our approach is similar to theirs, but with the added element that the contracting parties can benefit by
explicitly including social norms in the contract.




34
     See Charness and Rabin (2002), Fehr and Schmidt (1999), and Thaler and Dawes (1992).

                                                                                                                   28
Also relevant are studies by Ostrom (1990) and Ellickson (1991). These authors show how groups of
people can overcome social dilemmas in situations where people must engage in face-to-face
discussions and negotiations on how to solve problems, for example on how to allocate costs and risks.
Put in situations where they have to make decisions and argue their case, people are affected by social
norms, and are led by those norms to efficient outcomes35.

Our analysis in Section 4 rests on the idea that communication can align preferences and induce
cooperative behavior. It is a well-established fact that communication, not least face-to-face
communication, can in many circumstances improve cooperation and reduce deadweight losses. An
area of particular focus has been how communication can mitigate conflicts of interest in social
dilemmas, starting with studies by Deutsch (1958, 1960) and Loomis (1959). In a 1995 meta-study, Sally
(1995) analyzed over 100 studies and concluded, having tested a number of independent variables, that
communication increases cooperation by 40 percent and was the variable having the strongest effect on
cooperation. These results were confirmed in a later meta-study by Balliet (2010), who concluded also
that face-to-face communication has a stronger effect than written communication.

Not only does communication as such have an effect; the content of the messages communicated
matters. For example, Charness and Dufwenberg (2006) have shown in the laboratory that a statement
of intent or promise can have a particularly strong effect on cooperation. We find this important, since
our model builds on a scenario with ex ante communication where the parties exchange promises to
follow certain guiding principles.

Communication has also been studied within the framework of contracts-as-reference-points. In a study
related to Hart and Moore (2008), Brandts et al. (2016) (BCE) tested whether communication affects
parties' reference points and thereby shading behavior. As noted by Hart and Moore (2008), an
important consequence of the fact that contracts serve as reference points is that there is a tension
between contractual rigidity and flexibility. Whereas a flexible contract is generally preferable, it can
also lead to increased shading behavior since the flexibility gives more room for conflicting feelings of
entitlement. In their experiment, BCE showed that free-form communication significantly reduced
shading levels in flexible contracts, making them more profitable for both parties than rigid contracts. In
particular, clarification of transfer plans, friendliness and promises helped the subjects align their
expectations and resolve ambiguity, thereby reducing shading behavior.




35
  Our suggested approach for overcoming contractual incompleteness is also related to the work of Bernstein. In
Bernstein (2015), evidence is put forward that, in outsourcing and supply chain relationships, organizations rely on
the enforceability of contracts only to a limited extent to mitigate contractual risks, for example regarding hold-ups.
Instead, other mechanisms are used, such as control over production in supplier plants and over supplier labor. In
particular, Bernstein (2015) points to the use of governance and institutional mechanisms to generate conditions for
cooperation, one of them being the creation of social capital based on trust and social norms. Our understanding is
that the organizations studied have not explicitly included social norms such as loyalty or equity in their formal
contracts, as we suggest here.



                                                                                                                     29
To be sure, we are not claiming that communication is a solution in all situations. Fehr et al. (2015)
obtain less optimistic results about communication although they do not allow for free-form
communication. Also, Fehr et al. (2017) show that, under certain competitive conditions,
communication, rather than being used by buyers for aligning expectations and improving cooperation,
was instead abused for the purpose of influencing the activities of the seller. The distinction made by
German social philosopher and sociologist Jürgen Habermas between communication in strategic
actions, aimed at influencing others, and communicative action, aimed at reaching a common
understanding, seems relevant in this context36. It seems plausible that the interaction between the
distribution of preferences in a given population and the strategic environment, emphasized by Fehr and
Schmidt in the context of social preferences, is highly relevant for communication as well.
Communication can be a weapon in the pursuit of strictly self-regarding behavior, even though strong
evidence also shows that communication can promote and be part of other-regarding behavior.

In summary, both social norms and communication have been shown to improve cooperation and
reduce deadweight losses. Based on this, we find it plausible that ex ante and ex post communication
about social norms should have important effects and be capable of aligning reference points.

The idea that communication about norms is important is also related to the concept of principled
negotiations, introduced by Roger Fisher and William Ury (1981) in their classic negotiation book Getting
to Yes, which was a product of the Harvard Negotiation Project. Among other things, Fisher and Ury
recommend that negotiating parties avoid imposing their wills on one another and instead apply
standards of fairness, market practice or scientific merit, which both parties recognize as valid. While
disagreement is still possible, the parties avoid damaging conflicts by agreeing on common criteria.

Fisher and Ury did not frame their recommendations in the language of reference points. However, it
could easily be argued that the reason that following their recommendations has proved to be valuable
for so many organizations negotiating agreements is related to reference points: by agreeing on
common standards, the parties will have their expectations (reference points) tied to outcomes based
on those standards and even though the actual application of the standard may not in all cases lead to
the optimal solution for one party, that party will still not be disappointed since the standard adopted by
that party was followed.

Fisher and Ury saw principles of fairness as just one among many possible objective criteria. While we
acknowledge that there can be several principles playing a similar role, in this paper we emphasize the
importance of principles based on social norms, which have the motivating force discussed above to
induce cooperation.

As a final point, it can be asked why the adopted guiding principles should be documented in a written
contract. Would it not be enough to make them part of an informal agreement? While we believe that
informal agreements about guiding principles can be helpful, we still want to emphasize the importance
of formalization. The signing of a contract has significant symbolic meaning and, even though it may be


36
     Habermas (1984).

                                                                                                        30
challenging to litigate over the breach of a guiding principle, we believe that the parties will be more
reluctant to commit a breach if the guiding principle is formalized (see also footnote 14)37.

7. Conclusions

A common explanation for the idea that contracts are incomplete is that there are too many future
contingencies for parties to contract on. However, as the literature has noted, even though writing
down all the contingencies may be impossible, anticipating the payoff consequences of these
contingencies should be feasible and the question then is, why do the parties not contract on these
payoff consequences instead of the contingencies themselves, via mechanisms?

Our paper provides an answer to this question, and also proposes an alternative approach to dealing
with contractual incompleteness. We have suggested that the parties can improve the situation by
committing as part of the contract to apply a number of guiding principles such as loyalty or equity in
case of unexpected events, and to build in communication processes that will enable the application of
these principles. These principles rest on strong social norms and are thus better described as being
`activated' than `chosen'. This makes them different from mechanisms such as take-it-or-leave-it offers
or revelation games, which have no motivating power in themselves, and which we believe will not work
as well38.

We have also provided evidence that organizations are already using and benefiting from the
combination of a contract and the guiding principles described here.

An important limitation of our analysis is that we have focused on ex post deadweight losses and how
the parties can reduce them through the use of guiding principles (but see Appendix 2). However,
business people often describe a lack of innovation by suppliers as a serious problem in outsourcing
deals, which is more of an ex ante problem. There is every reason to think that the analysis we have
presented could be used to study this issue too. We believe that this is an interesting topic for future
research.

There is obviously an overlap between the ideas that we have presented and those that form the basis
of the vast economics literature on relational contracts in that both highlight the importance of trust
and norms (see Malcomson (2013) for a survey). However, the approaches are also importantly
different. First, relational contracting models are plagued by multiple equilibria whereas our model has a
unique equilibrium. Second, formal contracts are often a negative in that literature since they can make
informal relationships harder to sustain (see Baker et al. (1994)); in contrast, in our model formal
contracts and guiding principles are complements. Finally, we stress the importance of communication
to align reference points and notions of fairness, something that is not a major feature of the relational
contracting literature.



37
   Formalization is also useful in the eventuality that the people who negotiated the original deal are no longer the
ones overseeing it.
38
    Aghion et al. (2018) find that revelation games do not work well in the lab. See also Fehr et al. (2018).

                                                                                                                   31
Obviously, much more work needs to be done to explore the generality of our ideas. We believe that
theory, empirical work, and experiments are all promising directions to pursue to clarify the role of
guiding principles in overcoming contractual incompleteness39.




39
  One topic in need of further research is the extent to which our suggested approach for overcoming contractual
incompleteness works across cultures. It should be noted that the effect of "national cultures" on trading
relationships is a complex topic, not least because the concept of culture is inherently vague. There may exist
organizational cultures that are stronger than national cultures: for example, the former may emphasize
maximizing leverage in commercial relationships whereas the latter may be more aligned to guiding principles such
as loyalty and equity. Or vice versa. While we do not ignore the influence of national cultures, we suggest that our
approach has general applicability since social norms such as loyalty, equity and reciprocity seem to exist in most
cultures and hence can be "activated" between two or more organizations, as we suggest here.


                                                                                                                 32
Appendix 1. Reference payoffs equal expected payoffs.

Consider what happens in the abnormal state when reference payoffs equal expected payoffs. As in
Section 3,  is inclined to pick George but  will pay her 5 - 7 to pick Adam. What changes is 's
aggrievement. 's reference payoff is given by

(1)  -  + a5 - 5 + 7 b,

      while his payoff in state  equals

(2)  -  + a5 - 5 + 7 b.

Thus, in state  he is below his reference payoff by

(3) -(1 - )a5 - 5 + 7 b.

Since  feels aggrieved only when he is below his reference point, 's aggrievement is capped by (3).
Hence 's aggrievement, which was previously (5 - 7 ), is now given by

(4) (5 - 7 , -(1 - )a5 - 5 + 7 b),

shading equals

(5)  ·5 - 7 , -(1 - )a5 - 5 + 7 b· 40,

and expected shading equals

(6) L= (5 - 7 , -(1 - )a5 - 5 + 7 b41.

One useful observation is that, as long as  is not too high, the more sophisticated treatment of
reference points does not change anything. Deadweight losses will be (5 - 7 )as long as

(7)  < -5 /(-5 + 5 - 7 ).




40
  This leads to the intuitive conclusion that if is close to 1, shading in state  will be very low: basically, the
abnormal state becomes the reference point.


41
     Note that L=0 if  = 0or1.



                                                                                                                     33
Appendix 2. Employment

So far we have supposed that  has residual rights of control and bears all the costs  + . We can
think of this as non-integration. Another possibility would be for  to acquire 's operations;  would
then possess residual rights of control. We can think of this as vertical integration or employment. In this
case it is natural to suppose that  bears 100% of the costs:  is on a fixed wage.

Of course, under both non-integration and vertical integration, cost-sharing is feasible since costs are
verifiable. For simplicity we stick to the polar cases where  bears all the costs under non-integration
and  bears all the costs under integration.

Under employment there is no conflict of interest ex post since  bears both the value and cost
consequences of replacing Eve. However, under standard assumptions,  has no incentive to work since
she bears none of the ex post costs:  = 042. Thus, under the classical assumptions of Section 2,
employment (with  bearing all the costs) would never be optimal (recall that we saw in Section 2 that
under classical assumptions a simple non-integration contract achieves the first-best).

However, employment can be attractive in the models of Sections 3 and 4. Suppose that the loyalty
principle is adopted. Now  will choose e to maximize

(1)     -  + ( -  + (5 - 5 ) -  ()).

The first-order conditions are

(2)  D () = -1.

Denote the solution by ().

The expected net surplus under employment equals

(3)  - a()b - () + (5 - 5 ) - (),

where recall that there are no shading costs since there are no ex post conflicts of interest.

From (3) it follows that under employment it is optimal to choose the level of communication  to
minimize

(4)   () + (()) + ().

Let * be the solution of (4). Then the total deadweight costs under employment are



42
  The idea that If B bears all the costs there will be no ex post conflicts of interest but S will have poor effort
incentives, while if S bears all the costs there will be ex post conflicts of interest but S will have strong effort
incentives, underlies Bajari and Tadelis's (2001) analysis of cost-plus versus fixed price contracts.

                                                                                                                       34
(5) ( )  + (( )) + ( )  - (Z[ ) -  Z[ .

To see whether employment is better than non-integration we must compare (5) with the optimized
expression in (4.11). Some simple conclusions are immediate. Suppose that 's effort does not matter
much: (Z[ ) + Z[ is close to (0). Then employment with no communication ( = 0) achieves
approximately the first-best (whereas non-integration typically does not).

Perhaps more interesting, suppose that we replace 's effort cost  by  and the cost function () by
(), where  > 0 . Then the first-best effort level Z[ and the effort under employment ( )
remain the same (the left-hand and right-hand sides of (2.4) and (2) are both multiplied by  ). However,
the deadweight cost from an inefficient choice of  is multiplied by  . Thus if  is large the deadweight
costs from employment (in (5)) become very large, either because ( ) is bounded away from Z[ or
because   is close to 1, in which case ( ) is large (we have supposed that lim   () = ). Thus,
                                                                              "_
for large  , non-integration will dominate employment.




                                                                                                      35
                                             REFERENCES


Aghion, Philippe, Ernst Fehr, Richard Holden, and Tom Wilkening. 2018. The Role of Bounded Rationality
and Imperfect Information in Subgame Perfect Implementation--An Empirical Investigation. Journal of
the European Economic Association 16(1): 232­274.
Ayres, Ian and Rob Gertner. 1992. Strategic Contractual Inefficiency and the Optimal Choice of Legal
Rules. The Yale Law Journal 101: 729-773.

Baker, George, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy 1994. Subjective Performance Measures in Optimal
Incentive Contracts. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(4): 1125-1156.

Bajari, Patrick and Steven Tadelis. 2001. Incentives versus Transaction Costs: A Theory of Procurement
Contracts. RAND Journal of Economics 32(3): 387-407.

Balliet, Daniel. 2010. Communication and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas: A Meta-Analytic Review.
Journal of Conflict Resolution 54(1): 39-57.

Bernstein, Lisa. 2015. Beyond Relational Contracts: Social Capital and Network Governance in
Procurement Contracts. Journal of Legal Analysis 7(2): 561-621.

Brandts, Jordi, Matthew Ellman, and Gary Charness. 2016. Let's Talk: How Communication Affects
Contract Design. Journal of the European Economics Association 14(4): 943-974.
Chakravarty, Surajeet and W. Bentley MacLeod. 2009. Contracting in the Shadow of the Law. RAND
Journal of Economics 40(3):533-557.
Charness, Gary and Martin Dufwenberg. 2006. Promises and Partnerships. Econometrica 74(6): 1579­
1601.
Charness, Gary and Rabin, Matthew. 2002. Understanding Social Preferences with Simple Tests. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(3): 817-869.
Chassang, Sylvain and Christian Zehnder. 2016. Rewards and Punishments: Informal contracting through
social preferences. Theoretical Economics 11(3):1145-1179
Coase, Ronald H. 1937. The Nature of the Firm. Economica 4(16): 386-405.

Deloitte, Deloitte's 2016 Global Outsourcing Survey, May 2016.


                                                                                                         36
Deutsch, Morton. 1958. Trust and Suspicion. Journal of Conflict Resolution 2: 256-79.

Deutsch, Morton. 1960. The Effect of Motivational Orientation Upon Trust and Suspicion. Human
Relations 13: 123-139.

Ellickson, Robert C. 1991. Order without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
University Press. Pg.71.

Ellingsen, Tore and Magnus Johannesson. 2004. Is There a Hold-Up Problem? Scandinavian Journal of
Economics 106(3): 475-494.

Fehr, Ernst, Oliver Hart and Christian Zehnder. 2015. How Do Informal Agreements and Renegotiation
Shape Contractual Reference Points? Journal of the European Economic Association 13(1): 1-28.

Fehr, Ernst, Oliver Hart, and Christian Zehnder. 2017. Contracts, Conflicts and Communication. Harvard
working paper.

Ferh, Ernst, Michael Powell, and Tom Wilkening. 2018. Behavioral Constraints on the Design of
Subgame-Perfect Implementation Mechanisms. Unpublished paper.

Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt. 1999. A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114(3): 817-868.

Fisher, Roger and William Ury. 1981. Getting to Yes. Penguin Books.

Frydlinger, David, Oliver Hart and Kate Vitasek. 2019. A New Approach to Contracts. Harvard Business
Review, September-October.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver Hart. 1986. The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical
and Lateral Integration. Journal of Political Economy 94(4): 691-719.

Habermas, Jürgen. 1984. The Theory of Communicative Action. Volume One: Reason and Rationalization
of Society. Beacon Press.

Hadfield, Gillian and Iva Bozovic. 2016. Scaffolding: Using Formal Contracts to Support Informal
Relations in Support of Innovation. Wisconsin Law Review. Volume 2016, no. 5.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore. 1999. Foundations of Incomplete Contracts. Review of Economics Studies
66(1): 115-138.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore. 2008. Contracts as Reference Points. Quarterly Journal of Economics
123(1): 1-48.

Hart, Oliver. 2009. Hold-Up, Asset Ownership, and Reference Points. Quarterly Journal of Economics
124(1): 267-300.

Henke, John W., Jr., Thomas T. Stallkamp, and Sengun Yeniyurt. 2014 Lost Supplier Trust ­ How Chrysler
missed out in $24 billion over the past 12 years. Supply Chain Management Review. May/June.

Kszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin. 2006. A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121(4): 1133-1165.


                                                                                                        37
Lando, Henrik. 2019. Why Do Business Losses Cause Conflict? Copenhagen Business School working
paper.

Loomis, James L. 1959. Communication, the Development of Trust and Cooperative Behavior. Human
Relations 12(4): 305-315.

Macaulay, Stewart. 1963. Non-Contractual Relations in Business: A Preliminary Study. American
Sociological Review, Vol. 28, No. 1 (Feb., 1963), pp. 55-67

Macneil, Ian. 1977. Contracts: Adjustment of Long-Term Economic Relations Under Classical,
Neoclassical and Relational Contract Law. 72 Nw. U. L. Rev. 854 (1977-1978)

Macneil, Ian. 1983. Values in Contract: Internal and External. 78 Nw. U. L. Rev. 340 (1983-1984).

Malcomson, James. 2013. Relational Incentive Contracts. In Robert Gibbons and John Roberts (eds.), The
Handbook of Organizational Economics, chapter 25, pp. 1014-1065. Princeton University Press.

Maskin Eric and Jean Tirole. 1999. Unforeseen Contingencies and Incomplete Contracts. Review of
Economic Studies. 66: 83-114.

Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Sally, David. 1995. Conversation and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas: A Meta-analysis of Experiments
from 1958 to 1992. Rationality and Society 7(1): 58-92.

Thaler, Richard and Robyn Dawes. 1992. Cooperation. In Thaler, Richard. The Winner's Curse. Princeton
University Press.

Vitasek, Kate, Mike Ledyard, and Karl Manrodt. 2013. Vested Outsourcing. Palgrave Macmillan. 2nd
edition.

 Vitasek, Kate. 2016. How Dell and FedEx Supply Chain reinvented their relationship to achieve record-
setting results. Case study published at www.vestedway.com.

Vitasek, Kate, Jeanne Kling, John J. Hayes and Ruud de Groot. 2017. Intel's and DHLSC's European
Expansion of Vested. Case study published at www.vestedway.com.

Vitasek, Kate and Bill DiBenedetto. 2018a. The Island Health ­ Hospitalist journey to Vested. A New Day,
New Way. Case study published at www.vestedway.com.

Vitasek, Kate and Bill DiBenedetto. 2018b. Telia and Veolia ­ from supplier to strategic partner. Case study
published at www.vestedway.com.

Vitasek, Kate, Jeroen van de Rijt and Wiebe Witteveen. 2019 Unpacking Request for Partner.

Williamson, Oliver E. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. New York: The
Free Press.




                                                                                                         38
