                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           PRICE DISCRIMINATION WITHIN AND ACROSS EMU MARKETS:
                      EVIDENCE FROM FRENCH EXPORTERS

                                      François Fontaine
                                        Julien Martin
                                       Isabelle Mejean

                                     Working Paper 26246
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26246


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




We are grateful to Brent Neiman, Ida Hjortsoe, Charles Engel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Jordi
Gali, and participants at the NBER-ISOM conference for insightful comments, as well as
Thibault Cezanne for excellent research assistance. Mejean gratefully acknowledges support from
a public grant overseen by the French National Research Agency (ANR) as part of the
"Investissements d'Avenir" program (Idex Grant Agreement No. ANR-11-IDEX-0003- 02/Labex
ECODEC No. ANR-11-LABEX-0047 and Equipex reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17 ­ Centre
d'accès sécurisé aux données ­ CASD) as well as the European Research Council (ERC) under
the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No.
714597). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by François Fontaine, Julien Martin, and Isabelle Mejean. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Discrimination within and across EMU Markets: Evidence from French Exporters
François Fontaine, Julien Martin, and Isabelle Mejean
NBER Working Paper No. 26246
September 2019
JEL No. F1,F14,F4

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the cross-sectional dispersion of prices paid by EMU importers for French products.
We document a significant level of price dispersion both within product categories across
exporters, and within exporters across buyers. This latter source of price discrepancies, sellers'
price discrimination across buyers, is indicative of deviations from the law-of-one price. Price
discrimination (i) is substantial within the EU, within the euro area, and within EMU countries;
(ii) has not decreased over the last two decades; (iii) is more prevalent among the largest firms
and for more differentiated products; (iv) is lower among retailers and wholesalers; (v) is also
observed within almost perfectly homogenous product categories, which suggests that a non-
negligible share of price discrimination is triggered by heterogeneous markups rather than quality
or composition effects. We then estimate a rich statistical decomposition of the variance of prices
to shed light on exporters' pricing strategies.

François Fontaine                                Isabelle Mejean
Paris School of Economics                        Département d'Economie
francois.fontaine@univ-paris1.fr                 Ecole Polytechnique
                                                 91128 Palaiseau Cedex
Julien Martin                                    France
Université du Québec à Montréal                  isabelle.mejean@polytechnique.edu
C.P. 8888, succursale A
Montréal, QC H3C 3P8, Canada
martin.julien@uqam.ca
    Price Discrimination within and across
    EMU Markets: Evidence from French
                  Exporters
           François Fontaine                Julien Martin              Isabelle Mejean§

                                        August 24, 2019


                                              Abstract
      We study the cross-sectional dispersion of prices paid by EMU importers for French
      products. We document a significant level of price dispersion both within product
      categories across exporters, and within exporters across buyers. This latter source
      of price discrepancies, sellers' price discrimination across buyers, is indicative of de-
      viations from the law-of-one price. Price discrimination (i) is substantial within the
      EU, within the euro area, and within EMU countries; (ii) has not decreased over
      the last two decades; (iii) is more prevalent among the largest firms and for more
      differentiated products; (iv ) is lower among retailers and wholesalers; (v ) is also
      observed within almost perfectly homogenous product categories, which suggests
      that a non-negligible share of price discrimination is triggered by heterogeneous
      markups rather than quality or composition effects. We then estimate a rich sta-
      tistical decomposition of the variance of prices to shed light on exporters' pricing
      strategies.


      1      Introduction
      The failure of the law of one price (LOP) has been a central fact in international
      macroeconomics over the last 30 years. It has been documented for a variety of
   
     We are grateful to Brent Neiman, Ida Hjortsoe, Charles Engel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Jordi Gali,
and participants at the NBER-ISOM conference for insightful comments, as well as Thibault Cezanne
for excellent research assistance. Mejean gratefully acknowledges support from a public grant overseen
by the French National Research Agency (ANR) as part of the "Investissements d'Avenir" program
(Idex Grant Agreement No. ANR-11-IDEX-0003- 02/Labex ECODEC No. ANR-11-LABEX-0047 and
Equipex reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17 ­ Centre d'accès sécurisé aux données ­ CASD) as well as the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No. 714597).
    
     Paris School of Economics and Université Paris Panthéon Sorbonne
    
     Université du Québec à Montréal and CEPR
   §
     CREST-Ecole Polytechnique and CEPR, Email address: isabelle.mejean@polytechnique.edu.

                                                   1
       countries and products, including across seemingly integrated markets such as EMU
       countries.1 Although deviations from the LOP are usually interpreted as a conse-
       quence of some form of market segmentation at the retail level, the underlying price
       strategies that make firms price discriminate across markets are not well under-
       stood. This paper exploits intra-EU firm-to-firm trade data to quantify deviations
       from the LOP at the producer level, document heterogeneity in exporters' propen-
       sity to price discriminate across markets, and discuss the mechanisms behind price
       discrimination.
           The wide coverage of the data offers a unique opportunity to explore the het-
       erogeneity in deviations from the LOP along different dimensions, namely, across
       markets, sectors, and sellers, and over time. We show that price discrimination is
       substantial within the EU, within the euro area, and within EMU countries; and it
       has not decreased over the last two decades. Price discrimination is more prevalent
       among the largest firms and for more differentiated products. But it also holds
       within almost perfectly homogenous product categories. By exploiting repeated
       transactions observed at the firm-to-firm level, we are able to quantify the extent
       to which exporters' ability to set high prices on their European partners, together
       with importers' tendency to renegotiate prices on the match influence the dispersion
       of prices within a firm.
           To document the extent of price dispersion, we use fine-grained data on the
       unit prices charged by French exporters to their European buyers over 2002-2016.
       For each of the 9,000 different products that the data cover, we observe a set of
       export transactions taking place in a given quarter between a particular French firm
       and one of its partners in the EU. The high disaggregation of the underlying data
       allows us to compare the price strategy of two French exporters selling the same
       narrowly defined product to a given EU destination as well as prices set by the
       same firm over different partners. At the firm-level, any dispersion in the FOB unit
       values means exporters set different markups and/or supply differentiated products
       to buyers in their portfolio. This level of dispersion constitutes our measure of price
       discrimination.2
           We start our analysis by quantifying how this source of price discrepancies influ-
       ences the overall variance of prices observed in the data. To this aim, we construct
       a measure of price dispersion at the product level for each quarter and calculate
       the extent to which these price discrepancies come from different exporters serving
   1
     A recent exception is Cavallo et al. (2014), who study deviations from the LOP in the context of four
major online retailers within the euro area. Although they provide evidence of pricing-to-market across
countries, they also show that these firms' pricing strategies within the euro area are close to uniform.
   2
     One may argue that LOP should be considered at the level of consumer prices, thus including
transportation costs. If arbitrage is strong enough, exporters may be forced to absorb trade costs, which
would transmit into heterogeneous f ob prices but homogenous cif prices. Consistent with existing
evidence based on firm-to-destination export data (e.g., see Manova and Zhang, 2012; Martin, 2012, for
Chinese and French data), our firm-to-firm f ob prices are increasing in distance. This finding suggests
that, if anything, the corresponding cif prices should be more dispersed than the f ob prices we study.



                                                    2
      European markets at different mean prices, a "between" component, versus indi-
      vidual exporters price discriminating between partners in their portfolio, a "within"
      component. Even though we work within narrowly defined product categories, the
      level of price dispersion recovered from these data is substantial. The mean coeffi-
      cient of variation of prices in the EU is as high as 1.3. Two thirds of this dispersion
      is due to the between component, that is, exporters setting heterogeneous aver-
      age prices to serve the same or different partners with potentially differentiated
      products. Still, a third of the cross-sectional variance in prices is attributable to
      the within-seller dimension, that is, exporters charging heterogeneous prices across
      their different clients. The rest of the analysis is dedicated to this specific source
      of price discrepancies, which we refer to as price discrimination.
          Price discrimination is a common practice among French exporters. The median
      coefficient of variation of prices across buyers purchasing the same product from
      a given exporting firm in a specific quarter is as high as 30.5%.3 This average,
      however, hides a substantial amount of heterogeneity. In the limit, 14% of exporters
      have uniform pricing strategies in the EMU, yet these firms are relatively small and
      thus contribute little to aggregate exports.
          Although the within-firm price dispersion implies systematic deviations from
      the LOP within the euro area, we also document that price dispersion at the firm-
      level is less severe within the EMU than in the overall EU. Mean differences across
      country samples within a firm are quantitatively important because prices within
      the extended EU are, on average, 10% more dispersed than within the EU restricted
      to its 15 old members, whereas they are 14% less dispersed in the EMU than in
      the EU15. These differences are in part due to composition effects, within a firm,
      but we show the difference is still significant when we use firm-level randomiza-
      tion to compare prices within and outside of the EMU. This finding confirms that
      sharing a common currency causes greater market integration. The level of price
      dispersion has, however, increased over time, especially for relatively small firms.
      The coefficient of variation of prices recovered within a firm was 25% higher in the
      2010s than in the 2000s, a result that is robust to composition effects. This result
      goes against the view that both the increasing integration of European markets
      and new communication technologies should enable consumers to arbitrage across
      goods, which is expected to force the convergence of prices. Instead, the increasing
      dispersion of prices observed within an exporter over time suggests small exporters
      in our sample manage to maintain high price discrepancies, potentially thanks to
      product differentiation.
          In a second step, we study how firm and product heterogeneity is related to
      the degree of price discrimination. Among the characteristics that might explain
      why firms are unequally prone to price discriminating, we find a significant effect
      of the firm's size and profit margin. Large multiproduct exporters and firms with a
  3
    This figure is in line with the level of dispersion documented by Kaplan and Menzio (2015) based
on US consumer price data. The authors find the dispersion in normalized prices ranges between 19%
and 36% in the US Kilts-Nielsen Consumer Panel dataset.


                                                 3
       greater market power within their sector of activity are found to price discriminate
       more intensively. Within a firm, the propensity to price discriminate is weaker
       over the firm's core product. Finally, we find evidence of heterogeneity in price
       discrepancies across sectors. Retailers and wholesalers charge less dispersed prices
       than manufacturing firms supplying the same type of products. Price dispersion
       is stronger for differentiated products, especially durable ones.4 Along the value
       chain, price discrimination is more stringent for more downstream products.
           The dispersion of prices within a firm is consistent with two potentially comple-
       mentary mechanisms. First, exporters may price discriminate across their partners
       through product differentiation, for example, by customizing their product to their
       customers' needs. Such a strategy should be especially relevant for differentiated
       goods, thus the higher the mean dispersion of prices observed for these products.
       Second, exporters may sell the same product to various buyers at differentiated
       prices, thus adjusting their markup to their buyers' valuation for the good. Al-
       though the data do not allow us to quantify the relative contribution of both factors
       to the observed dispersion of prices, we conclude the analysis with two exercises
       that are meant to dig deeper into the underlying mechanisms of price discrimi-
       nation. In the first exercise, we focus on a sub-sample of roughly 200 chemical
       products that we argue offer very little ground for product differentiation, because
       they correspond to raw molecular substances. By comparing the level of price dis-
       persion in this sample and in the rest of the dataset, we can provide some indicative
       elements regarding the role of product differentiation as a source of price discrep-
       ancies. In the sample of homogenous products, the mean coefficient of variation
       is about 10 percentage points lower than in the control group. The difference is
       significant, including when identified within firms selling homogenous and hetero-
       geneous chemical products, controlling for unobserved heterogeneity across firms.
       Extrapolating these results beyond the chemical industry suggests about a quarter
       of the observed price dispersion is due to product differentiation within a firm.5
           The second exercise digs deeper into the pricing strategies of French exporters,
       using a rich linear model to analyze the determinants of export price levels. Using
       insights from the labor literature (Abowd et al., 1999), we estimate a price equa-
       tion with two-sided unobserved heterogeneity (seller and buyer) that allows us to
       characterize the dynamics of firm-to-firm prices, conditional on sellers' and buyers'
       unobserved heterogeneity. Results show that firm-to-firm prices tend to decrease
       with the age of the buyer-seller relationship, which is consistent with buyers rene-
       gotiating and increasing their share of the transaction's surplus as they increase
       their outside options. Despite downward price renegotiations, the mean price set
       by French exporters increases over time. The reason is that more experienced ex-
   4
     This finding confirms the singular role played by durable goods in open-macroeconomics (see Engel
and Wang, 2011; Levchenko et al., 2010).
   5
     Such extrapolation is arguably heroic because the average difference in the dispersion of prices
between homogenous and heterogeneous products is estimated for firms in the chemical industry, which
may not be representative of the average firm in the data.


                                                  4
       porters manage to expand their portfolio of buyers and charge their new consumers
       relatively high prices. Interestingly, firms at the top of the distribution of sales in
       their sector are especially good at charging new consumers high prices while suf-
       fering from relatively less pronounced downward price renegotiation. We thus offer
       some insights on the way superstar firms exert their market power.
           Literature review. In addition to the works cited above, this paper pertains
       to different strands of the literature. Deviations from the LOP are often associated
       with market segmentation and border effects. Engel and Rogers (1996) document
       systematic deviations from the LOP using disaggregated consumer price indices
       across Canadian and US cities. Using similar data across European cities, the
       authors do not find evidence of price convergence after the introduction of the euro
       (Engel and Rogers, 2004). Within the car industry, Goldberg and Verboven (2005)
       find a strong positive impact of the European integration on price convergence, and
       a weaker impact on the level of price dispersion. We focus here on the absolute
       version of the LOP. As in Engel and Rogers (1996), we exploit the granularity of
       the data in the spatial dimension to compare the level of price discrepancies within
       the euro area and within countries of the euro area.
           Part of the literature relates deviations from the LOP at the consumer level to
       the extent of local distribution costs (Crucini et al., 2005; Crucini and Shintani,
       2008). According to Gopinath et al. (2011), these distribution costs are not the
       main source of price discrepancies, which are instead high upstream in the value
       chain, at the wholesale level. Our analysis confirms their result by documenting the
       large degree of price discrepancies at the producer level. The evidence documented
       in Gopinath et al. (2011) further suggests that the price differences we document
       are likely to translate into price discrepancies at the consumer price level.
           Because our data cover both manufacturing firms and wholesalers and retailers,
       for a wide range of different products, we can also compare the propensity to price
       discriminate at different points of the value chain. Although price discrepancies are
       large on average in all sectors, we do find some evidence of the propensity to price
       discriminate being smaller in the retail sector, within a product. The lower level of
       price discrimination by retailers is consistent with results in Cavallo et al. (2014)
       on the LOP within the EMU. The paper documents the importance of uniform
       pricing across euro countries for products sold online by four large retailers. To our
       knowledge, this paper is first to document uniform pricing across different countries.
       Although we find retailers (and non-durable goods) have a lower price dispersion in
       our data, the prevalence of uniform pricing is not striking. This behavior concerns
       about 14% of product varieties accounting for 2% of the value of trade.6
           The literature has also examined price discrepancies in a national context. Most
       papers focus on specific industries and get quite different pictures. DellaVigna and
       Gentzkow (2017) show that the vast majority of large US retailers charge uniform
   6
     One explanation for the different results we obtain is that Cavallo et al. (2014) focus on the online
prices of four giant retailers. We do not have online prices and retail firms account for a tiny fraction of
exports in our data.


                                                     5
       or nearly uniform prices across their stores. Cavallo (2018) shows the degree of
       uniform pricing of the largest US retailers across US locations has increased over
       the last 10 years, partly driven by on-line competition. By contrast, Adams and
       Williams (2019) focus on price dispersion in the home-improvement industry. They
       find substantial price dispersion in this sector and document the granularity of
       zone pricing. They further show that big players in this industry adopt different
       pricing strategies. Our work is also related to Kaplan and Menzio (2015), who
       describe the distribution of prices at which identical consumer goods are sold within
       a market. They find substantial dispersion in consumer prices, within narrowly
       defined products. As discussed above, we also document a substantial heterogeneity
       in the pricing practices of French exporters across sectors.
            Finally, our work contributes to a literature that uses increasingly disaggregated
       data to understand the microeconomic underpinnings of incomplete exchange-rate
       pass-through and pricing-to-market7 (e.g., Berman et al., 2012; Amiti et al., 2019).
       The closest papers are Devereux et al. (2017) and Goldberg and Tille (2016) who use
       transaction-level data to discuss the role of market power on both sides of the trade
       relationship. Our estimates are consistent with exporters and importers sharing the
       surplus of the transaction. Because we can observe repeated transactions within a
       relationship, we can further discuss how this sharing evolves over time, and provide
       evidence of downward price renegotiation "on-the-match". Moreover, we are able
       to document the extent to which market segmentation affects the dispersion of
       prices not only across countries but also within a destination, across the exporter's
       partners.
            The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data used
       to document the extent of price discrepancies in French exports. Stylized facts
       on price discrepancies are then presented in three steps. Section 3 discusses the
       extent to which deviations from the LOP within a firm contribute to the overall
       dispersion of prices observed in the data. In section 4, we study heterogeneity
       in firms' propensity to price discriminate over space, over time, and across firms.
       Section 5 digs deeper into exporters' pricing strategies to discuss the underlying
       mechanisms at the root of observed price discrepancies. Section 6 concludes.


       2     Data and Summary Statistics
       Throughout the analysis, we rely on export data provided to us by the French
       customs and covering the universe of export transactions from France to the rest
       of the EU. A full description of the data can be found in Bergounhon et al. (2018).
       Details on the construction of the variables used in the analysis can be found in
       appendix A. The originality of the data is its extreme degree of disaggregation,
   7
     PTM refers to situations in which a firm charges different prices when selling the same good to
different markets segmented by different currencies (see ,e.g., Atkeson and Burstein, 2008; Fitzgerald
and Haller, 2014)



                                                  6
       which enables us to identify both parties involved in a transaction, namely, the
       French exporter, identified by its Siren number, and the European importing firm,
       identified by its (anonymized) VAT number.8 This firm-to-firm dimension is useful
       because it allows us to compare pricing strategies across producers serving the same
       market and eventually the same buyer with the same product as well as prices
       offered by a given exporter to different partners located in the same or in different
       European markets. We exploit the cross-sectional richness in the analysis.
           On top of the identity of both firms involved in the export flow, transactions
       recorded in the dataset are characterized by a date, at the monthly frequency, a
       product category at the 8-digit level of the combined nomenclature, the value of
       the transaction, and the physical quantity being traded.9 Although the data are
       exhaustive, small exporters are allowed to complete a simplified form that does
       not request information on the product category or the physical quantity exported.
       Because these variables are key in the analysis, we neglect this population of firms.
       Between 2001 and 2006, the simplified regime concerned exporters whose annual
       export turnover in the EU was below 100,000 euros. The declaration threshold was
       increased to 150,000 euros in 2007 and to 460,000 euros in 2011. Therefore, our
       working sample is censored to the left of the distribution of exporters' size and the
       censoring increases over time. Censored observations, on average, represent 36%
       of exporters accounting for 13% of the value of trade during the main period of
       analysis, 2002-2006. We also present some results based on the 2012-2016 period,
       when the simplified regime represents 63% of exporters and 18% of the value of
       trade, on average.
           The analysis mostly focuses on the cross-sectional dispersion of prices, within a
       given product category and a given quarter. But we also want to study how this
       cross-sectional dispersion evolves over time. Doing so requires identifying time-
       consistent product categories, which is cumbersome when working with the com-
       bined nomenclature because it continuously evolves over time. We follow Behrens et
       al. (2019) and harmonize product categories by nesting into broader clusters prod-
       ucts that are connected through nomenclature updates. Because this methodology
       can produce relatively large clusters of products when applied over long horizons,
       we decided to restrict our attention to two five-year periods, 2002-2006 and 2012-
       2016. These subperiods are not affected by major revisions of the harmonized
       system at the root of the combined nomenclature. Working on relatively short pe-
       riods limits the number of product categories that are grouped together through
       the harmonization algorithm. But this also means that product categories are not
   8
      These data are collected for VAT purposes and solely cover trade between firms. We thus do not
include direct exports by a firm to a final consumer in the rest of the analysis. This restriction represents
less than 1% of the value of exports in overall customs data.
    9
      Although the raw data are available at the monthly frequency, we aggregate transactions within a
quarter to compute statistics over the cross-sectional dispersion of prices in sections 3 and 4. Doing
so allows us the benefit of high frequency while slightly increasing the dimensionality used to recover
information on price discrepancies.



                                                     7
       fully comparable across sub-periods. Whenever price strategies are compared over
       long periods, within a firm, the analysis is restricted to product categories that are
       the same in both subperiods. This restricted sample represents 6,896 products, out
       of the 9,402 categories observed over 2002-2006.
           For each transaction, we recover a price proxy, defined as the unit value:

                                                   V aluesb(c)pt
                                      psb(c)pt 
                                                  Quantitysb(c)pt
       where the s, b(c), p, and t subscripts, respectively, refer to the identity of the
       seller, the buyer (which is further identified by its origin country c), the product
       being exported, and the time of the transaction. The value of the transaction,
       V aluesb(c)pt , is measured in euros and is fob. The analysis excludes transactions
       below 100 euros, because of rounding issues. The quantity, Quantitysb(c)pt is either
       measured in kilograms or in physical units for some specific product categories.
       Therefore, unit values are not necessarily comparable across products but they are
       within a product category, the focus of the analysis.10
           The high disaggregation of data, which enables us to compute unit values for
       each trade transaction, helps mitigate composition effects that have been argued
       to reduce the quality of unit values as a proxy for prices. Because unit values
       can still suffer from measurement issues when either the value or the quantity
       is misreported, we trim the data and remove price quotes that deviate from the
       median price set by the firm for this product over the considered year by more
       than 200%.11 The remaining differences in transaction-level unit values observed
       across and within an exporter for a given product and period imply the same
       quantity is sold at different prices. In theory, these price discrepancies can be
       attributable to heterogeneity in mark-ups, heterogeneity in marginal costs, and/or
       the vertical differentiation of the good. Most of the analysis is agnostic about
       the origin of observed price discrepancies, the discussion of the mechanisms at the
       root of price discrimination being delayed to section 5. Our approach consists
       of gradually reducing the potential for cost and product differentiation by first
       focusing on the dispersion within a product and then on price discrepancies within
       a particular exporter of this product. But even when we compare the price of the
       same product sold by the same firm to its different partners, we cannot rule out
       the possibility that the firm maintains price discrepancies by differentiating the
       product it serves to various buyers. Section 5 discusses the extent to which product
       differentiation is likely to explain results in sections 3 and 4.
  10
     Some product categories whose quantities are defined in different units can end up grouped together
after the product-harmonization procedure. Because the corresponding unit values are not comparable,
we drop them from our sample.
  11
     This price range may still appear large. However, Adams and Williams (2019) document that the
price of Home Depot's 4' x 8' x 1/2" mold-resistant drywall ranges from 7.65 to 23.71 USD across
locations. Kaplan and Menzio (2015) show that the price of a 36-oz plastic bottle of Heinz ketchup
ranges from 0.5 to 2.99 USD. This restriction concerns less than 2% of the transactions in the data.



                                                   8
           Over 2002-2006, our dataset is composed of more than 37.7 million observations
       involving 70,649 exporters, 1.1 million importers located in 24 European countries,
       and 9,400 (harmonized) product categories. Table 1 provides detailed statistics
       over the structure of the dataset, by destination country. Note that the period
       encompasses the entry of 10 Eastern European countries into the EU and thus
       into the dataset. For this reason, we compute a number of statistics on a sample
       restricted to the 15 "old" members of the EU.12 Likewise, EMU members are those
       that were already part of the euro-area in 2002. For each observation, we observe
       a transaction-specific price quote. We use the high dimensionality to condition the
       statistics regarding the variance of prices on a particular position in the network.
       Namely, we start by computing the variance of prices conditional on a particular
       product×quarter. Then, we further focus on price discrepancies within a firm. The
       remaining dimensions in the data can then be used to discuss how the dispersion
       of prices varies across firms, over space, and over time.


       3     From price dispersion to price discrimina-
       tion
       In this section, we establish that a substantial share of the dispersion in export
       prices in the data is driven by exporters selling a given product at different prices
       to different buyers. We call such individual price behavior "price discrimination"
       and study it in more details in sections 4 and 5.


       3.1     Price dispersion in the EU
       We start by documenting that the prices of French exports to the EU are highly
       dispersed, even within narrowly defined product categories. A third of this disper-
       sion is driven by individual sellers charging their buyers different prices, whereas
       two thirds of the dispersion is attributable to average price differences across sellers.

       Methodology. Hereafter, the object of interest is the cross-sectional dispersion
       of prices, within a narrowly defined product category, which we measure as:

                         scb(c)                      1                                   scb(c) 2
                    V arpt        (psb(c)pt ) =                              psb(c)pt - p
                                                                                        ¯pt
                                                  Npt - 1       s   c b(c)

       where p ¯ and V ar(p), respectively, refer to the first and second moments of the
       cross-section of prices and Npt is the number of price quotes in the corresponding
       cross-section. Subscripts refer to the dimensionality of the corresponding variable,
       whereas superscripts denote the dimension in which the corresponding moment is
                        scb(c)
       calculated. V arpt (psb(c)pt ) thus denotes the variance of prices computed across
  12
   When working on the later 2012-2016 period, we also neglect transactions involving importers in
Romania, Bulgaria, and Croatia because these countries joined the EU only recently.


                                                            9
sellers, buyers, and countries, for a particular product×period. Because the vari-
ance is increasing in the average level of prices, we use a normalized measure of
dispersion, namely, the coefficient of variation:

                                                                scb(c)
                             scb(c)                        V arpt        (psb(c)pt )
                          CVpt      (psb(c)pt )   =                 scb(c)
                                                                p
                                                                ¯pt
    In examining what share of these price discrepancies is attributable to different
exporters selling a given product at different prices versus exporters price discrimi-
nating their partners in the EU, we further decompose the dispersion of prices into
a within and a between components. The within component is a weighted average
of the variance of prices within an exporter s, and the between component measures
variations in mean prices between exporters of the same good. Formally,

             scb(c)                       Nspt - 1     b(c)                   s    b(c)
         V arpt       (psb(c)pt ) =                V arspt (psb(c)pt ) + wV arpt p
                                                                                 ¯spt              (1)
                                      s   Npt - 1
                                                                                        Between
                                                      W ithin
                                                                                            b(c)
where Nspt is the number of buyers connected to seller s, V arspt (psb(c)pt ) is the
variance of prices that this exporter sets on transactions with different partners,

                       cb(c)                      1                                    cb(c) 2
                  V arspt (psb(c)pt ) =                               psb(c)pt - p
                                                                                 ¯spt
                                           Nspt - 1        c b(c)

and

                           s      b(c)                Nspt - 1 b(c)     scb(c)          2
                      wV arpt p
                              ¯spt        =                    ¯spt - p
                                                               p      ¯pt
                                              s       Npt - 1
is the variance of exporter-specific average prices. The ratio of the within component
over the overall variance of prices is thus a measure of how much the cross-sectional
dispersion of prices within a product is attributable to price discrepancies within a
seller.

Results. Figure 1 shows the evolution over time of the average coefficient of
variation, using various country samples, namely, the EU25, the subset of coun-
tries that were already members of the EU in 2002 (EU15), the 11 original EMU
countries, and the three members of the EU that do not participate in the common
currency. The top panel corresponds to the 2002-2006 period, and the bottom one
is for 2012-2016. The dispersion of prices is relatively stable over each subperiod,
but price dispersion is higher in 2012-2016 than over 2002-2006. As expected, the
coefficient of price variations is, on average, lower in the EMU sub-sample than
in the whole EU. But the most striking difference is observed in the subsample of
non-EMU members, in which the recovered coefficient of variation is an order of
magnitude lower. This result is in part mechanical because this sample consists of
three countries (the UK, Denmark and Sweden) that are not the most popular des-
tinations for French exports. We further dig into this result in section 4.1, when the


                                                      10
       analysis is restricted to the dispersion of prices within a seller and we can compare
       price dispersion across geographical areas, conditional on a number of partners.
           Table 2 provides further details on the distribution of the product- and period-
       specific coefficients of variation recovered from data covering the 2002-2006 pe-
       riod.13 The level of price dispersion varies substantially among products and quar-
       ters. The mean coefficient of variation is thus equal to 1.3 in the EU25, but the
       median is substantially lower, at .8, which indicates the distribution in the dis-
       persion is skewed to the right. Some product quarters display much higher price
       dispersion than the median. This heterogeneity is to a large extent driven by the
       product dimension, because 8-digit product categories cover a large array of differ-
       ent types of goods, some much more differentiated than others, thus offering more
       ground for price discrepancies.
           Unobserved heterogeneity across sellers (and the varieties they produce), the
       between component in equation (1), is a key driver of the dispersion of prices in
       French export markets. But the dispersion of prices within a particular seller, our
       measure of price discrimination, is also substantial in the bottom panel of Table 2.
       The contribution of the within-seller component to the overall price dispersion is
       around 30%, on average, regardless of the sample of countries considered in columns
       (1)-(4).
           Note these figures tend to underestimate the extent of price dispersion within
       sellers across buyers. Indeed, at the 8-digit product and quarter level, almost
       50% of sellers (×period) display zero within price dispersion, because they serve
       a single client in the EU. Although we latter drop these firms from the analysis
       of price discrimination within a firm, they contribute to the overall dispersion of
       prices, within a product. As such, we include them in the statistics of Table 2. By
       definition, they solely contribute to the between-firm component, thus mechanically
       inflating its contribution to the overall dispersion.


       3.2     Price discrimination within the EU
       This section focuses on sellers' propensity to price discriminate, as measured by
       the dispersion of prices they charge their buyers for a given product and period.
       Price discrimination may arise due to firms charging different markups for the
       exact same variety sold to different buyers, or it may be a consequence of sellers
       selling different varieties of a given product to their buyers. For now, we refer
       to both strategies as price discrimination.14 We come back on the origin of such
       price discrimination in section 5. Price discrimination is a common practice among
       French exporters. The coefficient of variation of prices computed within a seller
  13
     Statistics are based on the subsample of coefficients of variation computed on at least five price
quotes. Results are qualitatively similar over 2012-2016.
  14
     Firms may indeed offer a menu of packages or bundles (in terms of prices, quantity, and/or quality)
to consumers to price discriminate. This is often refereed to as second-degree price discrimination (Tirole,
1988).



                                                    11
based on prices set to buyers located in the EMU is equal to 35.7%, on average.
Despite the within-exporter dispersion of prices being substantial, on average, we
do observe a subsample of firms charging close to uniform prices in the EMU. These
firms are relatively small, on average, and thus do not contribute much to aggregate
exports.

Methodology. To study price discrimination, we now focus on sellers connected
to multiple partners in a given period. The coefficient of variation of prices, mea-
sured within a seller, product, and time period, reads


                                       cb(c)
                       cb(c)       V arspt (psb(c)pt )
                    CVspt                cb(c)
                                                                                        (2)
                                        p
                                        ¯spt
                        cb(c)                    1                            cb(c) 2
             with V arspt (psb(c)pt ) =                           psb(c)pt - p
                                                                             ¯spt
                                          Nspt - 1       c b(c)

           cb(c)
where V arspt (psb(c)pt ) is the variance of prices set by seller s, computed across
all transactions with partners located in various countries, Nspt is the number of
                                                                           cb(c)
partners the firm is connected to in this particular time period, and p   ¯spt is the
mean price of its export transactions. These statistics are defined for the 50% of
French exporters that interact with at least two European importers within a given
quarter. In what follows, the analysis is further restricted to firms serving at least
five partners in a given quarter, around 40% of the overall distribution. We remove
this restriction once the analysis can control for the number of partners involved
into the corresponding cross-section.

Results. Figure 2 represents the distribution of coefficients of variation. The
distribution is bi-modal. About 10% of product-seller pairs have a coefficient of
variation below 1%. The corresponding firms do not discriminate across partners,
within a product. We examine this extreme form of "uniform pricing" in more
details in the next paragraph. The rest of the distribution exhibits a substantial
level of price discrimination, with a mode around 25% and a distribution that is
skewed to the right.
    Table 3 provides additional summary statistics over the distribution of the coef-
ficients of variation of prices, measured within a seller, product, and time period for
different samples of countries. Column (1) is based on the whole country sample, as
is Figure 2. Columns (2), (3), and (4) are then restricted to importers located in the
EU15, the EMU, and the non-EMU members of the EU, respectively. As expected,
the level of price dispersion is lower once we focus on the within-exporter dimension.
However, price discrepancies are still quantitatively important, the standard devi-
ation being slightly above 35% of the mean level of prices, on average. This level
of dispersion is in the range of what Kaplan and Menzio (2015) find for consumer
goods sold in various US stores. Restricting the country sample to increasingly
integrated markets as we do from column (1) to column (3) implies a distribution

                                               12
       that is slightly shifted to the left. This finding is consistent with the view that price
       discrepancies are reduced in more integrated markets. Instead, the distribution re-
       covered from the non-EMU countries is slightly shifted to the right, thus suggesting
       that firms exporting to these destinations tend to set more dispersed prices.15

       Uniform pricing. Uniform pricing has recently attracted new scrutiny as sev-
       eral papers have documented that large retailers tend to adopt such strategy in the
       US market, and in the euro area (Cavallo et al., 2014; DellaVigna and Gentzkow,
       2017). The mass around zero in Figure 2 shows a subsample of exporters that do
       adopt such pricing strategies. We now study this population in more details.
           We follow DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2017) and compute a measure of nearly
       uniform pricing based on close to zero coefficients of variation. Namely, we define a
       dummy variable that is equal to 1 for firms adopting near uniform pricing strategies:

                                    N U Pspt = 1 CVspt
                                                        cb(c)
                                                                < .01                         (3)

       Using that measure, we examine the prevalence of near uniform pricing within the
       euro area and within euro countries. We report the results in Figure 3. Over the
       period 2002-2006, about 14% of the products exported by French firms to their
       euro-area buyers are priced nearly uniformly (solid line, top panel, left-hand side)
       and almost 10% are priced nearly uniformly while exported to at least two EMU
       destinations. This finding is a significant result that has not been documented using
       trade-price data to our knowledge. The prevalence of near uniform pricing is twice
       as low, around 7%, but still significant over 2012-2016 (top panel, right-hand side).
           Whereas a significant share of products is priced uniformly, they account for a
       more modest share of trade in value terms. The dotted lines in Figure 3 show that
       NUP weights about 2% of French exports toward euro trade partners in 2002-2006
       and a lower 1.7% in the more recent period.16
           We further consider the possibility that firms choose to price uniformly within
       a market but not across destinations, which would be consistent with zone pricing
       (Adams and Williams, 2019).17 The prevalence of NUP within EMU countries is
  15
     We have also computed the same statistics based on the EMU less Belgium and Netherlands. Trade
with these countries is somewhat biased by the presence of major trade ports in Anvers and Rotterdam.
A substantial share of trade between the EU and the rest of the world indeed transits through these
ports. In principle, these trade flows have been excluded from the dataset as we dropped trade flows
that are reported to be exported to destinations outside of the EU but exit France through another
EU country. However, a significant number of trade flows could still be intermediated by firms in these
countries, in which case the flow is recorded as an intra-EU transaction. The comparison of EMU results
with numbers recovered from this restricted sample were very similar. We concluded from this finding
that exports to these countries do not bias our results.
  16
     Part of the discrepancy is explained by the largest firms being relatively less likely to adopt near
uniform pricing. When we perform the analysis conditional on the number of partners served in the
EMU, we observe that NUP is relatively more prevalent among firms serving two to four buyers in the
EMU, which are not the largest ones.
  17
     Such zone pricing has also been documented to some extent by Cavallo et al. (2014), who show that


                                                   13
      summarized in the bottom panels of Figure 3. Over 2002-2006, 13% of varieties
      exported by French firms in a given destination are priced uniformly. This amount
      is about the same magnitude as the prevalence observed in the whole euro area.
      However, the economic weight of NUP within a destination is about twice as large
      as in the overall euro area, at almost 4%. Here as well, the prevalence of NUP
      seems to decrease over time, in terms of both frequency and exported value.


      4      Heterogeneity in the level of price discrim-
      ination
      This section investigates the heterogeneity in the level of price discrimination across
      markets, sectors, firms, and over time. It shows the level of price discrimination is
      substantial within the EMU - and within EMU destinations - but remains lower than
      outside the EMU. We further show the level of price discrimination has increased
      over time, mostly driven by the behavior of small firms. Large firms and firms
      active in more differentiated sectors are more likely to price discriminate, whereas
      retailers and wholesalers charge less dispersed prices.


      4.1      Price discrimination across markets
      In this section, we study the extent of price discrimination within a firm and across
      various geographical areas. In particular, we study the extent to which price dis-
      crimination is lower in the EMU than in the rest of the EU. One of the expected
      benefits of the monetary union is indeed the convergence of prices, through arbi-
      trage. Such arbitrage should limit firms' ability to price discriminate. Our data
      also enables us to compare the extent of price discrepancies within a country and
      across countries. Here as well, the comparison is insightful inasmuch as we think of
      countries as relatively well-integrated geographical areas that should thus display
      less dispersion in prices than larger geographical units.

      Price discrimination within vs outside the EMU. We start by doc-
      umenting that price discrimination is lower within the common currency area.
      To do so, we construct a panel of coefficients of variation in which each obser-
      vation is identified by the exporting firm, the product being exported, and the
      period of analysis (the spt triplet), and the country sample over which price dis-
      crepancies are recovered (either EU25, EU15, or EMU). We regress these mea-
      sures of dispersion on dummies indicating the geographical area considered and
      exporter×product×period fixed effects. The coefficients on the dummies thus mea-
      sure the extent to which price discrimination varies within a firm, across various
      geographical areas. Results are presented in Table 4.
Zara has a pricing strategy specific to Spain and Portugal on the one hand, and other euro countries on
the other hand.


                                                  14
           First, consider columns (1) and (2), which compare the mean dispersion of
       prices across country sub-samples. Consistent with Table 3, results show that price
       discrepancies are, on average, larger in the complete sample than in the sample
       restricted to the 15 historical members of the EU, whereas they are lower in the
       EMU than in the EU15. This observation is true in both periods, although the
       difference between the EU25 and the EU15 is not statistically different from zero
       over 2002-2006.18 Mean differences across country samples within a firm are quan-
       titatively important because prices within the EU25 are, on average, 10% more
       dispersed than within the EU15, whereas they are 14% less dispersed in the EMU
       than in the EU15. By construction, the coefficients of variation are computed us-
       ing a larger number of observations for the EU samples than for the EMU one.
       Columns (3) and (4) include the number of buyers as a control, to ensure that the
       differences across geographic areas are not mechanically driven by such differences
       in the dimensionality of the underlying variables. Results show thy are not because
       the coefficient on the EMU dummy continues to be significantly negative and of
       the same order of magnitude once we control for the number of buyers.
           To further assess the robustness of this result to potential composition effects,
       we do an additional exercise. The idea is to fix the number of buyers per seller,
       and compare the level of discrimination among EMU buyers relative to the level
       of discrimination between buyers located both within and outside the EMU. More
       specifically, we restrict the sample to firms (×product×period) serving at least
       three partners in the EMU and at least one partner outside of the EMU (but
       within the EU15).19 We then compute a measure of price dispersion within the
       EMU based on a random sample of three price quotes, drawn from the firm-specific
       portfolio of EMU partners. This statistics is then compared with a measure of price
       dispersion in the EU15, recovered from two random draws from the firm's EMU
       partners and one random draw from its non-EMU partners. This exercise amounts
       to comparing the dispersion of prices within a firm (×product×period), within and
       outside of the EMU, conditional on a fixed number of partners. Figure 4 presents
       the distribution of the coefficients of variation recovered from the exercise. As
       expected, the distribution recovered from EMU buyers is denser at low levels of the
       coefficient of variation. This finding is consistent with price discrimination being
       lower within a firm, and within rather than outside of the EMU. Note, however,
       the difference is not very pronounced, with the difference in means being equal to
       two percentage points.
  18
     One possible reason for the lack of significance of the EU25 dummy in column (1) is the size of
the sample used to identify the coefficient. Our dataset does not cover bilateral data prior to countries'
entry into the EU. Therefore, the coefficient on the EU25 dummy for the 2002-2006 period is de facto
identified over observations recovered from 2004-2006 data.
  19
     This restriction reveals itself to be quite demanding, because it reduces the population of firms to
34% of the overall sample.




                                                   15
Price discrimination within and across countries. We have shown that
price discrimination is lower within the EMU than in the EU15, but remains sub-
stantial at 35.7%, on average. The data offer a unique opportunity to dig deeper
into the importance of administrative borders for price discrimination because they
allow us to compare prices set by the same exporting firm over different partners
located in the same country. Using the same strategy as in the previous paragraph,
we now compare the extent of price discrimination within a country and across
countries, within the EMU.
    Following the same logic as in equation (1), price discrepancies within an ex-
porter can further be decomposed into within and between components according
to:

             cb(c)                  Nscpt - 1     b(c)                    c     b(c)
        V arspt (psb(c)pt ) =                 V arscpt (psb(c)pt ) + wV arspt p
                                                                              ¯scpt    (4)
                                c   Nspt - 1
                                                                        Between
                                              W ithin
           b(c)
where V arscpt (psb(c)pt ) is the variance of prices that this exporter sets on trans-
actions with these buyers, Nscpt is the number of buyers connected to seller s in
country c, and

                          c     b(c)          Nscpt - 1 b(c)   cb(c)     2
                     wV arspt p
                              ¯scpt =                   p
                                                        ¯    -p
                                                              ¯spt
                                          c   Nspt - 1 scpt
is the variance of mean prices set by seller s, across destination countries. The within
component in equation (4) thus captures what is attributable to the seller price
discriminating across buyers within a destination country. The between component
instead measures discrepancies in mean prices across destinations, that is the PTM
component. The decomposition is calculated for each firm serving at least two
partners in the EU, the within (respectively between ) component being mechanically
equal to zero if the firm serves a single buyer within each destination (respectively,
a single destination, but at least two partners there).
    The second panel in Table 3 provides statistics over the contribution of the
within component to the overall dispersion of prices set by an exporter. On aver-
age, in the EU25, half of the price dispersion is attributable to exporters setting
different prices on their different partners located in the same EU country. The
remaining 50% of the dispersion is due to the firm applying different mean prices
across destinations, and in particular across EMU and non-EMU destinations. Note
the contribution of the within component naturally increases when the analysis is
restricted to smaller country samples, but this is just the consequence of the be-
tween term being computed over a smaller cross-section. Within the EMU, 58% of
the variance of seller-specific prices is observed within a country.
    Although these numbers indicate the average contribution of the within and
between components of price discrimination in the data, they hide a substantial
amount of heterogeneity. In particular, differences between firms that mostly export
to a single destination and firms that serve few buyers in many different destinations


                                               16
       can mechanically induce a substantial dispersion. To control for this heterogeneity,
       we again rely on randomization. Namely, we retrict the dataset to the 10% of
       firms that export to at least three partners in three different destinations. In
       this subsample, we randomize to recover three price quotes per destination and
       three price quotes in three different destinations. Based on this subsample, we can
       compute measures of price dispersion within and across destinations that are fully
       comparable within a firm, because they are based on the same number of price
       quotes, with the location of the partners being the only source of variation. The
       distributions recovered from the two samples are reported in Figure 5.
           Within a firm (×product×period), the dispersion of prices charged on three
       random partners located in a given destination is 22% lower that the corresponding
       statistics based on three random partners located in three different countries, on
       average. Market segmentation is thus a significant source of price discrepancies,
       including within the EMU. However, within-country price discrepancies are also
       substantial, in this sub-sample as in the overall population of French exporters. For
       the mean firm in the considered population, the within-country dispersion recovered
       from the randomization is indeed as high as 25% of the mean unit value, only
       somewhat below the coefficient of 36% found for the average firm in the overall
       EMU. This finding suggests price discrimination is an important feature of the
       data, including within a destination market.


       4.2     Price discrimination over time
       After having analyzed the geography of price discrimination within and outside the
       EMU, this section focuses on the time dimension. We show price discrimination
       has increased over time within the EMU. This trend has been mainly driven by
       the pricing behavior of small exporters. This result goes against the common view
       that both the increasing integration of European markets and new communication
       technologies should allow consumers to arbitrage more easily across goods, which
       is expected to force the convergence of prices. Instead, the increasing dispersion
       observed within an exporter, over time, suggests exporters in our sample manage
       to maintain high price discrepancies, potentially thanks to product differentiation.
           These results are recovered using a panel of coefficients of variations, computed
       for each seller×product×period across buyers in the EMU. We restrict the analysis
       to the subsample of firm-product pairs observed at least once over 2002-2006 and
       once over 2012-2016. This sample represents 20% of the overall population of
       exporters. Based on this panel, measuring the evolution of price discrimination
       over time, within a particular seller, is possible.20 Results are presented in Table
  20
     Importantly, the exercise is conducted within a firm. Doing so implies that results are immune
from composition effects related to the change in the declaration threshold, between the first and second
periods of analysis. As explained in section 2, changes in customs procedures imply that the population
of firms covered by the 2012-2016 period is smaller than the population of exporters covered in the
2002-2006 sample. Results in this paragraph are based on the population of firms whose sales are above



                                                   17
       5, top panel. On top of the fixed effects, the list of regressors includes a post-2012
       dummy. The coefficient estimated on this variable measures the average difference
       in the level of price dispersion, between the first and the second periods. In column
       (1), the coefficient is positive but not precisely measured. Column (2) further
       controls for the number of buyers underlying the measure of price dispersion. With
       this additional control, the coefficient on the post-2012 dummy turns significant
       at the 10% level and is positive, suggesting the level of price discrimination has
       increased over time.
           The weak precision of the estimates suggests possible heterogeneity in the evolu-
       tion of price discrimination in the data. Regressions in columns (3) and (4) include
       an interaction between the Post 2012 dummy and measures of firms' size and market
       power.21 Coefficients on both interactions are negative and significant, suggesting
       the increase in within-firm price discrimination has been relatively less pronounced
       for large and high market-power firms. Price discrimination is actually stable over
       time for the top four firms in each sector (column (4)).
           To rule out the possibility that results are driven by composition effects, we
       again rely on randomization. Regressions in columns (2)-(4) are reproduced based
       on coefficients of variation computed for each firm×product×quarter, using a ran-
       dom sample of three EMU partners. Results reported in columns (5)-(7) are very
       similar, both qualitatively and quantitatively. In particular, we confirm the het-
       erogeneity along the distribution of firms, with the average increase in the level of
       price discrimination being mostly driven by relatively small firms.
           Finally, the bottom panel of Table 5 reproduces the same regressions, using the
       dispersion of prices within a particular EMU country as left-hand-side variable,
       and identifying the variation over time within a firm×country×product. All results
       are qualitatively the same. This finding implies the overall increase in the level of
       price dispersion observed within an exporter is not triggered by more dispersion
       across EMU destinations but indeed by a stronger degree of price discrimination,
       including across buyers located in a given country.


       4.3     Individual determinants of price discrimination
       In the previous sections, we documented some heterogeneity in price discrimination
       across markets and over time, within a firm. This section takes another perspec-
       tive and examines the individual characteristics driving the heterogeneity in price
both declaration thresholds.
  21
     Size is measured by the total value of the firm's (domestic and export) sales. Market power is
recovered from the ratio of the firm's gross operating surplus over its value added. Both dummy variables
are equal to 1 for firms belonging to the top of the distribution, within their sector of activity. The "High
Market Power" dummy is equal to 1 for firms in the fourth quarter of the sectoral distribution of market
power. The "Large Firm" dummy is equal to 1 for the four largest firms in their sector. Results are very
similar, though more difficult to interpret quantitatively, when both size and market power are measured
using a continuous variable, namely, the level of the variable for the firm, in relative terms with respect
to the median firm in its sector.


                                                     18
discrimination across sellers. We show the degree of price discrimination varies
substantially across firms and products. Large, multi-product firms and produc-
ers of differentiated goods exhibit a higher degree of price discrimination. Price
dispersion is instead lower for retailers and wholesalers.

Methodology. To measure the characteristics at the root of heterogeneity in
firms' propensity to price discriminate, we rely on the following linear decomposi-
tion:

                            cb(c)
                      ln CVspt      = Xspt + F Es + F Ept + espt                   (5)

F Es and F Ept refer to seller-specific and product×period fixed effects, respectively.
Xspt is a vector of time-varying controls. In a second step, we use the estimated
fixed effects to study the determinants of price discrepancies that are (i) specific to
an exporting firm and (ii) product-specific. Results of the first and second stages
are presented in Tables 6-8. Details on the construction of the different explanatory
variables can be found in Appendix A.
    Table 6 presents results of the first stage estimation. The model in equa-
tion (5) explains about 56% of the variance in the data, most of it being at-
tributable to the fixed effects. Namely, heterogeneity in coefficients of variation
across product×periods explains 10% of the variance, whereas as much as 44% is
attributable to unobserved heterogeneity across sellers. This finding confirms the
high degree of heterogeneity across exporting firms in terms of their propensity to
price discriminate. Once we control for this heterogeneity, we find price dispersion
is larger over large trade flows, even conditional on the number of partners served,
but relatively less pronounced for the firm's core product. Finally, price dispersion
tends to increase with the firm's experience as an exporter of the product. We dig
deeper into this result in section 5.2.

Seller characteristics and price discrimination. Heterogeneity across ex-
porters is investigated in Table 7, where the estimated seller fixed effects recovered
from equation (5) are regressed on various firm-level variables. In column (1), the
estimated fixed effects are regressed against the seller's sales (normalized by the
median firm's sales in the industry). The (normalized) market power of the firm
is included in column (2). The variable is measured by the ratio of gross operat-
ing surplus over value added, relative to the median firm in the sector. Column
(3) introduces dummy variables, for Wholesalers and Retailers. The control group
is the rest of the economy, mostly firms in manufacturing sectors. To control for
heterogeneity between single- and multi-product firms, column (4) correlates the
fixed effects with the number of products exported by the firm. Finally, column (5)
corresponds to the multivariate specification.
    In terms of explanatory power, the most important variables are the firm's size
and the number of products it exports. Relatively large and multi-product firms
tend to price discriminate more, conditional on the number of buyers served and

                                           19
         the product being exported, because we use these variables as controls in the first
         stage (Table 6). Each of these variables explains about 7% of the variance in the
         fixed effects, and they are not fully redundant because the adjusted R-squared of
         the multivariate regression in column (5) is above 11%.
             Less important in terms of explanatory power but also highly significant is
         the heterogeneity across firms with different degrees of market power (column (2)).
         High market-power firms are found to display larger price discrepancies, on average.
         Our results also point to heterogeneity across sectors with retailers and wholesalers
         being relatively less prone to price discrimination, on average (column (3)).22 Here
         as well, the R-squared of the regression is low, meaning heterogeneity in pricing
         strategies is strong, even within these sectors. Not all retailers adopt near uniform
         pricing strategies. All of these results remain the same in the multivariate regression
         of column (5).

         Product characteristics and price discrimination. In Table 8 and Fig-
         ures 6 and 7, we characterize the heterogeneity across products, in the degree of
         price discrimination. Histograms in Figures 6 and 7 report the mean level of price
         dispersion, across industries and broad economic categories, respectively.23 In both
         cases, the ranking of products appears consistent with expectations. We find that
         prices are relatively less dispersed in industries producing relatively homogenous
         goods such as petroleum, food products, minerals, and some chemicals. The largest
         average levels of price discrepancies are instead found within highly differentiated
         industries, for example, Machineries and Professional equipments. We find the same
         ranking between primary and processed goods when products are classified accord-
         ing to the BEC classification in Figure 7. The least dispersed prices are found for
         primary goods. At the other side of the distribution, the highest average coefficients
         of variation are obtained for durables and capital goods. This result is consistent
         with the view that the differentiation of products facilitates price discrimination.
         Engel and Wang (2011) argue that trade in durable goods is key to understand-
         ing the volatility and comovement of exports and imports in open macroeconomic
         models. Our findings further highlight the central role of durable goods for the
         level of price discrimination associated with exports.
             This intuition is broadly confirmed by the multivariate regressions in Table
         8. In columns (1) to (5), the product fixed effects estimated in equation (5) are
         regressed against measures of product durability, product differentiation, upstream-
         ness, product complexity, and relationship stickiness. Column (1) confirms price
  22
       Retailers and wholesalers, respectively, represent 35% and 7% of firms in the sample.
  23
       Statistics in Figures 6 and 7 are recovered from the following second-stage regression:

                                         F^
                                          E pt = Classp + F Et + ept

where Classp is a full set of industry (Figure 6) or BEC categories (Figure 7). Because the left-hand side
variable of the first stage is a log, numbers can be interpreted in percentage change from the omitted
category in each figure.


                                                      20
       discrimination is more pronounced in sectors classified as durables in the BEC
       classification. Column (2) also confirms prices are more dispersed across buyers
       for more differentiated products as measured by Nunn (2007). Column (3) shows
       less discrimination among products with a more upstream position in value chains,
       with upstreamness defined as in Antras et al. (2012).24 Column (4) shows that firms
       selling more complex products (as defined by Hausmann and Hidalgo (2014)) tend
       to have a higher level of price discrimination. And column (5) implies a positive
       correlation between price discrimination and the level of stickiness in relationships
       (estimated by Martin et al. (2019) across HS6 product categories). These results
       are still valid in a multivariate regression including all the variables (column (6)).
       Together, these variables explain almost 16% of the dispersion in the level of price
       discrimination across HS6 product categories. Most of the dispersion is explained
       by Nunn's measure of input specificity confirming the role of product differentiation
       in firms' pricing strategies.
            These results show not all firms and products are equally prone to price dis-
       crimination. Depending on their size, market power, and the type of products they
       sell, French exporters appear strongly heterogeneous with respect to the dispersion
       of prices set on various buyers in the EMU. A corollary is that the mechanisms
       at the root of such price discrimination are heterogeneous. Price discrimination
       may sometimes reflect buyers' heterogeneity in terms of their willingness to pay, or
       come from differences in sellers' ability to differentiate products and serve different
       buyers with different products, or may be related to heterogeneity in the way the
       seller and its partner share the surplus. Until now, we have been agnostic about
       the underlying causes for such price discrimination. In section 5, we provide some
       indicative evidence of the relative importance of these factors.


       5      An exploration of the sources of price dis-
       crimination
       This section explores into more details the mechanisms at the root of observed
       price discrimination strategies. Price discrimination occurs whenever consumers
       of a firm's product are heterogeneous in terms of their product valuation, or even
       with identical consumers in the presence of information frictions on the consumer
       or producer side (Stigler, 1961, Varian, 1980, Tirole, 1988). In such environments,
  24
     This observation may seem to contradict results in column (3) of Table 7 that price dispersion is
less pronounced for retailers. By definition, retailers tend to sell goods at the end of value chains, which
should thus display less dispersed prices according to column (3) in Table 8. The apparent contradiction
comes from the reference used to interpret both coefficients. In Table 7, we study heterogeneity across
sellers, conditionally on a product being exported. The low propensity of retailers to price discriminate
must thus be understood in relative terms with respect to manufacturing firms selling the same product.
Instead, the coefficient on upstreamness identified in Table 8 is identified from the comparison of different
products that are positioned at various points of the value chain.



                                                     21
sellers benefit from the fact that consumers cannot perfectly arbitrage to set prices
between the competitive price and a maximum price where the buyer's surplus
is zero. The share of the total surplus that goes to a seller is a measure of its
market power. Firms may price discriminate by offering different prices to different
consumers for the same variety, or by offering different packages (e.g., different
volumes or different qualities) at different prices to all consumers.
    Although our data do not allow us to measure heterogeneity in preferences, nor
the amount of information available to firms while deciding on their prices, nor
the exact packages sold by the firm, we propose two exercises to make progress on
these questions. First, we restrict the analysis to a subsample of products that we
argue are highly homogenous, so that we can confidently exclude the possibility
that observed price discrepancies are explained by vertical differentiation. Second,
we rely on a rich statistical decomposition of the variance of prices to discriminate
between various models of price discrimination.


5.1     Price discrimination for homogenous products
In this section, we provide an indirect assessment of the importance of product
differentiation as a source of price discrimination. To do so, we compute the level
of price discrimination for a subset of products for which we expect very little room
for vertical differentiation. This approach allows us to rule out that, in this sample,
price discrepancies reflect a differentiation of products sold by the exporter to its
partners in the EMU, and instead interpret the dispersion in terms of heterogeneous
markups.

Methodology. We used a two-step method to select the sample of homogenous
products. We started from 2,446 product codes of sections V, VI, and VII of the
combined nomenclature (Mineral Products, Products of the Chemical or Allied
Industries, Plastics and Articles Thereof; Rubber and Articles Thereof). Among
sections V and VII, we kept mineral, plastic, and rubber in their primary forms.
Among chemical products, we excluded specialty chemicals such as pharmaceutical
products, fertilizers, tannins, or pigments because these products are usually pro-
duced in low-volume and customized for the clients. We then excluded all product
categories that explicitly mention that several varieties can enter in the description
(e.g., Chlorides and chloride oxides) and those that include derivatives or esters
of chemical compounds (e.g., Derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons), leaving us with
402 CN8 product categories that we thought were potentially quite homogenous.
    We then interviewed a chemist that went through the 402 product categories
and classified them into eight groups: elements entering the Mendeleiev classifica-
tion, molecular organic substances, molecular inorganic substances, essential oils,
polymers, industrial inorganic products, industrial organic products, and petroleum
products. Based on his assessment, we decided to exclude from the group of ho-
mogenous products essential oils and petroleum products, whose quality usually


                                          22
       depends on the concentration of the product in the substance, as well as polymers
       and industrial inorganic and organic products that, contrary to the raw organic
       and inorganic substances, can be produced in various ways and qualities, leaving
       us with 276 product categories classified as homogenous. Examples of homogenous
       products include Fluorine (CN8 28013010), Calcium (CN8 28051200), Sulphuric
       acid (CN8 28070010), Solid potassium hydroxide (CN8 28152010), Trichloroethy-
       lene (CN8 29032200), or Octan-2-ol (CN8 29051620). The complete list of these
       products is available in Table 11.25
          Once the products were identified, we merged the list with the customs data
       to select the subsample of export transactions for these particular homogenous
       products. This selection leaves us with 7,441 observations covering 276 product
       categories exported by 395 sellers.

       Results. Figure 8 compares the distribution of coefficients of variation recovered
       for firms (×product×quarter) in the overall sample (solid line) and in the restricted
       sample of homogenous products (dashed line). Compared with the overall distri-
       bution, the distribution based on homogenous products is shifted to the left. This
       finding is consistent with the view that homogenous products are less prone to price
       dispersion within a seller, because firms cannot price discriminate by differentiating
       the products they offer to their different partners. The mean dispersion of prices
       in the sample of homogenous goods is still substantial though, at 27% of the mean
       price.
           Table 9 digs further into this difference by systematically comparing the level of
       price discrimination across different samples. Column (1) is the analog of Figure 8.
       The coefficient of variation is explained by a dummy that is equal to 1 if the exported
       product is a homogenous chemical product, the control group being composed of
       the rest of the dataset. Price discrimination is 5.6 percentage points lower in the
       selected sample. Because all homogenous products belong to the chemical industry,
       the difference in means may be entirely explained by composition effects across
       industries. Column (2) is thus restricted to products in the chemical and allied
       industries. This sample includes all homogenous products but also other chemical
       products such as pharmaceuticals, specialty chemicals, or any chemical substance
       that was not sufficiently homogenous to pass the selection process. In this sample as
       well, we find prices of homogenous products significantly less dispersed than more
       differentiated products, with a difference of 16 percentage points. Finally, columns
       (3) and (4) in Table 9 further restrict the analysis to the sub-sample of firms that
       do export at least one homogenous product. Here as well, the coefficient estimated
       on the homogenous product dummy is significantly negative, at -10 percentage
       points, whether identified across or within a firm. Note the within specification in
       column (4) identifies the coefficient of interest solely on multi-product firms that
       export homogenous and non-homogenous chemicals. Controlling for unobserved
25
     We are thankful to Luc Mejean for his valuable help at this stage of the procedure.



                                                   23
heterogeneity across sellers, we can still confirm that prices of homogenous products
are significantly less dispersed.
    Although the external validity of these results is questionable, these results are
indicative of composition effects within a seller being a factor at the root of some of
the price discrepancies discussed in this paper. In the most demanding specification
that allows us to compare homogenous and differentiated products sold by the same
firm, price dispersion is 26% lower for homogenous products. Assuming that firms
in the chemical industry are representative of the rest of the sample implies about
a quarter of the price dispersion discussed in this paper is attributable to firms
differentiating the products they offer to various partners in the EMU. Even within
homogenous products such as molecular substances, price dispersion within a firm
is found to be high, on average, at 27% of the mean price. Because this number is
obtained within a firm, for a particularly homogenous product, it indicates exporters
price discriminate across their partners by adjusting their markup.


5.2 Exporters' dynamic pricing strategies as a source
of price dispersion
Interpreting firms' propensity to price discriminate requires us to dig deeper into
their pricing strategies, in the cross-section and over time. In particular, we need
to separate systematic differences between firms, coming from unobserved product
differences, production technology, or market power, from differences within firms
but between buyers if firms do not face the same marginal cost and/or do not apply
the same mark-ups over the different partners served in a given period. For that
purpose, we use a rich linear model, controlling for both seller and buyer fixed
effects to analyze the determinants of price levels. Results are used to recover
insights about the likely sources of the previously discussed price dispersion.

Methodology. The decomposition takes inspiration from the labor literature.
Following Abowd et al. (1999), this literature has extensively used matched employer-
employee data and high-dimensional fixed-effect estimators to identify the sources
of the dispersion in wages observed in the data. Our dataset has the same bipar-
tite graph structure, and we can thus rely on this methodology to decompose the
observed variance of export prices.
    The estimated model takes the following form:

                   ln psb(c)pt =  Xsb(c)pt + F Es + F Eb(c) + esb(c)pt              (6)
where Xsb(c)pt is a set of control variables, F Es is a (time-invariant) fixed effect
for seller s, F Eb(c) is a (time-invariant) fixed effect for buyer b(c), and esb(c)pt is
a residual that captures the unexplained dispersion of prices within a seller-buyer
match. As shown by Abowd et al. (1999), such an equation can be estimated on
panel data to recover the contribution to the dispersion in prices of (i) unobserved
heterogeneity across sellers absorbed into F Es , (ii) unobserved heterogeneity across

                                          24
       buyers absorbed into F Eb(c) , (iii) observable variables regarding the relationship in-
       volving seller s and buyer b Xsb(c)pt , and (iv) a residual esb(c)pt that is specific to
       the seller-buyer relationship and the particular product and period under consider-
       ation.26
            Hence, the seller fixed effect captures both unobserved product heterogeneity
       between sellers and systematic differences in market power, with some sellers being
       able to set higher prices, on average. In the same way, the buyer fixed effect
       captures both the heterogeneity in good valuation among buyers, and differences
       in bargaining power, for example, because some buyers are new to the market and
       have limited information about the other sellers. Finally, the residual reflects any
       match-specific difference: a buyer experiencing particularly low or high prices with
       that seller or price fluctuations coming from idiosyncratic shocks.
            The set of controls systematically includes a product×period effect that ab-
       sorbs the mean price set by French firms in the product market for this particular
       quarter. These fixed effects control for the effect of inflation on prices and also
       absorb any difference induced by unit values being defined with respect to different
       physical quantities for some products. Identification of the buyer and seller fixed
       effects comes from the variance of prices across sellers and across buyers within
       a product×period. In comparison with similar statistical decompositions applied
       to matched employer-employee data, the parameters of this model are well iden-
       tified. In a panel of almost 40 millions transactions, product×period fixed effects
       are identified, on average, on 226 price quotes (=37,470,412/165,730) while seller
       and buyer components are measured on, respectively, 30 and 2.3 price quotes per
       quarter, on average. This dimensionality renders the estimation of buyer and seller
       fixed effects more precise and alleviates the so-called limited mobility bias (Andrews
       et al., 2008).

       Results. Table 10 reproduces the results based on 2002-2006, starting with the
       baseline equation that solely controls for fixed effects in column (1), before sequen-
       tially adding more controls. The simplest specification captures 89% of the variance
       of the data, with more than 65% solely attributable to the product×period fixed
       effects. The large contribution of the product×period fixed effects is not surprising
       given the diversity of products in the data that cover transactions over airplanes,
       wine bottles, car components, and so on. Besides the heterogeneity across products,
       the variance decomposition confirms the role of unobserved heterogeneity between
       exporters, which explains as much as 20% of the overall variance. In comparison,
       the contributions of the buyer unobserved heterogeneity and the residual are small,
       at 4.5 and 10.5%, respectively.
  26
    This equation can be estimated whenever the underlying bipartite graph is connected, which is
largely the case in our data. Namely, the largest connected component of the graph encompasses more
than 99% of all observations. In the rest of the section, we neglect the remaining 1% of observations
and estimate equation (6) on the largest connected component, which allows estimated fixed effects to
be comparable.


                                                 25
           The bottom panel of the table reports the variance decomposition of the within-
       seller (×product×period) components of prices.27 These components are the ones
       that we are mostly interested in, because the objective is to understand price dis-
       crimination within a firm. In this dimension, the buyer fixed effect and the residual,
       respectively, account for 17% and 83% of the variance. The importance of buyers'
       unobserved heterogeneity as a determinant of sellers' pricing strategies can be in-
       terpreted in terms of the heterogeneity of buyers' preferences, which makes sellers
       optimally differentiate the product they sell and/or adjust their mark-up. Figure
       9 shows the correlation between the mean value of the buyer fixed effects and the
       GDP per capita of their country of origin. The correlation is strongly positive.
       This finding is consistent with the view that buyers in rich countries have higher
       valuations, and/or demand higher-quality goods, which inflates the relative price
       that they pay.28
           Columns (2)-(6) in Table 10 augment the specification with additional observed
       variables to dig deeper into the origin of the match-specific component (esb(c)pt )
       entering equation (6). In column (2), we control for the size of the transaction
       (in euros) and the distance between the exporter and her partner.29 These two
       variables explain another 1% of the variance of prices. Export prices are larger
       over large transactions and towards distant countries. These results are consistent
       with evidence based on more aggregated firm-level data (Manova and Zhang, 2012;
       Martin, 2012).
           In column (3), we add two variables that capture the dynamics of prices, over
       time. Namely, the "Seller's experience" is the number of years since the seller
       started exporting the product to the destination. The "Age of the relationship" is
       the number of years since the seller first started serving the buyer with the product.
       The coefficient on the seller's experience is positive and significant, whereas the
       impact of the age of the relationship is significantly negative. In quantitative terms,
       one more year of experience implies .2% higher prices, on average. The downward
       renegotiation of prices within a firm-to-firm relationship amounts to 1% after one
       year.30
  27
      In practice, the decomposition is based on the three-way fixed-effects estimation presented in equation
(6). More specifically, the buyer and match components are regressed on normalized (log) prices. Prices
are normalized in the product×period and seller dimensions. The estimated coefficients measure how
much of the dispersion in prices within sellers and products is attributable to the buyer fixed effects and
the residuals.
   28
      We also computed the correlation of the fixed effects with the number of French exporters the firm
has been connected to, over time. The correlation is negative but very small.
   29
      The "Distance" separating the firm and the buyer is a population-weighted average of distances
between the seller's commuting zone in France and the destination's main cities. This measure of distance
is taken from Laboureau (2018). We also run a specification with an alternative measure of distance,
namely, the driving time between the commuting zone and the destination's main cities. Results were
qualitatively unchanged.
   30
      Note the downward trend of prices within a firm-to-firm relationship is recovered from all repeated
transactions, including those that display full price rigidity. Indeed, some of the relationships we observe



                                                     26
          Taken together, these coefficients are interpreted as follows. Within a firm-to-
      firm relationship, a downward renegotiation of prices occurs over time. Assuming
      the renegotiation takes place given a constant variety sold by the seller to the buyer,
      implies the buyer recovers a larger share of the surplus of the transaction when inter-
      acting with the seller repeatedly. This observation is true even though, on average,
      the seller increases her average price over time, when she acquires experience in
      the destination. The reason for these conflicting results is that sellers compensate
      for the decreasing prices recovered from their existing customers by acquiring new
      buyers and charging them with higher prices. This interpretation is consistent with
      results in columns (4) and (5). In column (4), we add a measure of the number
      of partners that the firm serves in the destination. The coefficient associated with
      this variable is identified within a firm, over time, and thus is interpreted as the
      marginal effect of the firm's expanding its portfolio of clients. The impact is pos-
      itive and makes the coefficient on the firm's experience turn nil. This finding is
      consistent with the interpretation that the positive impact of firms' experience is
      driven by the acquisition of new partners.31 In column (5), we further augment
      the specification with two dummy variables, one for "One shot" relationships, that
      is, transactions involving a seller and a buyer who will never interact again in the
      future, and one for "First time" transactions, that is, the first transaction involv-
      ing a particular pair of firms. Both coefficients are positive and highly significant.
      The outcome is that sellers charge higher prices, on average, across buyers that
      they have just met. In quantitative terms, "One shot" relationships are priced at
      .8% more than repeated transactions, whereas the first transaction of a repeated
      relationship is priced at .2% more than the next ones.
          Finally, in column (6), we interact several variables with a dummy identifying
      the top four firms in their sector. The interaction is meant to take a focus on
      the "superstar firms" that have recently been argued to have gained market power
      (De Loecker and Eeckhout, 2017). Because superstar firms are, on average, more
      experienced in export markets, tend to serve more partners, and are involved in
      larger transactions, the coefficients estimated on the corresponding variables might
      to some extent reflect their pricing strategies. Part of the heterogeneity in pricing
      strategies between superstar firms and the rest of the distribution is, however, ab-
      sorbed into the seller fixed effects entering equation (6). We confirm this result in
      Figure 10, which shows the correlation of the seller fixed effects with the firms' rel-
      ative sales. As expected, the correlation is positive, meaning large firms on average
      set higher prices. In column (6), we further interact the age of the transaction and
      the two dummies for "One shot" relationships and "First time" transactions with
in the data are likely based on long-term contracts between the firm and its client. If these long-term
contracts include pre-set prices, the following series of prices observed over the corresponding repeated
transactions will display very little variance, if any. Because we cannot distinguish long-term contracts
from spot transactions, there is nothing we cannot control for this possibility.
   31
      See Lenoir and Patault (2019) for a detailed discussion of the dynamics of exporters' buyers acqui-
sition based on the same data.


                                                   27
the dummy for large firms. The three coefficients on the interactions are found
significantly positive. Therefore, price renegotiation on the match is relatively less
pronounced for large firms, although these firms are also the ones that manage
to set the highest prices across new consumers. This helps refine the evidence in
De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017). According to our results, the increase in su-
perstars' average markups is explained by their ability to attract new customers.
High markups they charge these new customers allow sellers to compensate for
downward renegotiations with their existing partners and maintain high average
markups, over time.
    Evidence in this section is thus consistent with the dispersion of within-seller
prices being driven by two reinforcing factors. On the one hand, buyers are shown
to be charged heterogeneous prices, which is consistent with price discrimination
based on heterogeneity in consumers' valuation for the firm's product. On the other
hand, the dynamics of prices charged by exporters, over time, suggests buyers that
are charged high markups renegotiate over time the sharing of surplus which exerts
downward pressures on export prices. To compensate for this downard pressure on
their average markup, sellers must attract new buyers that they can charge high
prices. This differentiation of prices between new and old customers can explain
part of the cross-sectional dispersion of prices observed within a firm.


6     Conclusion
This paper exploits fine grained information on the unit price that French exporters
charge their European buyers. We document a significant level of price dispersion
both within product categories across exporters and within exporters across buy-
ers. This latter source of price discrepancies is indicative of significant deviations
from the LOP - even within the euro area. The median coefficient of variation of
prices set by a French exporter over the different partners in its portfolio is 30%,
but we show that pricing strategies are highly heterogeneous. Although a small
fraction of exporters adopt a near uniform pricing strategy, most exporters charge
different prices across buyers. We further document a substantial level of price
discrimination among homogenous chemical products, which suggests that a non
negligible share of price discrepancies is triggered by differences in mark-ups rather
than quality/composition effects.
    Price discrimination is particularly prevalent among firms exporting differen-
tiated products, in particular durable ones, and for large firms. Interestingly, al-
though we provide evidence of downward price renegotiations as the buyer-seller
relationship is maintained over time, our results suggest these large exporters main-
tain high average mark-up rates, by increasing their customer base and charging new
buyers with high prices. These results shed new lights on some of the micromech-
anisms that could explain the observed increase in market power (De Loecker and
Eeckhout, 2017) and how they potentially rely on informational frictions on the



                                         28
buyers' side.


References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis, "High Wage Workers
  and High Wage Firms," Econometrica, March 1999, 67 (2), 251­334.
Adams, Brian and Kevin R. Williams, "Zone Pricing in Retail Oligopoly," American
  Economic Journal: Microeconomics, February 2019, 11 (1), 124­156.
Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings, "International Shocks and Domestic
 Prices: How Large Are Strategic Complementarities?," The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 2019.
Andrews, M. J., L. Gill, T. Schank, and R. Upward, "High wage workers and low
  wage firms: negative assortative matching or limited mobility bias?," Journal of
  the Royal Statistical Society Series A, 2008, 171 (3), 673­697.
Antras, Pol, Davin Chor, Thibault Fally, and Russell Hillberry, "Measuring the
  Upstreamness of Production and Trade Flows," American Economic Review,
  2012, 102 (3), 412­416.
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, "Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and Inter-
  national Relative Prices," American Economic Review, December 2008, 98 (5),
  1998­2031.
Behrens, Kristian, Brahim Boualam, and Julien Martin, "Are Clusters Resilient?
  Evidence from Canadian Textile Industries," Journal of Economic Geography,
  2019.
Bergounhon, Flora, Clémence Lenoir, and Isabelle Mejean, "A guideline to French
  firm-level trade data," 2018.
Berman, Nicolas, Philippe Martin, and Thierry Mayer, "How do Different Exporters
  React to Exchange Rate Changes?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012,
  127 (1), 437­492.
Cavallo, Alberto, "More Amazon Effects: Online Competition and Pricing Behav-
  iors," NBER Working Papers 25138, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
  October 2018.
  , Brent Neiman, and Roberto Rigobon, "Currency Unions, Product Introduc-
  tions, and the Real Exchange Rate," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014,
  129 (2), 529­595.
Crucini, Mario J. and Mototsugu Shintani, "Persistence in law of one price devia-
  tions: Evidence from micro-data," Journal of Monetary Economics, April 2008,
  55 (3), 629­644.
  , Chris I. Telmer, and Marios Zachariadis, "Understanding European Real Ex-
  change Rates," American Economic Review, June 2005, 95 (3), 724­738.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Matthew Gentzkow, "Uniform Pricing in US Retail
  Chains," NBER Working Papers 23996, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc November 2017.
Devereux, Michael B., Wei Dong, and Ben Tomlin, "Importers and exporters in
  exchange rate pass-through and currency invoicing," Journal of International
  Economics, 2017, 105 (C), 187­204.
Engel, Charles and Jian Wang, "International trade in durable goods: Understand-
  ing volatility, cyclicality, and elasticities," Journal of International Economics,
  January 2011, 83 (1), 37­52.

                                         29
  and John H Rogers, "How Wide Is the Border?," American Economic Review,
  December 1996, 86 (5), 1112­1125.
   and John H. Rogers, "European product market integration after the euro,"
  Economic Policy, July 2004, 19 (39), 347­384.
Fitzgerald, Doireann and Stefanie Haller, "Pricing-to-Market: Evidence From
  Plant-Level Prices," Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (2), 761­786.
Goldberg, Linda S. and Cédric Tille, "Micro, macro, and strategic forces in inter-
  national trade invoicing: Synthesis and novel patterns," Journal of International
  Economics, 2016, 102 (C), 173­187.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Frank Verboven, "Market integration and convergence
  to the Law of One Price: evidence from the European car market," Journal of
  International Economics, January 2005, 65 (1), 49­73.
Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Nicholas Li, "In-
  ternational Prices, Costs, and Markup Differences," American Economic Review,
  October 2011, 101 (6), 2450­2486.
Hausmann, Ricardo and Cesar Hidalgo, The Atlas of Economic Complexity: Map-
  ping Paths to Prosperity, Vol. 1 of MIT Press Books, The MIT Press, January
  2014.
Kaplan, Greg and Guido Menzio, "The Morphology Of Price Dispersion," Interna-
  tional Economic Review, November 2015, 56, 1165­1206.
Laboureau, Thomas, "City Gravidist Database," 2018.
Lenoir, Clemence and Berangere Patault, "Exporters Dynamics: Sales Managers
  and Firm's International Portfolios," 2019.
Levchenko, Andrei A, Logan T Lewis, and Linda L Tesar, "The Collapse of Inter-
  national Trade during the 2008­09 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun," IMF
  Economic Review, December 2010, 58 (2), 214­253.
Loecker, Jan De and Jan Eeckhout, "The Rise of Market Power and the Macroe-
  conomic Implications," 2017. UCL mimeo.
Manova, Kalina and Zhiwei Zhang, "Export Prices Across Firms and Destinations,"
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (1), 379­436.
Martin, Julien, "Markups, quality, and transport costs," European Economic Re-
 view, 2012, 56 (4), 777­791.
  , Isabelle Mejean, and Mathieu Parenti, "Relationship stickiness: Measurement
  and Applications to International Economics," 2019.
Nunn, Nathan, "Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of
  Trade," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 569­600.
Rauch, James E., "Networks versus markets in international trade," Journal of
  International Economics, June 1999, 48 (1), 7­35.
Stigler, George J., "The Economics of Information," Journal of Political Economy,
  1961, 69, 213­213.
Tirole, Jean, The Theory of Industrial Organization, Vol. 1 of MIT Press Books,
  The MIT Press, March 1988.
Varian, Hal, "A Model of Sales," American Economic Review, 1980, 70 (4), 651­59.




                                        30
       A      Data Appendix
       This section provides additional information regarding the various variables used
       as controls in the analysis.


       A.1      Variables constructed using the Customs data
       Count partners. Tables 4, 5, and 6 use as control the number of partners in the
       firm's portfolio, which is also equal to the number of observations used to recover
       the corresponding coefficient of variation. This variable is also used in Table 10 to
       understand the dynamics of average prices, within a seller.

       Size. We use two measures of the "size" of trade relationships as controls in the
       analysis. Throughout the paper, the size of a trade relationship is measured as the
       value of exports recorded in the Customs database. In the raw data, the variable
       is available for each transaction involving a seller s, a buyer b(c) over a particular
       product p, and for a specific period t. This is what is used as control in Table 10 and
       referred to as the "Transaction Size". Table 6 uses the value of trade as a measure
       of the size of the exporting firm. In that case, transactions are aggregated within
       an exporter×product×period, across all partners to which the firm is connected.

       Age and Experience. The duration of trade relationships is also constructed
       using the panel dimension of the data. The "Seller's experience" measures the
       experience of the firm as an exporter. In Table 10, it is measured as the number of
       years since the firm has started serving the destination.32 In Table 6, the focus is on
       the overall dispersion of prices within a seller and product, and experience is thus
       measured as the number of years since the firm started exporting this particular
       product in the EMU. Finally, the "age" of a relationship used as control in Table
       10 is measured relative to the date of the first transaction involving the seller and
       its foreign partner for a particular product.

       Core Product. In Table 6, we introduce a dummy variable identifying the
       firm's "Core" product. For each firm and product, we first aggregate exported
       values across all partners, all destinations, and all periods. The core product is
       then defined as the most important product generating at least 30% of the firm's
       overall sales. We also run a specification with the firm's main product (in value
       terms) without imposing that it represents at least 30% of the firm's sales but
       results were qualitatively the same because more than 75% of multi-product firms
       have their core product that represents at least a third of their exports. Finally,
       note the "Core" product dummy is normalized to zero for firms that export a single
       product.

       Count Products. In Table 7, column (4), we control for the number of products
       that the firm is exporting. Here as well, the variable is recovered from aggregated
       trade across all periods and destinations, within a firm.

       First time and One-shot dummies. In Table 10, columns (5) and (6), we
       control for two dummy variables identifying firm-to-firm relationships displaying a
       single transaction (dummy "One shot"), as well as the first transaction involving a
       particular pair of firms (dummy "First time"). Note that the "First time" dummy
       is always equal to 1 when the "One shot" dummy is as well but the reverse is not
       true so that coefficients on these two dummy variables are identified.
  32
    The construction of this variable exploits the overall panel provided to us by the customs, that goes
back to 1995.




                                                   31
A.2     Variables recovered from external sources
In Tables 7 and 10, we use various firm-level variables to document the heterogeneity
in pricing strategies across French firms. We rely on the INSEE-Ficus dataset, which
provides balance-sheet data covering the universe of French firms. We merge the
dataset with the trade variable, using the French firm Siren identifier.

Sector. Based on the balance-sheet data, we can recover information on the
firm's sector of activity, as defined in the NAF nomenclature. We use this informa-
tion to construct the "Wholesaler" and "Retailer" dummies introduced in column
(3) of Table 7.

Relative Sales. The "Relative Sales" variable in Table 7 is measured as the
ratio of the firm's overall turnover divided by the median turnover of firms active
in the same sector of activity. We get rid of the time dimension by calculating
this ratio for a single cross-section, namely, 2006. The variable thus captures the
relative size of the firm, in its sector. The "Large firm" dummy used in Tables 5
and 10 is constructed from this variable and is equal to 1 for the top four firms in
each sector.

Relative Market Power. The "Relative Market Power" variable is defined
based on information on the ratio of the firm's gross operating surplus over its value
added, expressed in relative terms with respect to the median firm in the sector.
Here as well, the variable has no time dimension and 2006 is used as reference. The
"High Market Power" dummy used in Table 5 is constructed from this variable and
is equal to 1 for the top 25% of firms in each sector.

Distance. The "Distance" variable used in Table 10 is recovered using the database
constructed by Laboureau (2018). Because we are working with trade flows re-
stricted to the EU, the mean distance from France is relatively low and only some-
what heterogeneous across countries. In such a restricted geographic area, the
precise location of the firm in France becomes an important source of variation
in distances to various destinations. For this reason, Laboureau's dataset domi-
nates more standard datasets such as the CEPII's distance database which pro-
vides various measures of bilateral distances between all countries in the world. In
Laboureau's dataset, distance is measured between a precise commuting zone and a
given destination using a weighted average of bilateral distances with the country's
most important cities. This dataset can be merged with the firm-level data using
information on the firm's location provided by INSEE. The variable used in Table
10 is measured in kilometers, but we also estimated a specification using the driving
time to the destination, recovered from the Google Map API.




                                         32
                        Table 1: Dimensionality of the data

                                                   Number of
                            Transactions     Exporters Importers         Relationships
                               sb(c)pt           s          b(c)            sb(c)p
                                  (1)           (2)         (3)               (4)
      All                    37,796,239       70,649    1,103,275         8,626,857
      Austria                  893,889        14,924      31,638           232,339
      Belgium                 6,329,954       46,765     128,592          1,397,788
      Cyprus                    63,891         3,061       2,271            19,906
      Czech Republic           261,788         8,601       8,101            50,723
      Denmark                  697,829        15,106      17,968           159,829
      Estonia                   53,873         2,283       1,617            12,498
      Finland                  404,946         9,287       9,978            83,978
      Germany                6,661,428        40,437     228,985          1,414,047
      Greece                   825,919        13,514      25,577           235,831
      Hungary                  203,617         6,873       5,884            40,803
      Ireland                  532,835        11,297      12,898           138,614
      Italy                  5,134,450        34,992     188,556          1,290,050
      Latvia                    53,164         2,546       1,796            14,281
      Lithuania                 60,250         3,420       2,342            16,187
      Luxembourg               941,590        19,289      18,226           254,588
      Malta                     44,014         2,395       1,279            12,454
      Netherlands             2,286,535       28,684      63,231           506,606
      Poland                   431,354        11,956      16,664            95,659
      Portugal               1,717,826        20,974      42,307           394,948
      Slovak Republic           79,645         4,008       2,913            18,491
      Slovenia                 110,763         3,548       2,760            20,896
      Spain                  5,355,890        36,395     164,399          1,230,907
      Sweden                   767,925        13,547      19,947           156,392
      United Kingdom         3,882,864        32,049     105,346           829,042

Notes: Column (1) is the number of transactions recorded over 2002-2006. Columns (2) and (3),
respectively, report the number of French exporters and European importers involved in these
transactions. Finally, column (4) is the number of exporter×importer×product triplets. The ratio
of column (4) to (1) allows us to recover the mean number of transactions observed over time for
a particular firm-to-firm relationship and a particular product.




                                              33
Table 2: Summary statistics on the coefficient of variation, within a product,
and quarter

                                       EU25      EU15       EMU non-EMU
                                        (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)
                                                                  scb(c)
                                      Coefficient of variation CVpt (psb(c)pt )
                 Mean                  1.293      1.280     1.236        0.998
                 Median                0.790      0.785     0.774        0.722
                 10th percentile       0.331      0.330     0.325        0.312
                 90th percentile       2.753      2.720     2.595        2.007
                                         Contribution dispersion within s
                 Mean                  0.312      0.312     0.304        0.286
                 Median                0.265      0.264     0.253        0.203
                 10th percentile       0.006      0.006     0.005        0.002
                 90th percentile       0.704      0.705     0.696        0.725
                 Count obs            142,266 141,521 138,354           75,669

  Notes: The table reports summary statistics on the dispersion of prices within a product and
  period, in various country sub-samples. The first panel reports statistics on the distribution of
  coefficients of variations:
                                                               scb(c)
                                 scb(c)
                                                           V arpt       (psb(c)pt )
                              CVpt      (psb(c)pt )   =          scb(c)
                                                               p
                                                               ¯pt

  using the notations in equation (1). The second panel corresponds to the contribution of the within
  component also described in this equation. Statistics are based on the 2002-2006 period and are
  restricted to coefficients of variation recovered from at least five points.




                                                      34
Table 3: Summary statistics on the coefficient of variation, within a seller,
product, and quarter

                                       EU25      EU15       EMU non-EMU
                                        (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)
                                                                  cb(c)
                                      Coefficient of variation CVspt (psb(c)pt )
                 Mean                  0.364     0.362      0.357       0.365
                 Median                0.314     0.311      0.305       0.307
                 10th percentile       0.027     0.026      0.027       0.058
                 90th percentile       0.761     0.758      0.749       0.760
                                         Contribution dispersion within c
                 Mean                  0.506     0.526      0.580       0.839
                 Median                0.551     0.581      0.656       0.941
                 10th percentile       0.000     0.001      0.020       0.505
                 90th percentile       0.950     0.957      0.979       1.000
                 Count Obs            863,275 835,386 716,780 104,410

  Notes: The table reports summary statistics on the dispersion of prices within an exporter, product,
  and period, in various country samples. Price dispersion is measured as:

                                                           cb(c)
                                   cb(c)
                                                       V arspt (psb(c)pt )
                                CVspt (psb(c)pt ) =          cb(c)
                                                            p
                                                            ¯spt

  using the notations in equation (2). The second panel corresponds to the contribution of the within
  component described in equation (4). The period of analysis is 2002-2006. Statistics are computed
  on the distribution of variation coefficients recovered from at least five points.




                                                  35
    Table 4: Dispersion of prices within a seller across EU markets

                                                                                   cb(c)
                                 Dep. Var: ln Coefficient of variation CVszpt (psb(c)pt )
                                 2002-2006 2012-2016 2002-2006          2012-2016
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)
                                                      c
   EU25 dummy                       .082        .104         .091           .112c
                                   (.049)      (.035)       (.047)         (.035)
   EMU dummy                       -.140a      -.141b       -.151a         -.150b
                                   (.013)      (.033)       (.012)         (.033)
                                                                  b
   Count partners                                           -.003          -.002b
                                                            (.000)         (.000)
   # Observations                2,063,813 2,742,399 2,063,813           2,742,399
   Fixed Effects                               Product×period×seller
   # FE                           961,105    1,270,168     961,105       1,270,168
   Adjusted R2 (overall)            .930         .874        .930            .875

Notes: The LHS variable is the log of the coefficient of variation, across buyers within a seller (for
each product and quarter), calculated for a specific geographical area z , the EU25, the EU15, or
the EMU. The sample thus has a maximum of three observations per firm×product×period. We
further impose a minimum of two observations; that is, the sample is restricted to firms that serve
different partners in at least two zones in a given period. "Count partners" is the number of buyers
served by the firm in the corresponding area.




                                                 36
     Table 5: Dispersion of EMU prices, within a seller: Over time

                                                  All buyers                           3 random buyers
                                    (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)      (6)      (7)
                                                                                       cb(c)
                                             Dep. Var: ln Coefficient of variation CVspt (psb(c)pt )

    Post 2012 dummy                .254         .262c          .286c      .345c      .318b       .356b     .392b
                                  (.055)       (.028)         (.029)     (.033)     (.021)      (.020)    (.025)
    Post 2012 ×High Mket Power                                -.054b                            -.121b
                                                              (.003)                            (.005)
    Post 2012 ×Large Firm                                                  -.360b                         -.308b
                                                                           (.019)                         (.022)
    ln Count Partners                           .368b          .374a        .370a
                                               (.002)          (.006)      (.006)
    # Observations               1,345,036   1,345,036       1,151,259 1,297,404 977,945        836,402   942,559
    Fixed Effects                                                   seller×product
    # FE                          64,501       64,501         54,945       62,125  46,608       39,698    44,871
    Adjusted R2 (overall)          .420         .435            .434         .435   .730         .726      .728
                                                                                         b(c)
                                             Dep. Var: ln Coefficient of variation CVscpt (psb(c)pt )

    Post 2012 dummy                .225         .238c          .258c      .290c      .280b       .311b     .322b
                                  (.055)       (.029)         (.030)     (.032)     (.017)      (.022)    (.023)
    Post 2012 ×High Mket Power                                -.040b                            -.102c
                                                              (.002)                            (.008)
    Post 2012 ×Large Firm                                                 -.254b                          -.191c
                                                                          (.013)                          (.020)
    ln Count Partners                           .355b           .357b      .359b
                                               (.009)          (.010)     (.009)
    # Observations               1,444,353   1,444,353       1,256,483 1,390,426 817,549        717,462   787,302
    Fixed Effects                                              seller×country×product
    # FE                          86,421       86,421         74,508      83,081   48,465       42,201    46,655
    Adjusted R2 (overall)          .391         .403             .404       .402    .737         .733      .734

Notes: The LHS variable is the log of the coefficient of variation, across buyers within a seller
(for each product and quarter) in the EMU (top panel) or in a particular country of the EMU
(bottom panel). The panel is restricted to coefficients of variation that can be compared in both
subperiods, within a particular individual, that is, within a seller×product in the top panel and
within a seller×product×country in the bottom panel. The first four columns are based on the
overall sample. The last three columns report results obtained from the randomization of three
buyers per individual and quarter. Standard errors are clustered by sub-period.




                                                        37
Table 6: Determinants of the dispersion of EMU prices, within a seller:
Seller-product determinants

                                                                              b(c)
                                           Dep. Var: ln Coef of var CVspt (psb(c)pt )
                                             (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
                                                 a           a          a
          ln Count Partners                .321        .390       .417        .318a
                                          (.002)      (.002)     (.002)      (.002)
          ln Size                          .059a                              .062a
                                          (.001)                             (.001)
                                                             a
          Experience (product)                         .030                   .027a
                                                      (.000)                 (.000)
                                                                        a
          Core Product                                           -.081       -.169a
                                                                 (.004)      (.004)
          # Observations                1,945,787 1,931,140 1,945,787 1,931,140
          Fixed Effects                            Product×period, Seller
          # pt                           126,124     125,798    126,124     125,798
          #s                              42,614      42,241     42,614      42,241
          Adjusted R2 (overall)             .559        .557       .558        .558
          Within R2                         .040        .041       .039        .043

  Notes: The LHS variable is the log of the coefficient of variation, across EMU buyers within a
  seller (for each product and quarter) as in equation (5). "ln Count Partners" is the log of the
  number of price quotes used to compute the variance of prices. "ln Size" is the log of the value of
  the seller's overall exports in the EU, during this particular period and for this particular product.
  "Experience (product)" is the number of years since the firm began exporting the product in the
  EMU. "Core Product" is a dummy equal to 1 if the product under consideration is the exporter's
  main source of export revenues. Standard deviations are clustered in the seller dimension. In
  column (4), product×period fixed effects explain 10% of the overall variance, and the contribution
  of seller fixed effects is equal to 44%.




                                                   38
Table 7: Determinants of the dispersion of EMU prices, within a seller:
Seller-specific determinants

                                               Dep. Var: Seller Fixed Effect F^
                                                                              Es
                                             (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)
                                                 a
         ln Relative Sales                 .328                                .259a
                                          (.006)                              (.008)
                                                          a
         ln Relative Market Power                   .065                       .079a
                                                    (.015)                    (.014)
         Wholesaler                                          -.067a           -.098a
                                                             (.024)           (.028)
                                                                   a
         Retailer                                            -.191            -.266a
                                                             (.045)           (.051)
                                                                            a
         ln Count products                                            .508     .387a
                                                                     (.009) (.011)
         # Observations                   35,094 28,044 39,231 42,244 27,851
         Adjusted R2                        .069     .001     .001     .076     .115

  Notes: The LHS variable is the estimated seller fixed effect recovered from the estimation of
  equation (5). "ln Relative Sales" is the (log of) the seller's turnover in 2006, normalized by the
  median firm's sales in the same sector. "ln Relative Market Power" is a measure of the seller's
  relative market power, in comparison with the median firm in its sector, where a firm's market
  power is proxied by the ratio of gross operating surplus over value added, in 2006. "Wholesaler"
  and "Retailer" are dummy variables for sellers belonging to the wholesaling and retailing sectors,
  respectively. "ln Count products" is the (log of) the number of products that the firm exports in
  the EMU.




                                                 39
Table 8: Determinants of the dispersion of EMU prices, within a seller:
Product-specific determinants

                                                Dep. Var: Product fixed effect F^E pt
                                        (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)           (6)
   Durables dummy                     .631a                                                .024a
                                      (.009)                                               (.009)
   Share of differentiated inputs               1.818a                                     1.273a
                                                (.014)                                     (.020)
   Upstreamness                                            -.299a                          -.159a
                                                           (.003)                          (.005)
   Product complexity                                                 .156a                .135a
                                                                      (.003)               (.004)
   Relationship stickiness                                                      .100a       .015c
                                                                                (.008)     (.009)
   # Observations                    125,798    108,696   124,342 112,431      125,787    102,173
   Fixed Effects                                               Period
   #t                                   20        20        20        20          20         20
   Adjusted R2                         .044      .147      .061      .023        .005       .157

  Notes: The LHS variable is the estimated product×period fixed effect recovered from the esti-
  mation of equation (5). The "Durables dummy" is an indicator variable that takes the value 1
  for products classified as durables in the BEC classification (i.e., durable consumption goods and
  capital goods). "Share of differentiated inputs" is the percentage share of inputs used to produce
  the corresponding product that are classified as "differentiated" according to Rauch (1999) classi-
  fication, which corresponds to the measure of "Input specificity" in Nunn (2007). "Upstreamness"
  measures the product's average position in value chains and is taken from Antras et al. (2012).
  "Product complexity" is a measure of the complexity of the product as measured by Hausmann
  and Hidalgo (2014). Finally, "Relationship stickiness" is the level of stickiness of relationships
  estimated for each HS6 product category in Martin et al. (2019). All regressions include a period
  fixed effect so that coefficients are identified across products, within a quarter.




                                                  40
  Figure 1: Evolution of the mean dispersion of prices, over time


                                                           2002-2006 period




                                                           2012-2016 period
                      1.4
           Coefficient of Variation
             1        .8     1.2




                                      2012     2013             2014            2015              2016   2017

                                                                 EU25                  EU15
                                                                 EMU                   non-EMU


Notes: This figure plots the evolution of the mean coefficient of variation of prices, computed
for each product and quarter, that is, the mean across products of:

                                                                                scb(c)
                                                scb(c)
                                                                            V arpt       (psb(c)pt )
                                             CVpt        (psb(c)pt ) =               scb(c)
                                                                                p
                                                                                ¯pt

using the notations in equation (1). Coefficients of variation are computed across exporters,
countries, and importers, in the whole sample ("EU25") and in three subsamples restricted
to EU15, EMU, and non-EMU EU15 member countries. The vertical line in the top panel
corresponds to the EU enlargement.




                                                                       41
Figure 2: Distribution of coefficients of variations, across exporters, product
and time
                     10
                     8
                     6
               Percent
                     4
                     2
                     0




                          0        .5             1               1.5        2
                                            Coefficient variation


    Notes: This figure plots the distribution of variation coefficients, computed for each
    exporter×product×period according to equation (2):

                                                           cb(c)
                                 cb(c)
                                                       V arspt (psb(c)pt )
                              CVspt (psb(c)pt )   =          cb(c)
                                                            p
                                                            ¯spt

     The analysis is restricted to statistics computed on buyers in the EU25, over 2002-2006 and
    based on at least five points.




                                                  42
                                                                    Figure 3: Near uniform pricing within the EMU


                                                                                                               Within the EMU
                                                                    2002-2006                                                                                                                 2012-2016
                                                                                                                                                                          .08
Share of sellers doing nearly uniform pricing




                                                                                                                          Share of sellers doing nearly uniform pricing
                                                .15


                                                                                                                                                                          .06

                                                 .1

                                                                                                                                                                          .04



                                                .05
                                                                                                                                                                          .02




                                                 0                                                                                                                         0
                                                      2002   2003        2004       2005          2006      2007                                                                2012   2013        2014       2015          2016     2017

                                                                    Share (count)          Share (value)                                                                                      Share (count)          Share (value)




                                                                                                           Within EMU countries
                                                                    2002-2006                                                                                                                 2012-2016
                                                .15                                                                                                                       .08
Share of sellers doing nearly uniform pricing




                                                                                                                          Share of sellers doing nearly uniform pricing




                                                 .1                                                                                                                       .06




                                                .05                                                                                                                       .04




                                                 0                                                                                                                        .02
                                                      2002   2003        2004       2005          2006      2007                                                                2012   2013        2014       2015          2016     2017

                                                                    Share (count)          Share (value)                                                                                      Share (count)          Share (value)



Notes: This figure reports the share of near uniform pricing within the euro area. Near
uniform pricing is defined in equation (3). The top panels report the prevalence of NUP
within the EMU; two thirds of the firms doing NUP are selling their product to more than
one destination within the EMU. The bottom panels report the prevalence of NUP within
EMU destinations.




                                                                                                                     43
Figure 4: Price discrimination within and outside the EMU: Randomized
sample




                      2.5
                      2 1.5
                  Density
                      1
                      .5
                      0




                              0               .5                 1                 1.5
                                                         CV

                                                   EMU        Non-EMU


  Notes: This figure shows the distribution of the coefficients of variation in equation (2) recovered
  from the randomization of prices within and outside of the EMU. These statistics are based on
  the sub-sample of firms exporting to at least three partners in the EMU and at least one partner
  outside of the EMU (but within the EU15) in a given month over 2002-2006. Coefficients of
  variation plotted in the "EMU" dispersion are calculated from three random price quotes within
  the EMU in the seller's portfolio. The "non-EMU" dispersion is based on two random draws in
  the EMU and one random draw outside of the EMU. Horizontal lines materialize the means.


Table 9: Price discrimination : Homogenous versus differentiated products
                                                              cb(c)
                                              Dep. Var.: CVspt (psb(c)pt )
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)
               Average              0.323a        0.372a    0.369a       0.368a
                                   (0.000)       (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)
               Homogenous          -0.056a       -0.105a
                                                            -0.101a
                                                                        -0.097a
               products            (0.003)       (0.001)    (0.004)     (0.004)
               Sample                 All     Chemicals & sellers exporting at least
                                              allied indus. one homogenous product
               Fixed effects         no             no         no     seller×time
               Observations       1,402,748      109,676    61,851       61,851
               R2                   0.000         0.037      0.010        0.191

     Notes: The table reports the estimated average coefficient of variation, in the overall sample
     and in the sub-sample of homogenous products (the coefficient being expressed in relative
     terms). The different columns correspond to various control groups: The rest of the economy
     in column (1), other chemical products in column (2), other products exported by firms that
     sell homogenous goods in columns (3)-(4).



                                                     44
Figure 5: Price discrimination within and across countries: Randomized
sample
                     2.5
                     2 1.5
                  Density
                     1
                     .5
                     0




                             0              .5                  1                 1.5
                                                       CV

                                                 Between        Within


  Notes: This figure shows the distribution of the coefficients of variation in equation (2) recovered
  from the randomization of prices within and across EMU destinations. These statistics are based
  on the subsample of firms exporting to at least three partners in three EMU countries in a given
  month over 2002-2006. Coefficients of variation plotted in the "Between" dispersion are calculated
  from three random price quotes in three different countries in the seller's portfolio. The "within"
  dispersion is based on three random price quotes in each destination. Horizontal lines represent
  the means.




                                                    45
        Figure 6: Mean dispersion of prices, across industries



                               Petroleum refineries
                               Industrial chemicals
                               Paper and products
                                     Food products
                         Misc. food products n.e.c
                                      Iron and steel
              Other non-metallic mineral products
                                Non-ferrous metals
                Misc. petroleum and coal products
                  Wood products, except furniture
                Footwear, except rubber or plastic
                                         Beverages
                                             Textiles
                            Furniture, except metal
                                    Plastic products
                       Pottery, china, earthenware
                                            Tobacco
                                Glass and products
                Wearing apparel, except footwear
                                   Rubber products
                                    Other chemicals
                            Printing and publishing
                        Fabricated metal products
                              Transport equipment
                                   Leather products
                     Other manufactured products
                       Machinery, except electrical
                                Machinery, electric
             Professional and scientific equipment

                                                        -1    -.5        0          .5     1
                                                             Mean CV (in relative terms)


Notes: This figure reports the mean coefficient of variation per broad industry, in relative
terms with respect to the sector producing wood products. These statistics are recovered
by regressing the product×period fixed effects of equation (5) on a set of time and sector
dummies. The sector dummies are reported on the graph. Since the left-hand side variable
of equation (5) is in log, the y-axis can be interpreted in percentage terms.




                                                        46
    Figure 7: Mean dispersion of prices, across BEC categories



                              Fuels and lubricants, primary
                            Industrial supplies nes, primary
              Food and beverages, processed, for industry
                     Fuels and lubricants, other processed
                 Food and beverages, primary, for industry
                           Fuels and lubricants, processed
              Food and beverages, primary, for household
            Food and beverages, processed, for household
                        Industrial supplies nes, processed
               Transport equipment, passenger motor cars
                 Transport equipment, other, non-industrial
                     Consumption goods nes, non-durable
                    Consumption goods nes, semi-durable
                     Transport equipment, other, industrial
             Parts and accessories of transport equipment
                         Consumption goods nes, durable
                                              Capital goods
                                                 Goods nes
                    Parts and accessories of capital goods

                                                               -3       -2     -1        0      1
                                                                    Mean CV (in relative terms)


Notes: This figure reports the mean coefficient of variation per category of the BEC clas-
sification. Results are relative to non-durable consumption goods. These statistics are
recovered by regressing the product×period fixed effects of equation (5) on a set of time and
BEC category dummies. The estimated coefficients on the BEC categories are reported on
the graph. Becau,se, the left-hand side variable of equation (5) is in log, the y-axis can be
interpreted in percentage terms.




                                                    47
    Figure 8: Price discrimination among homogenous products




                  2.5
                  2
                 1.5
           Density
                  1
                  .5
                  0




                                  0                               .5                                  1           1.5
                                                                                   CV

                                                        Full sample                          Selected chemicals


Notes: This figure reports the distribution of the coefficients of variation in equation (2),
in the full sample and in the sample restricted to homogenous products. Horizontal lines
represent that means.



    Figure 9: Mean level of prices, across destinations countries
                  .1




                                                                                                          SE IE   LU
                  .05




                                                                                                      AT GB
                                                                                                      FI    DK
                                                                                                 DE
                                                                                            IT            NL
           Mean (log) price




                                                                                     CY
                                                                                      ES          BE
                                                                       PT       GR
                      0




                                                 EE          MT
                                                                       SI
                                       LV
            -.05




                                            HU          CZ

                                                  SK
                  -.1




                                      LT
                  -.15




                                      PL

                              9              9.5                10             10.5          11                   11.5
                                                      (log) GDP per capita, 2006 current USD

                                                                            Non-EMU                   EMU
                                                                            Fitted Values


Notes: This figure correlates the mean level of prices set by French firms to a destination with
the country's GDP per capita (in 2006, Source: World Bank). To account for composition
effects, mean prices are recovered from the estimated buyer fixed effects entering equation
(6).




                                                                              48
                          Figure 10: Mean level of prices, across size bins
                        .1            0
             Mean seller fixed effect
           -.2         -.1
                        -.3




                                          -2   0       2              4   6       8
                                                   log Relative sales


Notes: This figure correlates the mean level of prices set by French firms with their relative
size in their sector. To account for composition effects, mean prices are recovered from the
estimated seller fixed effects entering equation (6). The distribution of firms' sales in each
sector is then discretized into 50 bins, and the mean fixed effect inside each bin is correlated
with the relative sales of firms there.




                                                       49
 Table 10: Results of the fixed-effect decomposition of price dispersion

                                                       Dep.Var: ln price psb(c)pt
                              (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)
 ln Transaction size                       .036a         .039a         .036a          .036a         .036a
                                           (.000)        (.000)       (.000)          (.000)       (.000)
 ln Distance                               .008a         .008a         .009a          .009a         .016a
                                           (.001)        (.001)       (.001)          (.001)       (.002)
 Seller's experience                                     .002a         -.000           .000         -.000
                                                         (.000)       (.000)          (.000)       (.000)
 Age of the relationship                                 -.009a       -.010a          -.009a       -.009a
                                                         (.000)       (.000)          (.000)       (.000)
 -× Large firm                                                                                      .003a
                                                                                                   (.000)
 ln count partners                                                     .008a          .008a         .008a
                                                                       (.000)         (.000)       (.000)
 Dummy First time                                                                     .002a         .002a
                                                                                      (.000)       (.001)
 -× Large firm                                                                                      .003b
                                                                                                   (.001)
 Dummy One shot                                                                       .008a         .005a
                                                                                      (.000)       (.000)
 -× Large firm                                                                                      .013a
                                                                                                   (.001)
 # observations            37,470,412    35,143,089    35,143,089    35,143,089     35,143,089   33,490,640
 Adj R2                       .891          .892          .892          .892           .892          .891
 Within R2                    .000          .005          .005          .005           .005          .005
 # Estimated FE
 Seller                      62,497        55,471       55,471        55,471       55,471          49,957
 Buyer                      808,383       777,965       777,965      777,965      777,965         751,553
 Product×Period             165,730       164,507       164,507      164,507      164,507         163,562
                                               Share of price dispersion explained by
 Observables                                -.002        -.002         -.001        -.001          -.001
 Product×period FE            .652          .647          .647         .647         .647           .647
 Seller FE                    .197          .201          .201         .201         .201           .200
 Buyer FE                     .045          .048          .048         .048         .048           .048
 Match residual               .106           .105         .105          .105        .105           .106
                                        Share of within-seller price dispersion explained by
 Observables                                 .000         .001          .002        .002            .002
 Buyer FE                     .169          .175          .175         .175         .175            .176
 Match residual               .831           .825         .824          .823        .823            .821

Notes: The table reports results of the estimation of equation (6), over 2002-2006. The last two
panels are variance decompositions of observed price discrepancies into the components entering
equation (6), in the whole sample and within seller×product×period triplets.




                                                      50
             Table 11: List of chemical homogenous products

Elements entering the Mendeleiev classification
2801 10 00 Chlorine                         2804 50 90 Tellurium
2801 20 00 Iodine                           2804 61 00 Silicon containing >= 99.99% by
                                                       weight of silicon
2801 30 10 Fluorine                         2804 69 00 Silicon containing < 99.99% by
                                                       weight of silicon
2801 30 90 Bromine                          2804 70 00 Phosphorus
2803 00 10 Methane black                    2804 80 00 Arsenic
2804 10 00 Hydrogen                         2804 90 00 Selenium
2804 21 00 Argon                            2805 11 00 Sodium
2804 29 10 Helium                           2805 12 00 Calcium
2804 30 00 Nitrogen                         2805 40 10 Mercury (flasks of a net content
                                                       of 34.5 kg, fob value per flask 
                                                       224 euros)
2804 40 00 Oxygen                           2805 40 90 Mercury (other)
2804 50 10 Boron
Molecular inorganic substances
2806 10 00 Hydrogen chloride "hydrochloric  2825 90 60 Cadmium oxide
           acid"
2806 20 00 Chlorosulphuric acid             2826 12 00 Fluoride of aluminium
2807 00 10 Sulphuric acid                   2827 10 00 Ammonium chloride
2807 00 90 Oleum                            2827 20 00 Calcium chloride
2809 10 00 Diphosphorus pentaoxide          2827 31 00 Magnesium chloride
2809 20 00 Phosphoric acids                 2827 32 00 Aluminium chloride
2810 00 10 Diboron trioxide                 2827 33 00 Iron chlorides
2811 11 00 Hydrogen fluoride "hydrofluoric  2827 34 00 Cobalt chlorides
           acid"
2811 19 10 Hydrogen bromide "hydrobromic    2827 35 00 Nickel chloride
           acid"
2811 19 20 Hydrogen cyanide "hydrocyanic    2827 36 00 Zinc chloride
           acid"
2811 21 00 Carbon dioxide                   2827 39 10 Tin chlorides
2811 22 00 Silicon dioxide                  2829 11 00 Chlorate of sodium
2811 23 00 Sulphur dioxide                  2829 90 10 Perchlorates
2811 29 30 Nitrogen oxides                  2830 10 00 Sodium sulphides




                                     51
Continued    from previous page
2812 10 15   Phosphorus trichloride              2830   20   00
                                                            Zinc sulphide
2812 10 16   Phosphorus pentachloride            2830   30   00
                                                            Cadmium sulphide
2812 10 18   Chloride oxides of phosphorus       2832   10   00
                                                            Sodium sulphites
2812 10 91   Disulphur dichloride                2833   11   00
                                                            Disodium sulphate
2812 10 93   Sulphur dichloride                  2833   19   00
                                                            Sodium sulphates (excl.         dis-
                                                            odium)
2812 10 94   Phosgene "carbonyl chloride"        2833 21 00 Sulphate of magnesium
2812 10 95   Thionyl dichloride "thionyl chlo-   2833 22 00 Sulphate of aluminium
             ride"
2813 10 00   Carbon disulphide                   2833 23 00 Sulphates of chromium
2813 90 10   Phosphorus sulphides, incl. com-    2833 24 00 Sulphates of nickel
             mercial phosphorus trisulphide
2814 10 00   Anhydrous ammonia                   2833 25 00 Sulphates of copper
2814 20 00   Ammonia in aqueous solution         2833 26 00 Sulphate of zinc
2815 11 00   Sodium hydroxide "caustic soda"     2833 27 00 Sulphate of barium
             solid
2815 12 00   Sodium hydroxide "caustic soda"     2833 29 10       Sulphate of cadmium
             in aqueous solution "soda lye or
             liquid soda"
2815 20 10   Potassium hydroxide "caustic        2833 29 50       Sulphates of iron
             potash" solid
2815 20 90   Potassium hydroxide "caustic        2834 10 00       Nitrites
             potash" in aqueous solution
             "potassium lye or liquid potas-
             sium"
2818 10 10   Artificial corundum, whether or     2834 21 00       Nitrate of potassium
             not chemically defined, white,
             pink or ruby, with an aluminium
             oxide content > 97.5% by weight
             "high purity"
2818 10 90   Artificial corundum, whether or     2835 22 00       Mono- or disodium phosphate
             not chemically defined (excl.
             white, pink or ruby, with an alu-
             minium oxide content > 97.5% by
             weight "high purity")
2818 20 00   Aluminium oxide (excl. artificial   2835 23 00       Phosphate of trisodium
             corundum)
2818 30 00   Aluminium hydroxide                 2835 24 00       Phosphates of potassium


                                         52
Continued from previous page
2819 10 00 Chromium trioxide                     2835 26 10 Phosphates of calcium (excl.
                                                            calcium hydrogenorthophosphate
                                                            "dicalcium phosphate") with a flu-
                                                            orine content < 0.005% by weight
                                                            on the dry anhydrous product
2819 90 10   Chromium dioxide                    2835 26 90 Phosphates of calcium (excl.
                                                            calcium hydrogenorthophosphate
                                                            "dicalcium phosphate") with a flu-
                                                            orine content  0.005% by weight
                                                            on the dry anhydrous product
2820 10 00   Manganese dioxide                   2835 31 00 Sodium triphosphate "sodium
                                                            tripolyphosphate", whether or
                                                            not chemically defined
2820 90 10    Manganese oxide containing by      2836 20 00 Disodium carbonate
              weight  224 euros 77% of man-
              ganese
2820 90 90    Manganese oxides (excl. man-       2836 30 00       Sodium       hydrogencarbonate
              ganese dioxide and manganese ox-                    "sodium bicarbonate"
              ide containing by weight  77% of
              manganese)
2823 00 00    Titanium oxides                    2836 40 00 Potassium carbonates
2824 10 00    Lead monoxide "litharge, massi-    2836 50 00 Calcium carbonate
              cot"
2824 20 00    Red lead and orange lead           2836 60 00 Barium carbonate
2824 90 00    Lead oxides (excl.      monoxide   2836 70 00 Lead carbonates
              "litharge, massicot")
2825 80 00    Antimony oxides                    2836 91 00       Lithium carbonates
2825 90 30    Tin oxides                         2836 92 00       Strontium carbonate
2825 90 50    Mercury oxides
Molecular    organic substances
2901 21 00    Ethylene                           2914   19   10   5-Methylhexan-2-one
2901 22 00    Propene "propylene"                2914   21   00   Camphor
2901 24 10    Buta-1,3-diene                     2915   11   00   Formic acid
2901 24 90    Isoprene                           2915   21   00   Acetic acid
2902 11 00    Cyclohexane                        2915   22   00   Sodium acetate
2902 20 00    Benzene                            2915   23   00   Cobalt acetates
2902 30 00    Toluene                            2915   24   00   Acetic anhydride
2902 41 00    o-Xylene                           2915   31   00   Ethyl acetate
2902 42 00    m-Xylene                           2915   32   00   Vinyl acetate
2902 43 00    p-Xylene                           2915   33   00   n-Butyl acetate
                                         53
Continued        from previous page
2902 50 00       Styrene                              2915   34   00 Isobutyl acetate
2902 60 00       Ethylbenzene                         2915   35   00 2-Ethoxyethyl acetate
2902 70 00       Cumene                               2915   70   25 Stearic acid
2903 11 00       Chloromethane "methyl chloride"      2915   90   10 Lauric acid
                 and chloroethane "ethyl chloride"
2903 12 00       Dichloromethane        "methylene    2916 12 10      Methylacrylate
                 chloride"
2903 13 00       Chloroform "trichloromethane"        2916 12 20 Ethylacrylate
2903 14 00       Carbon tetrachloride                 2916 19 40 Crotonic acid
2903 15 00       1,2-Dichloroethane       "ethylene   2916 32 10 Benzoyl peroxide
                 dichloride"
2903 19 10       1,1,1-Trichloroethane                2916 32 90      Benzoyl chloride
                 "methylchloroform"
2903 21 00       Vinyl chloride "chloroethylene"      2917 13 10 Sebacic acid
2903 22 00       Trichloroethylene                    2917 14 00 Maleic anhydride
2903 23 00       Tetrachloroethylene          "per-   2917 31 00 Dibutyl orthophthalates
                 chloroethylene"
2903   30   33   Bromomethane "methyl bromide"        2917   32   00 Dioctyl orthophthalates
2903   30   35   Dibromomethane                       2917   35   00 Phthalic anhydride
2903   41   00   Trichlorofluoromethane               2917   37   00 Dimethyl terephthalate
2903   42   00   Dichlorodifluoromethane              2917   39   50 Naphthalene-1,4,5,8-
                                                                     tetracarboxylic acid
2903 43 00       Trichlorotrifluoroethanes            2917 39     60 Tetrachlorophthalic anhydride
2903 44 10       Dichlorotetrafluoroethanes           2917 39     70 Sodium                      3,5-
                                                                     bis"methoxycarbonyl"benzenesulphon
2903   44   90   Chloropentafluoroethane              2918   12   00 Tartaric acid
2903   45   10   Chlorotrifluoromethane               2918   14   00 Citric acid
2903   45   15   Pentachlorofluoroethane              2918   90   10 2,6-Dimethoxybenzoic acid
2903   45   20   Tetrachlorodifluoroethanes           2918   90   20 Dicamba "ISO"
2903   45   25   Heptachlorofluoropropanes            2918   90   30 Sodium phenoxyacetate
2903   45   30   Hexachlorodifluoropropanes           2920   90   20 Dimethyl phosphonate "dimethyl
                                                                     phosphite"
2903 45 35       Pentachlorotrifluoropropanes         2920 90     30 Trimethyl              phosphite
                                                                     "trimethoxyphosphine"
2903 45 40       Tetrachlorotetrafluoropropanes       2920 90     40 Triethyl phosphite
2903 45 45       Trichloropentafluoropropanes         2920 90     50 Diethyl phosphonate "diethyl hy-
                                                                     drogenphosphite" "diethyl phos-
                                                                     phite"


                                              54
Continued from previous page
2903 45 50 Dichlorohexafluoropropanes                 2921 59 20       2,2"-Dichloro-4,4"-
                                                                       methylenedianiline
2903   45   55   Chloroheptafluoropropanes            2921   59   30   4,4"-Bi-o-toluidine
2903   46   10   Bromochlorodifluoromethane           2921   59   40   1,8-Naphthylenediamine
2903   46   20   Bromotrifluoromethane                2922   13   10   Triethanolamine
2903   46   90   Dibromotetrafluoroethanes            2922   13   90   Salts of triethanolamine
2903   51   00   1,2,3,4,5,6-                         2922   19   10   N-Ethyldiethanolamine
                 Hexachlorocyclohexane
2903 59 10       1,2-Dibromo-4-"1,2-                  2922 19 20 2,2"-Methyliminodiethanol          "N-
                 dibromoethyl" cyclohexane                       methyldiethanolamine"
2903 59 30       Tetrabromocyclooctanes               2924 11 00 Meprobamate "INN"
2904 90 40       Trichloronitromethane "chloropi-     2924 21 10 Isoproturon "ISO"
                 crin"
2905 11 00       Methanol "methyl alcohol"            2924 24 00 Ethinamate "INN"
2905 12 00       Propan-1-ol "propyl alcohol" and     2924 29 30 Paracetamol "INN"
                 propan-2-ol "isopropyl alcohol"
2905 13 00       Butan-1-ol "n-butyl alcohol"         2925 12 00 Glutethimide "INN"
2905 14 10       2-Methylpropan-2-ol "tert-butyl      2926 20 00 1-Cyanoguanidine             "dicyandi-
                 alcohol"                                        amide"
2905 14 90       Butanols (excl.          butan-1-    2926 90 20 Isophthalonitrile
                 ol "n-butyl alcohol" and 2-
                 Methylpropan-2-ol      "tert-butyl
                 alcohol")
2905 16 10       2-Ethylhexan-1-ol                    2930 40 10 Methionine "INN"
2905 16 20       Octan-2-ol                           2930 40 90 Methionine (excl.     methionine
                                                                 "INN")
2905 29 10       Allyl alcohol                        2930 90 30 DL-2-hydroxy-4-
                                                                 "methylthio"butyric acid
2905 39 10 2-Methylpentane-2,4-diol "hexy-            2931 00 10 Dimethyl methylphosphonate
           lene glycol"
2905 39 20 Butane-1,3-diol                            2931 00 20 Methylphosphonoyl      difluoride
                                                                 "methylphosphonic difluoride"
2905 39 25       Butane-1,4-diol                      2931 00 30 Methylphosphonoyl      dichloride
                                                                 "methylphosphonic dichloride"
2905 42 00       Pentaerythritol                      2932 11 00 Tetrahydrofuran
2905 43 00       Mannitol                             2932 12 00 2-Furaldehyde "furfuraldehyde"
2905 44 11       D-glucitol "sorbitol", in aqueous    2932 29 10 Phenolphthalein
                 solution containing  2% by
                 weight of d-mannitol, calculated
                 on the d-glucitol content
                                              55
Continued from previous page
2905 44 19 D-glucitol "sorbitol" in aqueous     2932 29 20 1-Hydroxy-4-[1-"4-hydroxy-3-
           solution (excl. containing  2%                  methoxycarbonyl-1-naphthyl"-3-
           by weight of d-mannitol, calcu-                 oxo-1H, 3H-benzo[de]isochromen-
           lated on the d-glucitol content)                1-yl]-6-octadecyloxy-2-naphthoic
                                                           acid
2905 44 91 D-glucitol "sorbitol", containing    2932 29 30 3"-Chloro-6"-
           <= 2% by weight of d-mannitol,                  cyclohexylaminospiro[isobenzofuran-
           calculated on the d-glucitol con-               1"3H", 9"-xanthen]-3-one
           tent (excl. in aqueous solution)
2905 44 99 D-glucitol "sorbitol" (excl.    in   2932 29 40   6"-"N-Ethyl-p-toluidino"-2"-
           aqueous solution and containing                   methylspiro[isobenzofuran-1"3H",
            2% by weight of d-mannitol,                      9"-xanthen]-3-one
           calculated on the d-glucitol con-
           tent)
2905 45 00 Glycerol                             2932 29 50 Methyl-6-docosyloxy-1-hydroxy-
                                                           4-[1-"4-hydroxy-3-methyl-
                                                           1-phenanthryl"-3-oxo-1H,
                                                           3H-naphtho[1,8-cd]pyran-1-
                                                           yl]naphthalene-2-carboxylate
2906 11 00 Menthol                              2932 29 60 gamma-Butyrolactone
2906 21 00 Benzyl alcohol                       2932 91 00 Isosafrole
2909 30 31 Pentabromodiphenyl          ether;   2932 93 00 Piperonal
           1,2,4,5-tetrabromo-3,6-
           bis"pentabromophenoxy"benzene
2909 30 35 1,2-Bis"2,4,6-                       2932 94 00   Safrole
           tribromophenoxy"ethane         for
           the manufacture of acrylonitrile-
           butadiene-styrene [ABS]
2909 41 00 2,2"-Oxydiethanol     "diethylene    2933 11 10   Propyphenazone
           glycol, digol"
2909 49 11 2-"2-Chloroethoxy"ethanol            2933 19 10 Phenylbutazone "INN"
2910 10 00 Oxirane "ethylene oxide"             2933 39 20 2,3,5,6-Tetrachloropyridine
2910 20 00 Methyloxirane "propylene oxide"      2933 39 25 3,6-Dichloropyridine-2-carboxylic
                                                           acid
2910 30 00 1-Chloro-2,3-epoxypropane            2933 39 35 2-Hydroxyethylammonium-3,6-
           "epichlorohydrin"                               dichloropyridine-2-carboxylate
2912 11 00 Methanal "formaldehyde"              2933 39 40 2-Butoxyethyl"3,5,6-trichloro-2-
                                                           pyridyloxy"acetate
2912 12 00   Ethanal "acetaldehyde"             2933 39 45 3,5-Dichloro-2,4,6-
                                                           trifluoropyridine
                                        56
Continued from previous page
2912 13 00 Butanal "butyraldehyde, normal    2933 39 50      Fluroxypyr "ISO" methyl ester
           isomer"
2912 21 00 Benzaldehyde                      2933 39 55 4-Methylpyridine
2912 41 00 Vanillin          "4-hydroxy-3-   2933 59 20 1,4-Diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane
           methoxybenzaldehyde"                         "triethylenediamine"
2912 42 00 Ethylvanillin      "3-ethoxy-4-   2933 61 00 Melamine
           hydroxybenzaldehyde"
2912 60 00 Paraformaldehyde                  2933   91   10 Chlorodiazepoxide "INN"
2914 11 00 Acetone                           2934   99   20 Furazolidone "INN"
2914 12 00 Butanone "methyl ethyl ketone"    2934   99   30 7-Aminocephalosporanic acid
2914 13 00 4-Methylpentan-2-one    "methyl   2935   00   20 Metosulam "ISO"
           isobutyl ketone"




                                     57
