                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              UNCERTAINTY-INDUCED REALLOCATIONS AND GROWTH

                                         Ravi Bansal
                                      Mariano Max Croce
                                         Wenxi Liao
                                        Samuel Rosen

                                      Working Paper 26248
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26248


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




We thank K. Adams, N. Bloom, S. Davis, F. Gourio, K. Singleton, and A. Marcet for their early
feedback. We thank our discussants M. Ulrich and I. Alfaro. We also thank the participants at the
Asset Prices and the Macroeconomy Conference (U of Mannheim), Bocconi University, SITE,
BI. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ravi Bansal, Mariano Max Croce, Wenxi Liao, and Samuel Rosen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Uncertainty-Induced Reallocations and Growth
Ravi Bansal, Mariano Max Croce, Wenxi Liao, and Samuel Rosen
NBER Working Paper No. 26248
September 2019
JEL No. E3,E6,G18

                                       ABSTRACT

Focusing on both micro and aggregate U.S. data, we show the existence of a significant link
between aggregate uncertainty and reallocation of resources away from R&D-intensive capital.
This link is important because a decrease in the aggregate share of R&D-oriented capital
forecasts lower medium-term growth. In a multi-sector production economy in which (i) growth
is endogenously supported by risky R&D investments, and (ii) the representative agent is
volatility-risk averse and has access to other safer technologies that do not support growth,
uncertainty shocks have a first-order negative impact on medium-term growth and welfare.


Ravi Bansal                                   Wenxi Liao
Fuqua School of Business                      Duke University
Duke University                               Fuqua School of Business
1 Towerview Drive                             Durham, NC 27708
Durham, NC 27708                              wenxi.liao@duke.edu
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu                          Samuel Rosen
                                              Temple University
Mariano Max Croce                             Fox School of Business
Bocconi University                            1801 Liacouras Walk
Milan                                         Philadelphia, PA 19122
Italy                                         sam.rosen23@gmail.com
and NBER
mmc287@gmail.com
1    Introduction
It is well documented that periods of high uncertainty are often associated with siz-
able and prolonged economic slowdowns during which both private consumption and
aggregate investment decline. Less is known, however, on the impact of uncertainty
shocks on the composition of national investments. In this manuscript, we study
the reallocation motives that uncertainty shocks generate across different investment
opportunities and we connect them to growth. Our focus is on the interplay of un-
certainty shocks and innovative capital.
    Specifically, focusing on US microeconomic data from Compustat, we look at a
cross section of firms sorted according to their R&D intensity. We document that
R&D intensive firms (High-R&D firms) are more affected by volatility shocks than
non-innovative firms (Low-R&D firms). That is, volatility shocks are more disruptive
for innovation-oriented firms both in terms of market valuation and contraction in
their investments. According to the data, when uncertainty increases there exists a
relative reallocation effect that penalizes investments in R&D-intensive firms, that is,
investments that are important to sustain long-term growth. These findings hold also
at longer horizons and hence are not limited to short-lived business cycle fluctuations.
    In our novel empirical analysis, we also use aggregate data from the National
Income Product Accounts (NIPA) tables to further support our main findings, that
is, uncertainty shocks are a first-order concern for growth because they are more
disruptive for innovation-oriented capital. In the context of this analysis, we consider
aggregate data on tangible and intangible private investment as well as government
investments.
    Accounting for government capital is important for two reasons. First, this mar-
gin is important in order to properly account for the wedge between private invest-
ments and savings. As already pointed out in the literature (among others, see
Fernandez-Villaverde et al. 2011 and Bloom et al. 2018), in a closed economy without
a government sector, private savings and investment must be identical to each other.
This result is at odds with national accounting data. Considering the behavior of
government-allocated resources is a way to avoid counterfactual conclusions. Second,
considering the dynamics of government investment enables us to better quantify the
impact of volatility shocks on innovation-oriented investments. Since the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA) provides a decomposition of government investment into
tangible and intangible components, we are able to measure R&D intensity of gov-

                                           1
ernment investments. Our data suggest that the US government has a low R&D
intensity when compared to the firms in Compustat.
    Using standard VAR empirical techniques, we show the existence of a significant
positive link between uncertainty and reallocation from innovative to less-innovative
forms of capital. After accounting for shocks to the level of economic activity and
controlling for several financial indicators, such as, for example, credit conditions, we
find that an adverse uncertainty shock prompts a reallocation away from both private
R&D capital and private tangible capital. These dynamics are both more pronounced
and long-lived when we focus on medium cycles of our aggregate variables (Comin
and Gertler 2006).
    We rationalize these novel empirical findings in a multi-sector production economy
with endogenous growth sustained by R&D investments that create new patents, a
form of intangible capital. Like in Comin and Gertler (2006) and Kung and Schmid
(2015), patents grant monopolistic rents that are procyclical, volatile, and more sen-
sitive to fundamental shocks than the marginal return of physical private capital and
government capital. As a result, in our economy intangible capital is essential for
growth, but it is also risky.
    In contrast to Comin and Gertler (2006) and Kung and Schmid (2015), the final
consumption bundle is an isoelastic aggregator of a private good and a government-
supplied good. Like the private producers, the government needs labor and infras-
tructure capital for production. The main difference between the private final-good
sector and the government is that the government offers its own good in a competi-
tive manner, that is, charging just its marginal cost, whereas the private sector has
monopoly power on the supply of private goods.
    Under this assumption, the value of private capital depends on both the present
value of its marginal productivity and the present value of future monopoly rents
(Hayashi 1982). With recursive preferences, the latter component is extremely sen-
sitive to uncertainty shocks, implying that even small increases in uncertainty can
depress the market value of intangible capital, that is, the stock of patents in the
economy. Under our benchmark calibration, the marginal product of capital is rela-
tively smooth and tangible capital is less risky than intangible capital. On the other
hand, tangible capital is riskier than government capital because the value of the
latter is not affected by monopolistic rents.




                                           2
   This setting explains the reallocation motives in our model: when uncertainty in-
creases, the monopoly rent channel induces the representative agent to both reduce
drastically private R&D investment and cut down tangible capital. Simultaneously,
more resources are allocated toward government capital. At the equilibrium, gov-
ernment capital offers a strong hedge against volatility shocks and is as safe as a
risk-free bond. This reallocation, although efficient, comes at the cost of dimming
future growth.
   We note that our model reconciles the observed pattern of savings and private
investments, in contrast to prior studies. When uncertainty spikes upward, our rep-
resentative agent reduces private consumption in order to increase her precautionary
savings. Simultaneously, private investment declines because the increase in private
savings is dominated by a reduction of government savings, or, equivalently, by the
higher government expenditure in investment goods, broadly consistent with the data.

Related literature. Our manuscript contributes to a recently growing literature
that studies the real effects of uncertainty shocks (see, among others, Bloom et al.
2007; Bloom 2009; and Alfaro et al. 2018). We find that higher productivity volatil-
ity is associated with a relevant reallocation away from R&D and a decline in future
growth. A general equilibrium model with endogenous growth and multiple sectors
suggests that these features of the data may result from aversion to volatility shocks.
More broadly, our framework generates persistent growth stagnation through a chan-
nel which is both distinct and complementary to that in Kozeniauskas et al. (2019).
   More broadly, our analysis relates to the recent literature examining the role of
uncertainty both in the data and in economic models (see, among others, Jones et al.
2005; Justiniano and Primiceri 2008; Basu and Bundick 2012; Gilchrist et al. 2014;
Jurado et al. 2015; Berger et al. 2018; Ludvigson et al. 2018; Kozeniauskas et al.
2018 and Bloom et al. 2018). We contribute with our attention to the reallocation of
resources across sectors with different riskiness and growth prospects. Furthermore,
we study the impact of this reallocation on growth through the lens of the recent
endogenous growth models developed by Kung and Schmid (2015), Kung (2015), and
Corhay et al. (2015).
   Barro et al. (2017) study the role of government assets in an endowment economy
with heterogenous agents. Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2015) focus on the real effect
of uncertainty shocks to unproductive government expenditure and distortionary tax-


                                          3
ation in a neoclassical model with exogenous growth. We differ from these studies for
(i) our novel empirical evidence on investment reallocation; (ii) our focus on produc-
tive government expenditure; and (iii) our focus on R&D and endogenous growth.
    Belo et al. (2013) and Belo and Yu (2013) examine the effects of government in-
vestment and spending on asset prices. Our work complements their findings and
highlights a new trade off between growth and government capital in times of higher
uncertainty. Both our empirical focus on heterogenous forms of capital and endoge-
nous growth, and our attention to priced uncertainty shocks are distinct from the
work of Baxter and King (1993).
    According to our model, it is optimal for the government to expand its size in
bad times, an outcome broadly consistent with that of new Keynesian models (for
a recent example, see Christiano et al. 2011). We differ from this literature for our
risk-based approach and for our attention to the trade off between long-term growth
and government size. In our setting with recursive preferences, uncertainty shocks are
also discount rate shocks and hence our findings are consistent with those in Comin
et al. (2017).
    We note that Futagami et al. (1993) have been the first one to consider an en-
dogenous growth model with productive government capital. We differ from their
study in many dimensions, the most important being that we focus on a stochastic
environment with time-varying uncertainty and recursive preferences.
    In our model, we abstract away from uncertainty stemming from government policy
(see, for example, Pastor and Veronesi 2012, 2013; Kelly et al. 2013; Fernandez-
Villaverde et al. 2015; and Baker et al. 2016), the nature of government financing
risk (see, among others, Lustig et al. 2008 and Berndt et al. 2012), the impact of
distortionary taxation on innovation (among others, see Akcigit et al. 2018) and the
role of government subsidies to relax credit constraints to innovators (among others,
see Howell 2017). Our results do not contradict the existing evidence on the positive
role of government support to innovation, they rather point out the existence of a
relevant reallocation motive. Furthermore, in our empirical investigation we control
for credit conditions.
    In the next section, we show our main empirical evidence. Section 3 describes the
model and its calibration. We summarize our main results in section 4. Section 5
concludes.




                                          4
2     Empirical Evidence
In this section, we show our main empirical findings. We start by looking at the link
between uncertainty and relative investment across private firms sorted according to
their innovation intensity. We then turn our attention to investment reallocation
across private and government capital and use a VAR approach to isolate the role
of uncertainty shocks on investment reallocation. Importantly, we document the
existence of a positive link between the relative size of innovation capital and long-
run productivity growth.
    When assessing reallocation in the cross section of R&D-sorted firms, we use either
a broad market-based measure of uncertainty such as integrated stock market returns
volatility (iV ol), or the economic policy uncertainty (EP U ) measure proposed by
Baker et al. (2016). We use integrated volatility as benchmark because it has two
relevant advantages: (i) it is easy to compute (see Appendix A for details), and (ii)
it is available on long samples.
    When we turn our attention to the reallocation across private and public capital,
we enhance our analysis by considering time-varying volatility in productivity as a
measure of uncertainty. This choice enables us to better guide the calibration of our
macroeconomic model. Since most of our data are well-known, we detail our sources
in Appendix A.


2.1    Reallocation Across Innovation-sorted Firms
Using quarterly accounting data from Compustat over the sample 1972:Q1-2016:Q4,
we compute firm-level R&D intensity measured as the ratio of R&D expenses to total
assets. This measurement is common in the empirical literature about R&D firms
and prevents our analysis from being driven by a small set of very large firms. We
use CRSP data for equity returns. Our results hold also in a post-1975 subsample
completely based on the most recent Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
accounting standards about R&D activity expenses.
   In each calendar year, we form five portfolios with equal number of firms sorted
according to their previous year's R&D intensity. The resulting composition of our
portfolios is consistent with prior studies and is summarized in table B1 in Appendix
B. This table shows also standard summary statistics for our portfolios. We are inter-



                                          5
             Table 1: Excess Returns in R&D-sorted Portfolios
                           ex
                          ri,t = rex
                                  i + z,i ez,t + vol,i evol,t +   i,t

                     High-R&D                      Low-R&D                   HML-R&D
rex
 i                     15.35                          8.30                     7.05
                       (4.34)                        (2.09)                   (2.99)
z,i                    13.53                          5.19                     8.34
                       (2.40)                        (1.37)                   (2.26)
vol,i                  -18.35                        -11.25                    -7.10
                       (3.36)                        (1.70)                   (2.60)
R2                      0.17                          0.21                     0.08
Notes: Our sample starts in 1972 and ends in 2016. Returns are annualized, multiplied by
100, equal-weighted, and unlevered. The High (Low) portfolio includes the top (bottom)
20% of R&D intensity-sorted firms and accounts for about 10% of total market capital-
ization. HML-R&D refers to a portfolio long in the High-R&D portfolio and short in the
Low-R&D portfolio. Integrated return volatility and price-dividend level are denoted as
ivol and pd. The variable zt is the residual from the regression pdt = pd + ivolt + zt . We
model both ivol and z as AR(1) processes and denote their innovations as evol,t and ez,t ,
respectively. Standard errors in parentheses are Newey-West adjusted.


ested in studying both return dynamics and the subsequent investment adjustments
of the firms in our portfolios upon the realization of adverse uncertainty shocks.
   In table 1, we show informative summary statistics about returns for a subset of
our portfolio returns. HML-R&D refers to the difference in behavior of the variables of
interest across the High- and Low-R&D intensity portfolios. We interpret the figures
for HML-R&D as being specific to innovative firms, as they are in excess of those
observed for regular firms. Consistent with Chan et al. (2001), we observe a higher
risk premium on R&D-intensive firms with respect to both levered and unlevered
returns.
   In order to formally test that the returns of innovative firms are more exposed
to economic uncertainty than those of non-innovative firms, we proceed as follows.
We regress the aggregate price-dividend ratio, pdt , on iV olt and take the residual of
this regression, zt , as a factor capturing shocks that affect the level of the market
activity and are orthogonal to uncertainty fluctuations. We model both iV ol and z
as AR(1) processes and denote their innovations as evol,t and ez,t , respectively. We
then estimate the following standard time-series regression,

                           ex
                          ri,t = rex
                                  i + z,i ez,t + vol,i evol,t +   i,t ,



                                              6
where the left hand side refers to annualized unlevered excess returns, ez,t controls for
shocks to the level of economic conditions, and evol,t captures unexpected volatility
shocks. Our results confirm that the market value of innovative firms is more exposed
to both level and volatility shocks. When the market price of risk of level shocks is
positive and that of volatility is negative, our estimated betas unambiguously imply
that High-R&D firms must be riskier than Low-R&D firms under no-arbitrage.
    Through the lens of our innovation-driven model, these results suggest that uncer-
tainty shocks depress the market value of the rents associated to patents and hence
they should discourage innovation-oriented investments. Given this observation, we
now turn our attention to the study of investment dynamics by estimating jointly the
following set of predictive regressions,

                                  R&Di                          i
   [·]i,tt+h = i + 0 + rnd                  ivolt + z zt + cntrlt ,   i = 1, ..., N,   (1)
                                  Assetsi

where the left hand side refers to the h-periods ahead future investment growth rate,
zt controls for shocks to the level of economic conditions, and N captures the size
                                                                                    i
of our cross section. We also consider additional control variables grouped in cntrlt .
The literature has already shown that 0 < 0, i.e., uncertainty shocks have a negative
impact on investment. We are interested in whether high R&D-intensity firms are
more exposed than low R&D-intensity firms, that is, rnd < 0.
    In table 2, we show our results when we focus on a cross section of five R&D
intensity-sorted portfolios. We account for financial shocks, or equivalently, credit
tightness, by adding the 10-year Baa credit spread as an additional control. Across
different horizons, our results confirm that high R&D firms reduce more significantly
both total investment and R&D intensity in the aftermath of an adverse volatility
shock. According to a formal Wald test on the joint hypothesis H0 : rnd = 0 =
0, we reject the null, i.e., we find support about uncertainty being a statistically
relevant driver of investment dynamics. This effect is relevant also in terms of R2 .
Over a three-year horizon, for example, removing our uncertainty measure from our
predictive regressions let the R2 for investment growth and R&D intensity decline by
52% and 21%, respectively.
    For the sake of economic interpretation of the magnitude of our results, we note
that the average R&D intensity in our High (Low) R&D-intensity portfolio is 16%
(0.00%). This implies that when iV ol is two standard deviations away from its mean,


                                            7
             Table 2: Reallocation across R&D-sorted Portfolios
                               R&D                          i
       [·]i,tt+h = i + 0 + rnd Assets i ivolt + z zt + cntrlt               i = 1, ..., 5

                                                                      R &D
Horiz.                   Inv.(%)                                      Assets (p.p.)
(years)       rnd        Wald          R2 Loss              rnd       Wald          R2 Loss

h=3           -1.80       19.10          -52                -0.89       12.96               -21
             (1.03)      [0.000]                           (0.35)      [0.002]

h=4           -1.54       17.38          -33                -0.76       11.18               -15
             (0.84)      [0.000]                           (0.35)      [0.004]

h=5           -1.35       13.22          -22                -0.84       8.70                -13
             (0.72)      [0.001]                           (0.38)      [0.013]
Notes: Our quarterly data sample starts in 1972 and ends in 2016. Cumulative investment
growth rates, Inv., are annualized. All estimates are obtained through GMM using five
portfolios sorted on R&D intensity. Numbers in parentheses are Newey-West adjusted
standard errors. We test H0 : rnd  0 and denote a significance level of 1%, 5%, and 10%
with  ,  ,  , respectively. We also test the joint hypothesis H0 : 0 = rnd = 0 and report
the implied Wald test (p-value in square brackets) as well as the associated reduction in
R2 from removing all volatility terms (iV ol and iV ol · R&D/Asset) from our benchmark
specification. Integrated return volatility and price-dividend level are denoted as ivol and
pd. The variable zt is the residual from the regression pdt = pd + ivolt + zt . We control
for the 10-year Baa credit spread.


the cumulative drop in relative investment across the High and Low portfolios over
a 3-year horizon is 11.5%.1 Similarly, over the same horizon the relative variation in
R&D intensity is -1.9 percentage points.
   In table 3, we focus on a more granular cross section in which we assess rnd
using firm-level data. In this case, we adopt firm-level fixed effects and account for
time-variation in the firm-level R&D intensity characteristic. We continue to control
for credit conditions by using 10-year Baa credit spread and we also consider firm-
level variables including Tobin's Q, a standard proxy for growth opportunities, as
well as profitability. Our goal is to test whether volatility shocks are statistically
and economically relevant, even after we account for key firm characteristics used to
  1
    In our data, we use annualized percent integrated vol and hence StD(iV ol) = 6.67. The
cumulative growth rate of investment is annualized, therefore we derive our result by computing
h · rnd · (.16 - .00) · 2StD(iV ol) for each horizon, h. For the R&D intensity measure, we have
rnd · (.16 - .00) · 2StD(iV ol).


                                               8
                  Table 3: Reallocation across R&D-sorted Firms
                                          R &D                           i
                  [·]i,tt+h = i + 0 + rnd Assets i,t ivolt + z zt + cntrlt   i = 1, ..., N
                                                                                   R &D
Horiz.                              Inv.(%)                                        Assets (p.p.)
(years)                Balanced      90%T           80%T             Balanced       90%T            80%T
h=3        rnd            -3.04       -4.69          -5.61              -1.28         -1.45          -1.89
                         (1.05)      (0.92)         (0.79)             (0.15)        (0.15)         (0.28)
           Wald          30.85       51.93          92.97              73.79         92.77          54.92
                        [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]            [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.000]
           R2 Loss         -13         -16            -22                -76           -75            -73

h=4        rnd            -3.06         -4.36        -5.41              -1.46            -1.67       -2.57
                         (0.93)        (0.84)       (0.80)             (0.17)           (0.18)      (0.39)
           Wald          28.44         59.82        89.08              73.51            90.02       51.33
                        [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]            [0.000]          [0.000]     [0.000]
           R2 Loss         -11           -12          -19                -70              -71         -75

h=5        rnd            -3.10         -4.18        -4.91              -1.65           -1.96        -3.03
                         (0.85)        (0.77)       (0.82)             (0.21)          (0.18)       (0.43)
           Wald          27.62         47.30        68.00              68.31          121.18        57.03
                        [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]            [0.000]         [0.000]      [0.000]
           R2 Loss         -10           -10          -18                -66             -69          -73
                         N=96         N=196        N=273               N=96           N=196        N=273
Notes: Our quarterly data sample starts in 1972 and ends in 2016. Cumulative investment
growth rates, Inv., are annualized. All estimates are obtained through GMM using a cross
section of firms sorted on R&D intensity. Numbers in parentheses are Newey-West adjusted
standard errors. We test H0 : rnd  0 and denote a significance level of 1%, 5%, and 10%
with  ,  ,  , respectively. We also test the join hypothesis H0 : 0 = rnd = 0 and report
the implied Wald test (p-value in square brackets) as well as the associated reduction in
R2 from removing all volatility terms (iV ol and iV ol · R&D/Assets) from our benchmark
specification. Integrated return volatility and price-dividend level are denoted as ivol and
pd. The variable zt is the residual from the regression pdt = pd + ivolt + zt . The firm-level
R&D intensity average, R&D/Assetsi,t , is computed over 3-year subsamples. We control
for firm-level Tobin's Q and cash flow profitability, as well as for aggregate credit conditions
as measured by the 10-year Baa credit spread (cntrlt    i ).



predict investment growth. In our first pass, we consider the subgroup of firms that
is in our sample for the entire 1972-2016 period in order to ensure a balanced panel.
We also consider larger subgroups of firms that are present in our sample for at least
90% or 80% of the entire time span.
    Across different groups and time horizons, our results suggest that volatility shocks
are particularly disruptive for innovative firms. Equivalently, investment contractions
originated by adverse volatility shocks come with important reallocations away from
firms with innovation capital.




                                                   9
   This result is significant both in terms of R2 variations due to the elimination of
our volatility measure, and according to a formal Wald test for H0 : rnd = 0 = 0.
When iV ol is two standard deviations away from its mean, these results imply a
cumulative drop in relative investment across the High and Low portfolios for h = 3
ranging from 8.9% to 21.8%, depending on whether we use a balanced cross section or
not. The cumulative relative decline in R&D intensity ranges instead from 1.2 to 2.4
percentage points. Hence our reallocation magnitudes are relevant both when using
portfolio-level and firm-level data.
   In Appendix B, table B2 shows that our results are confirmed also when we run
our firm-level regressions replacing the Baker et al. (2016) measure of economic policy
uncertainty (EPU). This finding is important because it broadens the relevance of our
reallocation evidence since EPU is a distinct and broader type of uncertainty relative
to productivity uncertainty. Table B3 confirms that our firm-level results are nearly
unchanged when including time fixed effects. Similar results apply to our portfolio-
level results.
   Through the lens of models of endogenous growth in which R&D intensity is a lead-
ing indicator of medium-term growth and innovation, these results suggest that un-
certainty shocks may anticipate periods of prolonged sluggish innovation and growth.
In what follows, we proceed in two steps. First, we broaden further our results by
using aggregate data. Second, we relate our reallocation measures to medium-run
growth.


2.2    Aggregate Data
In this section, we use aggregate data to support further our main findings, that
is, uncertainty shocks are a first-order concern for growth because they are more
disruptive for innovation-capital. In the context of this analysis, we consider aggregate
data on tangible and intangible investment as well as government investments.
    Accounting for government capital is important for two reasons. First, this mar-
gin is important in order to properly account for the wedge between private invest-
ments and savings. As already pointed out in the literature (among others, see
Fernandez-Villaverde et al. 2015 and Bloom et al. 2018), in a closed economy without
a government sector, private savings and investment must be identical to each other.
This result is at odds with national accounting data. Considering the behavior of
government-allocated resources is a way to avoid counterfactual conclusions. Second,

                                           10
considering the dynamics of government investment enables us to better quantify the
impact of volatility shocks on innovation-oriented investments.

Government capital: data and stylized facts. Government capital data are
reported in the NIPA tables, according to criteria described in Bureau of Economic
Analysis (2014). Examples of expenditures included in our government capital mea-
sure are provided in Appendix B, table B4. We include both tangible and intangible
investment both at the federal and the local level. Our data are consistent with
other sources explored by Aschauer (1988), Boskin et al. (1989), Peterson (1990),
and Kamps (2004), and include both in-house investment and purchases from the
private sectors.
    From a business cycle point of view, government capital is important in at least
three dimensions: (i) it is sizeable, as it is on average about one third of private capital;
(ii) government investment is an important margin during the cycle as its growth rate
is approximately 1.5 times more volatile than that of private investment; and (iii) the
correlation of private and government investment growth is negative, implying that
government capital is associated to important cross-sector reallocation during the
cycle (see Appendix B, figure B1). More specifically, during periods of economic stress
government investment becomes relatively more prominent than private investments.
This result is broadly consistent with what we have already observed in our R&D-
based cross section of firms because the R&D intensity of the government is moderate
compared to that of many firms in our cross section (see table 4), meaning that we see
a negative connection between R&D intensity and capital reallocation during periods
of high uncertainty also across sectors.2
    Summarizing, like in our microdata, our aggregate data suggest that innovation-
oriented investments are penalized in periods of high uncertainty. Within the private
sector, our tests show that investments are shifted toward low innovation-intensity
firms. In order to test whether private investments are substituted by government
investments when volatility increases, we proceed with a formal VAR investigation
that can inform us on the duration of these reallocations.
   2
     In Appendix B, we document additional related facts on government investments. We show
that the reallocation patterns are much more pronounced for government investment than for gov-
ernment expenditure. Equivalently, these dynamics are a distinct phenomenon when compared to
non-investment government expenditure (see Appendix B, figure B2). We also present evidence of
relevant reallocation of both capital flows and employment toward government capital in periods of
high uncertainty (see Appendix B, table B5).


                                               11
                   Table 4: R&D-Intensity across Sectors
               Firm-level quintiles (Compustat)                                  Govt
         20%         40%            60%          80%                              Avg
         0.17        1.98           5.40        11.70                             1.59
        (0.02)      (0.10)         (0.33)       (0.75)                           (0.04)
Notes: We sort Compustat firms with non-missing R&D expense according to their innova-
tion intensity and form 5 groups. We report our average R&D-to-Assets ratio quintiles as
well as the average value for the government sector. Numbers in parenthesis are Newey-West
standard errors. The sample ranges from 1972 to 2016.


2.3     A VAR analysis of aggregate reallocation.
We use a VAR analysis in order to determine the joint dynamics of level and volatility
shocks as well as capital reallocation. We perform this exercise using both realized eq-
uity market volatility and an ex-ante measure of productivity growth volatility. This
exercise has at least three relevant goals. First of all, we show that our reallocation
results are robust to using either an equity-based or a macroeconomic measure of
uncertainty. Second, our findings are not affected by the Berger et al. (2018) critique,
as they hold also when we adopt an ex-ante measure of fundamental uncertainty.3
Third, by quantifying the empirical role of productivity volatility shocks we obtain
relevant guidance on both the calibration of our aggregate model and the assessment
of its fit of the US aggregate data.
   We start by estimating the following VAR(1):

                           Yt+1 = µY + Yt + Cntrlt + ut+1 ,                                   (2)
with

                               Yt =      at     iV olt   log Xt ,                             (3)
and
                               Xt  {Ig,t , IR&D,t , Ip,t , Yp,t }.

The variables at , and iV olt denote productivity growth and integrated volatility for
stock market returns, respectively. By including productivity growth, we control for
shocks to the level of economic activity and isolate the role of uncertainty shocks on
the last variable of the VAR which refers to detrended economic aggregates such as
   3
   We agree with Berger et al. (2018) on the fact that realized equity volatility is not a perfect
measure of uncertainty.


                                               12
private output (Yp ), private R&D investment (IR&D ), total private investment (Ip ),
and total government investment (Ig ). The vector Cntrlt comprises other aggregate
variables, such as, for example, the 10-year Baa credit spread. We focus on the sample
period from 1972 to be consistent with the empirical evidence presented elsewhere in
this section. In Appendix B, we show that our results are unchanged when using the
full available sample period from 1961.
   Throughout this study, we do not need to take a stand on causality across uncer-
tainty and level shocks (for a further discussion of this point, see Berger et al. 2018).
We identify impulse responses through a lower diagonal Cholesky decomposition and
point out that their pattern does not change whether level shocks or volatility shocks
are ranked first. For the purpose of our analysis, both methods produce similar
orthogonalized level and volatility shocks.
   Using our estimated VAR, we trace the response of investment and output aggre-
gates to both productivity and volatility shocks in figure 1. In this figure, all variables
are HP-filtered in order to extract a business cycle component. A positive produc-
tivity shock boosts output as well as all forms of investment and it has a stronger
effect on private investment. This result is reassuring as it is consistent with previous
empirical evidence.
   Uncertainty shocks, instead, are associated to both production and private invest-
ment contractions and, in contrast, an increase in government investments. Hence our
reallocation evidence is not driven solely by private investment adjustments, but also
by an adjustment in the size of the government sector. Most importantly, uncertainty
shocks produce adjustments quantitatively as relevant as those due to level shocks.
Furthermore, the role of uncertainty shocks is much more pronounced if we follow
Comin and Gertler (2006) in using a pass-band filter to extract medium-cycle fluctu-
ations from macroeconomic aggregates. As shown in figure 2, the effects of volatility
shocks are both more disruptive and more long-lived along the medium-cycle.
   Integrated stock market volatility results from many different economic phenomena
that are not solely related to uncertainty shocks. As an example, integrated volatility
may be driven by sentiment shocks, or time-varying market frictions. In order to
focus on a fundamental measure of economy activity uncertainty and address Berger
et al. (2018)'s concerns related to the use of realized volatility, we extract ex-ante
time-varying volatility from productivity growth using a standard predictive-factors
approach that we detail in Appendix C.


                                            13
Fig. 1. Aggregate Capital Reallocation in a VAR with iVol. This figure shows the
response to both productivity growth shocks and volatility shocks of total gross government
investment (Ig ), total gross private investment (Ip ); gross private R&D investment (IR&D ),
and private output (Yp ). All results are based on the VAR specified in equations (2)­(3),
in which we use stock market integrated volatility to measure uncertainty. We control for
the 10-year Baa credit spread. All series are HP filtered and in log units. Our sources are
detailed in Appendix A. Our quarterly sample starts in 1972 and ends in 2016. Confidence
intervals are adjusted for heteroscedasticity.



    We proceed as before by estimating the VAR specified in equation (2) using the
following modified vector of variables

                             Y,t = at      xt     volt   log Xt ,                        (4)

where at controls for short-run realized growth shocks, the productivity long-run
component xt controls for growth news shocks, volt refers to our measure of produc-
tivity uncertainty, and Xt is defined as in equation (3).
   We depict our main results in figure 3. The role of productivity level shocks is
similar to that obtained using market volatility and can be found in Appendix B,
figure B6. As in the case of integrated volatility, productivity-based uncertainty
shocks promote a strong and persistent reallocation of resources away from private
capital. This effect is much more pronounced when we focus on medium-cycle effects.


                                             14
Fig. 2. Aggregate Capital Reallocation and Medium-Run Cycle. This figure
shows the response to volatility shocks of total gross government investment (Ig ), total
gross private investment (Ip ); gross private R&D investment (IR&D ), and private output
(Yp ). All results are based on the VAR specified in equations (2)­(3), in which we use stock
market integrated volatility to measure uncertainty. We control for the 10-year Baa credit
spread. In the top (bottom) panels, all series are HP (pass-band) filtered and in log units.
Our sources are detailed in Appendix A. Our quarterly sample starts in 1972 and ends in
2016. Confidence intervals are adjusted for heteroscedasticity.



In this case, the decline in production lasts for more than five years. We have also
replicated our analysis replacing our measure of expected volatility with the residual
of the following equation,

                        |at+1 - µ - xt | = bv
                                            0 + bv Ft + residt+1 .


In this case, we find no significant reallocation, implying that what really matters for
investment flows is the extent of expected long-term uncertainty.


2.4    Reallocation and growth.
In a model in which growth is endogenously linked to innovation, the decline in
R&D intensity is a leading indicator of persistent growth slowdowns. Given this



                                             15
Fig. 3. Aggregate Capital Reallocation and Medium-Run Cycle (II). This figure
shows the response to productivity-based volatility shocks of total gross government invest-
ment (Ig ), total gross private investment (Ip ); gross private R&D investment (IR&D ), and
private output (Yp ). All results are based on the VAR specified in equations (2)­(4), in
which we use stock market integrated volatility to measure uncertainty. We control for the
10-year Baa credit spread. In the top (bottom) panels, all series are HP (pass-band) filtered
and in log units. Our sources are detailed in Appendix A. Our quarterly sample starts in
1972 and ends in 2016. Confidence intervals are adjusted for heteroscedasticity.



consideration, we investigate whether the relative composition of capital matters for
future productivity growth by formally estimating the following forecasting regression:

             1
               at,t+n = µ + bn                      n
                             g CapitalM easurest + bc Cntrlst + residt                   (5)
             n

where at,t+n is the n-year-ahead cumulative aggregate productivity growth at time t,
CapitalM easures refers to different measures of capital composition that we detail in
what follows, and controls comprises a broad set of macro-financial leading indicators
that accounts also for credit conditions (US Treasury bond yields with maturity from
1 to 6 years; inflation; price-dividends ratio; iVol; Baa corporate yield minus 10y
Treasury bond yield).




                                             16
                           Table 5: Reallocation and Growth
Horizon (n):                                             5 year          7 year           10 year
     BEA H       Compustat
kg /ktot -kR&D /ktot                                     -0.14*        -0.31***          -0.36***
                                                         (0.08)          (0.08)            (0.07)
Adj R2                                                    0.20            0.34               0.24
Adj R2 w/o                                                0.19            0.18              -0.17
     BEA H       Compustat
Ig /Itot -IR&D /Itot                                    -0.12**        -0.20***          -0.20***
                                                         (0.05)          (0.02)            (0.02)
Adj R2                                                    0.32            0.61               0.50
Adj R2 w/o                                                0.19            0.18              -0.17
 H      Compustat
IR &D /Itot                                             0.16***         0.23***           0.22***
                                                         (0.06)          (0.03)            (0.03)
Adj R2                                                    0.31            0.53               0.33
Adj R2 w/o                                                0.19            0.18              -0.17
Credit Tightness Control: Baa10y                          Yes             Yes                Yes
Predicting Factors                                        Yes             Yes                Yes

Notes: This table reports the estimated coefficients ^
                                                     bg for the following regression:

               1
                 a     =  + bn                        n
                             g · CapitalM easurest + bc · controlst + residt ,
               n t|t+n
                                          BEA denotes the public-to-total capital stock ratio
where n is expressed in years. kg,t /ktot,t
                                     H        Compustat
as determined using BEA data. kR       &D,t /ktot,t     refers to total assets in our High-R&D
portfolio relative to total assets in our Compustat cross section focused on firms with non-
missing R&D data. The other ratios are constructed in a similar way using investment
flows, as opposed to capital stock data. The other forecasting variables included in the
regressions are: US Tresury bond yields with maturity from 1 to 6 years; inflation; price-
dividends ratio; iVol; and Baa corporate yield minus 10y Treasury bond yield. Our sources
are detailed in Appendix A. Our annual sample starts in 1972 and ends in 2016. Confidence
intervals are adjusted for heteroscedasticity. One, two, and three asterisks denote 10%, 5%,
and 1% significance, respectively. Adj R2 w/o refers to a regression in which we eliminate
our CapitalM easures variables.


   In table 5, we show the existence of a negative correlation between the share of
non-innovative capital and future long-term growth.4 This result applies to both cap-
ital stocks and investment flows. The bottom panel shows that our findings are not
solely driven by government capital, as the share of investment from our High-R&D
set of firms is a positive and significant predictor of growth over different horizons.
   4
    In the first two specifications, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient in front of
the government capital share is the opposite of that for the High-R&D capital share. For this reason,
we present the results of the regression in which we impose our null hypothesis as a restriction. In
Appendix C, the scatter plots depicted in figure C2 confirm that our findings do not depend on
outliers or specific time periods.


                                                   17
Importantly, across all panels, adding variables related to the innovation-based com-
position of capital increases substantially our adjusted R2 s, implying that our findings
are statistically important. Since we control for many other well-known leading in-
dicators that account also for credit conditions, we consider our R2 improvements
as very sizeable. To better interpret the economic relevance of this result, we notice
that if our capital measure in the top panel increases by two standard deviations,
cumulated productivity growth should decline by 3% over five years.5


3       The Model
We start by describing the representative household problem and then describe both
the private and public production sectors. The model is based on Comin and Gertler
(2006) and Kung and Schmid (2015) and it features a government-owned production
sector so that we can disentangle private savings from private investments. The goal
of this model is to propose a mechanism that links in equilibrium uncertainty shocks,
reallocation, innovation, and growth.


3.1     Household problem
The objective of the representative agent is to maximize her utility

                                                                   1- 1     1
                                             1                        
                                                                          1-1/
                        Ut = (1 -       ~t1- 
                                       )C        +     Et Ut1-
                                                            +1
                                                                   1-
                                                                                                   (6)

                             ~t is
where the consumption bundle C
                                                       l              l
                             ~t = Ct -       SLt Lp,t        SLt Lg,t
                             C         ¯ l,p          -¯ l,g          ,
                                               l               l

in which Ct denotes the consumption of the final good, Lp,t is the labor supply in
private sector, and Lg,t is the labor supply in government sector. To ensure bal-
    5
    Since the standard deviation of our capital measure is 0.023, the cumulative decline is 2 × 0.023 ×
0.14 × 5.




                                                  18
ance growth with Greenwood et al. (1988) preferences, we introduce an exogenous
preference shock process, SLt , cointegrated with productivity. Specifically, we define:

                                                   SLt
                                        slat :=
                                                   At

and assume
                     slat = (1 - sla )µ + (1 - sla )(slat-1 - at ),

in which we set sla  0 so that SLt mimics an exogenous linear trend.
   The budget constraint of the representative household is:

                                         ex
             Ct + Tt + Zt Vtex = Zt-1 (Vp,t + Dt ) + (wp,t Lp,t + wg,t Lg,t )/pt ,   (7)

where Tt is a lump-sum transfer from the household to the government; Zt  [0 1]
represents the percentage ownership of private capital; Vtex is the ex-dividends value
of private capital; Dt is the corporate payout; wp is the wage paid by the private firm;
and wg is the wage paid by the government. As described in detail in the next section,
pt is the relative price of the final good with respect to the numeraire (government)
good. This change of unit is required because all variables are expressed in terms of
the final good.

Optimality. The optimal investment strategy implies that:

                             Vtex = Et Mt+1 (Vtex
                                               +1 + Dt+1 ) ,


where Mt+1 is the IMRS of the agent in final consumption units. In what follows, we
often use the IMRS in government-good units,

                                                      pt
                                    Mtg+1  Mt+1           .
                                                     pt+1

  The optimal supply of labor in private and public sectors implies:

                                                         l -1
                                  wp,t /pt = ¯ l,p SLt Lp,t


                                                         l -1
                                  wg,t /pt = ¯ l,g SLt Lg,t .




                                              19
3.2    Final good producer
The final good in the economy is a bundle of private goods, Yp,t , and public goods,
Yg,t
                                                                   1
                                                                 1-1/
                                     1- 1                 1- 1
                        Yt =     t Yp,t     + (1 -   t )Yg,t             .         (8)

The elasticity of substitution between these two goods is determined by  . The
relative demand of the private good with respect to the public good is also determined
by the possibly time-varying preference process t . For parsimony, we assume that

                                         t = ev vt-1 ,

where vt-1 is the time-varying volatility of productivity, and v is a non-positive
constant. This expression captures the idea that public goods may be more desirable
in high-uncertainty periods. In our sensitivity analysis, we show that most of our
results do not require the presence of a preference shocks, i.e., they hold even when
v = 0.
   We assume the existence of a competitive producer that solves the following profit
maximization problem taking prices as given:

                               max pt Yt - pt Yp,t - Yg,t ,                        (9)
                            Yp,t ,Yg,t


where the price of the government good is normalized to one (numeraire). Optimality
implies:
                                              1
                                             -
                                 t     Yp,t
                                                = pt .                        (10)
                               1 - t Yg,t
The relative price of the final good w.r.t the numeraire good:
                                                                 1
                               Yg,t     1                Yg,t    
                           pt       =                                .
                               Yt     1 - t              Yt

3.3    Private sector
Private final good. The private firm that produces the private final good has
monopolistic power. The private firm has also access to the same technology of the
public firm and hence it could produce the public good as well. Since the price
of the public good is set equal to its marginal cost, there is no scope for positive

                                              20
profits creation, i.e., marginal profits are null and hence the firm is indifferent between
utilizing the public technology or not. Without loss of generality, we assume that the
private firm specializes in the production of the private good.
   The production function of the private final good is:

                                               
                                         p
                              Fp,t = (Kp,t (p,t Lp,t )1-p )1- Gt,                                      (11)

where the composite Gt is defined as
                                                                          1
                                                         Nt               
                                                               
                                           Gt                 Xi,t   di       ,                        (12)
                                                     0


Xi,t is the quantity of the intermediate good i  [0, Nt ], and Nt is the total mass of
intermediate good varieties. Since each intermediate good requires a patent, Nt also
measures the total mass of patents in use at date t.
    The exogenous stationary process of private firm productivity is p,t = eap,t , where
ap,t follows an AR(1) process subject to volatility shocks, v,t :

                                         a + ap,t-1 + evt-1 
                            ap,t = (1 - )¯                                              a,t

                               vt = v vt-1 + v                   ,t   + v,a       a,t

                       ,t , ,t          i.i.d.N (0, 1).

The parameter v,a captures contemporaneous correlation across level and volatility
shocks. In what follows, we refer to level shocks as short-run shocks, as they determine
most of the variance of the growth dynamics over the short-run. Over longer horizon,
capital reallocation is the main driver of growth.
   We assume that the private firm buys production inputs (investment goods Ip,t ,
labor Lp,t , and intermediate goods Xi,t ) in a competitive way, that is, by taking their
price as given. Hence the problem of the private firm is as follows:
                                                                      1
                                                                     -
                                               t          Yp,t
             Vp,t =         max                                           Yp,t - pt Ip,t - wp,t Lp,t   (13)
                        Lp,t , Ip,t , Yp,t   1 - t        Yg,t
                         Kp,t+1 , Xi,t
                                                         pt
                                      Nt
                       -pt                 Pi,t Xi,t di + Et [Mtg+1 Vp,t+1 ]
                                  0




                                                         21
subject to

                     Yp,t  Fp,t                                               (p,t )
                                                 Ip,t
                  Kp,t+1         1 -  + p,t                       Kp,t         (qp,t ),
                                                 Kp,t

where p,t is the shadow marginal cost, and qp,t is the shadow value of private capital.
The adjustment cost function is specified as in Jermann (1998):

                                                      1- 1
                                   p,1     Ip,t              p
                          p,t   =                                + p,0 ,
                                  1 - 1p
                                           Kp,t

and the optimality condition with respect to Ip,t pins down the marginal value of
private capital:
                                          pt
                                   qp,t =                                    (14)
                                          p,t
The optimal demand of labor implies

                         wp,t                            Yp,t
                              = (1 - 1/ )(1 - p )(1 -  )      ,
                          pt                             Lp,t

and the optimal condition with respect to Kp,t+1 is:

                                                  Vp,t+1
                                qp,t = Et Mtg+1                                              (15)
                                                  Kp,t+1

where by envelope theorem we have:

   Vp,t                         Yp,t                  Ip,t+1
        = (1 - 1/ )pt p (1 -  )      + 1 -  + p,t+1 -              qp,t+1 .                  (16)
   Kp,t                         Kp,t                  Kp,t+1 p,t+1

The optimal demand of Xi,t implies

                                                 Nt
                                                0
                                                      Pi,t Xi,t di         Yp,t
                     Pi,t =   1 - 1/ + 1/                                                    (17)
                                                       Yp,t                Xi,t

where                                                                         
                                                             Nt               
                                                                               -1
               Yp,t      p                                                            -1
                    =  (Kp,t (p,t Lp,t )1-p )1-                    
                                                                  Xi,t   di         Xi,t .
               Xi,t                                      0




                                           22
Intermediate Goods. Intermediate good producers can generate one unit of their
own good by buying one unit of the private good at market price pt . They have
monopoly power and choose Pi,t to maximize their profits, i,t , each period:

                max i,t  max         pt · [Pi,t · Xi,t (Pi,t ) - Xi,t (Pi,t )] .
                Pi,t        Pi,t


Since i,t is measured in public good units, the value Vi,t of owning exclusive rights
to produce intermediate good i is:

                       Vi,t = i,t + (1 - )Et [Mtg+1 Vi,t+1 ],                             (18)

where  is the probability that a patent becomes obsolete.

Aggregation. In our symmetric equilibrium,

                           1
            Pi,t  Pt =       ,                                                            (19)
                           
                                                                                      1
                              1 - 1/  p                                1-      
                                                                                -1   1-
            Xi,t  Xt =               Kp,t (p,t Lp,t )1-p                    Nt 
                                                                                          (20)
                              1 - /
                           
                            -
Under the restriction  +   
                           1-
                                 = 1, the production function of private good sector can
be written as:
                                                  1-
                                    Yp,t = Zp,t Kp,t Lp,t                                 (21)

where

                                 Zp,t  A(p,t Nt )1- ,                                     (22)

is an endogenous productivity process that grows with the stock of patents Nt , and
                                       
                           -1/       (1-)
whose initial level, A    1
                          1-/
                                      , depends on the extent of competition as deter-
mined by the elasticities  and  . Similarly to the process p,t , measured productivity
Zt features time-varying volatility.

Innovators. Innovators develop new patents that are sold to the intermediate good
producers in a competitive way. As a result, at the equilibrium, the price of a new




                                              23
patent is Vi,t . The law of motion of the intangible capital stock, Nt , is specified as
follows:

                                    Nt+1 = t St + (1 - )Nt ,                                         (23)

where St denotes R&D expenditures (in terms of the final good) and t represents
the productivity of the R&D sector that is taken as exogenous by the R&D sector.
In the spirit of Comin and Gertler (2006), we assume that this technology coefficient
involves a congestion externality effect
                                                               1-
                                                         Nt
                                          t =                       ,                                (24)
                                                         St

where  > 0 is a scale parameter and   [0, 1] is the elasticity of new patents
with respect to R&D. This specification captures the notion that concepts already
discovered make it easier to come up with new ideas, /N > 0, and that R&D
investment has decreasing marginal returns, /S < 0.6 The free-entry condition
in the R&D sector implies that

                        Et [Mtg+1 Vt+1 ](Nt+1 - (1 - )Nt ) = pt St ,                                 (25)

that is, the expected revenue from selling new patents must equal the incurred costs,
or equivalently,
                                 pt
                                    = Et [Mtg+1 Vt+1 ].
                                 t

3.4     Government sector
The public firm provides its own good in a competitive fashion. The public firm uses
labor, Lg,t , and final goods to accumulate government capital, Kg,t , and it solves the
following dynamic problem:

             Vg,t =             max                Yg,t - pt Ig,t - wg,t Lg,t + Et [Mtg+1 Vg,t+1 ]   (26)
                        Yg,t ,Kg,t+1 ,Lg,t ,Ig,t

   6
    Similarly, this congestion externality can be thought of as giving rise to adjustment costs to
investment in intangible capital, that is, R&D. We will later see that the optimality condition for
         1
R&D is    t
            = Et [Mt+1 Vt+1 ]. Absent the congestion externality, this becomes 1 = Et [Mt+1 Vt+1 ], a
result analogous to q -theory, in which case the absence of adjustment cost fixes marginal Q at unity.




                                                          24
subject to

                                              g          1-g
                       Yg,t  Fg,t = g Zp,t Kg,t Lg,t                  (g,t )
                                              Ig,t
                     Kg,t+1   1 -  + g,t                       Kg,t       (qg,t ),
                                             Kg,t

where g,t is the shadow marginal cost of the government good, qg,t is the shadow
value of government capital, and the parameter g captures the gap in the level of
measured public and private productivity. The adjustment cost function is defined
as follows,
                                                   1- 1
                         Ig,t      g,1    Ig,t        g
                   g,t         =               + 1      + g,0 ,
                        Kg,t      1 - 1g
                                          Kg,t

and allows for reversibility of government investment.7 This assumption captures the
ability of the private sector to use infrastructure generated by the government.
   The optimality condition with respect to Yg implies that

                                             g,t  1,

i.e., the marginal cost must be equal to the price of the good. As a result, the optimal
demand of labor implies
                                     wg,t = Fg,Lg ,t ,

   The optimality condition with respect to Ig,t pins down the marginal value of public
capital:
                                             pt
                                     qg,t =      ,                                 (27)
                                            g,t
where pt accounts for the fact that investment is made using the final good. The
optimality with respect to Kg,t+1 is

                            Vg,t+1
       qg,t = Et Mtg+1                                                                            (28)
                            Kg,t+1
                                                                  Ig,t+1
             = Et Mtg+1 Fg,Kg ,t+1 + 1 -  + g,t+1 -                            qg,t+1          . (29)
                                                                  Kg,t+1 g,t+1
   7                                                                     Ig
     The constant g,0 is set so that at the deterministic steady state   Kg   = g . The coefficient g,1
is set so that at the deterministic steady state g = 1.




                                                 25
Under this specification, the government sector does not produce innovations, but it
has access to the same production function of the private sector when we set g = 1
and g = p . Under this assumption, the government differs from the private sector
only in that it does not hold risky innovation capital.


3.5    Payout Flows
The total private pay-out (in numeraire units) is

                pt Dt = pt (Yp,t - Nt Xt ) - wp,t Lp,t - (pt Ip,t + pt St ),

that is, private GDP net of labor costs and private investments. As a result, V ex
captures the value of both tangible and intangible private assets. The government
payout is positive when the tax flow is negative, i.e., when the agent receives a net
subsidy. Similarly to the private payout computations, in numeraire units, we have

                           -pt Tt = Yg,t - wg,t Ng,t - pt Ig,t                     (30)
                                   = g Yg,t - pt Ig,t .


3.6    Calibration and Solution Method
We report our quarterly calibration in table 6. Many of the parameters are standard.
The preference parameters are set in the spirit of the long-run risk literature. See,
among others, Bansal and Yaron (2004).
   Both the tangible capital income share and the depreciation rate of tangible capital
are set to the same values across sectors. We choose numbers as in Croce (2014). We
also set the elasticity of the adjustment cost functions to be the same and choose a
moderate value that let investment be as volatile as in the data.
   In the bundle that aggregates private and government goods, the weight  is chosen
to match the relative size of private and government investment. The coefficient v
is set to zero because we consider the presence of this shock only in our sensitivity
analysis. The elasticity of substitution  is set to have a total profit share comparable
to the data. The parameters that determine the innovation activity in the model are
set in the spirit of Comin and Gertler (2006) and Kung and Schmid (2012). Our
innovators have stronger mark ups than other private producers, consistent with our


                                            26
                       Table 6:     Benchmark Calibration
Preferences
  Relative Risk Aversion                                           ()          10
  Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution                        ()            2
  Subjective Discount Rate                                         ()        0.981/4
  Labor Elasticity                                                ( l )        1.5
  Cointegration Labor Preference Shock                           ( sla )       0.1
  Public Good Preference Shock Coefficient                        ( v )         0
Final Good Aggregator
  Private Good Bias                                               ()           0.8
  Private/Public Elasticity of Substitution                       ( )           5
Production
  Intangible Capital Share                                      ()            0.49
  Tangible Capital Share                                    ( p = g )          0.3
  Capital Depreciation Rate                                 ( n = s )        0.06/4
  Adjustment Cost Elasticity                                 ( p = g )         3.5
  Elasticity of Substitution Across Interm. Goods              (  -1 )        1.73
Innovation
  Intangible Capital Congestion, Scale Parameter               ()             0.128
  Intangible Capital Congestion, Elasticity                    ()             0.83
  Patent Survival Rate                                       ( 1- )           0.96
Productivity
  Productivity Persistence                                         ()          0.98
  Productivity Volatility                                          ()        0.032/2
  Relative Log-Volatility Persistence                             ( v )        0.74
  Volatility of Relative Log-Volatility                           ( v )        0.15
  Relative Log-Volatility Short Run Exposure                     ( v,a )       -3.5
  Average Government Gap                                          ( g )        65%
Notes: This table reports our benchmark quarterly calibration.


Compustat data. The scaling parameter  is set to have an annual average growth
rate of 1.9%.
   Productivity is calibrated according to our quarterly data. Both the persistence
and the magnitude of time-varying volatility are consistent with our confidence inter-
vals reported in table C1. The parameter v,a accounts for the negative correlation


                                           27
between relative volatility and short-run shocks and is set according to the data to
-3.5. In untabulated sensitivity analysis, we find that this parameter plays no crucial
role.
   Private and public productivity share the same dynamics, although public produc-
tivity is set to a lower average level. This is consistent with the data provided by the
BEA. The model is solved with a third-order perturbation method.


4     Results
In this section, we use our benchmark model to study both new unconditional mo-
ments and to quantify the benefits of government capital through a counterfactual
analysis. We also show the relevance of both recursive preferences and volatility
shocks to generate the reallocation observed in the data.


4.1    Benchmark Model
Responses. In figure 4, we depict the response of variables of interest to both
productivity level shocks and volatility shocks. We note several points. First, with
respect to a positive level shock, our model behaves similarly to a standard production
economy model, as private consumption, total labor, private investments, and output
simultaneously expand.
    On the asset pricing side, the higher level of productivity increases the value of
both intangible (Vt ) and tangible (qp,t ) private capital. Since at the equilibrium there
is a reallocation away from the government sector (Ig /Itot declines) for 5 quarters, the
shadow value of government capital (qg,t ) declines as well.
    In contrast to a positive level shock, a positive (i.e., adverse) volatility shock pro-
duces a contraction in private economic activity and promotes a reallocation toward
government capital. Both private consumption and investment fall and the value of
both tangible and intangible private capital decline. Because of aversion to volatility
shocks, the representative agent finds it optimal to reallocate resources toward forms
of capital that are less exposed to volatility. Since both the marginal product of tan-
gible capital and the monopolistic rents generated through intangible capital are very
exposed to volatility, the household reallocates resources toward government capital
causing it to appreciate.



                                            28
Fig. 4. Impulse Responses. This figure shows percentage deviations from steady state.
Our benchmark calibration is reported in table 6. The dashed line refers to the model with
no time-varying volatility (v = 0).




                                           29
Fig. 5. Model versus VAR. This figure shows the response to productivity volatility
shocks of the ratio of total gross government investment to output (Ig /Y ), detrended total
gross private investment (Ip ); detrended gross private R&D investment (IR&D ), and de-
trended private output (Yp ). The VAR-implied responses are obtained as in figure 3, top
panels. The model-implied responses are obtain from our benchmark quarterly specification.


   In order to better compare the model predictions to our empirical results, in figure
5 we compare the responses of our model with those of our VAR in which we focus on
business cycle fluctuations. Absent cross-sector reallocation costs, the model predicts
a reallocation away from the private sector that is more pronounced but also less
long-lived than in the data. Overall, however, our model captures well the empirical
pattern of private output.
   As mentioned in our previous section, when we focus on medium cycle fluctuations
we capture a more prolonged and pronounced decline in output. In figure 6, we show
that our model can go in the direction of replicating these dynamics if we depart from
our conservative calibration in two dimensions. First, we assume that the productivity
of the government and that of the private sectors have the same average level, e.g.,
g = 1. We consider this modification plausible given that government services tend
to be undervalued because national accounting misses part of government services
added value (Abel et al. 2016). As a result, measured government productivity is
downward biased. From a model perspective, increasing g makes government capital
a more effective storage technology against volatility shocks and hence it facilitates
reallocation.
   Second, we increase v to 0.90, a value consistent with our estimated confidence
intervals. We note that these two modifications leave the unconditional moments
implied by our model almost unchanged. We discuss these results in what follows.


                                            30
Fig. 6. Business versus Medium Cycle. This figure shows the response to productivity
volatility shocks of detrended private output (Yp ). The VAR-implied responses are obtained
as in figure 3. The model-implied responses are obtain from our benchmark quarterly
specification (left) and an enhanced calibration described in section 4.


Simulated moments. To better assess the performance of our model, in table 7
we show a comprehensive list of moments generated through simulations. The top
portion of the table shows standard moments for private macroeconomic aggregates.
Our model matches very well all these well known figures, except the average share
of total private investment which is too high due to intangible investment. We note,
however, that McGrattan and Prescott (2009) and Corrado et al. (2006) argue that
the BEA data may underestimate the extent of intangible investments and hence we
regard our model output as plausible.
    In the second portion of this table, we focus on moments that are specific to
government capital. The model delivers an investment-to-output average ratio that
is on average slightly higher than in the data but within our confidence interval. As a
byproduct of this outcome, the share of government capital to total capital is slightly
higher than in the data. In terms of the volatility of Ig /Y , the model produces results
consistent with our empirical confidence interval. We find this outcome reassuring as
it suggests that our framework is broadly reliable.
    Thanks to the fact that government capital provides insurance against volatility
shocks, its implied excess return is lower than that of private capital. As it can be
observed in the bottom portion of this table, private tangible capital is risky and re-

                                            31
                             Table 7:      Main Moments
Moment                                           Data                             Model
                                         Est.         St.Err.
 (y ) (%)                               4.85           (0.90)                      4.81
 (c)/ (y )                              0.61           (0.11)                      0.68
 (itot )/ (y )                           2.14          (0.11)                     1.70
 (s) (%)                                10.20          (1.88)                     8.29
E [(Ip + S )/Y ] (%)                    15.06          (0.79)                     31.45
 ((Ip + S )/Y ) (%)                      3.41          (0.67)                     2.57
(c,  ln(Ip + S ))                        0.84          (0.41)                      0.81
E [Ig /Y ] (%)                          5.35           (0.51)                      6.21
 (Ig /Y ) (%)                            2.79          (1.00)                     1.73
      Kg
E  Kp +Kg
            (%)                         25.46          (0.54)                     35.54
    LEV
E rp,ex (%)                              5.04                (1.98)                6.03
   LEV
 (rp,ex ) (%)                           19.72                (1.78)               16.42
E [rg,ex ] (%)                                                                    0.00
 (rg,ex ) (%)                                                                     0.18
E HML-R&D LEV (%)                       5.27                 (3.74)                8.27
E rf (%)                                 0.49                (0.50)               0.86
 (rf ) (%)                               2.75                (0.48)               0.95
b10
 g                                      -0.29                (0.11)               -0.26
Notes: Empirical moments are computed using annual data from 1929 to 2016. All data
sources are discussed in Appendix A. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors adjusted
for heteroscedasticity. The entries for the model are obtained by repetitions of small sam-
ples. Our baseline calibration is detailed in table 6. The coefficient b10
                                                                         g is based on the
                                                        H
following measure of capital composition: Kg /Ktot - KR&D /Kp .


quires a levered premium of 6.03%. Furthermore, our model replicates the additional
excess return required to hold R&D capital. This result obtains because the present
value of patent rents is very sensitive to volatility shocks, meaning that it declines
when volatility increases. In addition, in this state of the world the household prefers
to reallocate resources toward safer forms of capital. In the presence of adjustment
costs, the reallocation amplifies the fall in the market value of R&D capital and
makes the implied risk-premium higher. As a result, periods of higher volatility are
associated with a contraction in innovative investments and medium-run growth.




                                            32
   In order to quantify the model-implied connection between capital reallocation and
growth, we estimate the following regression using simulated data:

               1
                   log Zp,t|t+10 = 0 + b10
                                        g · (Kg,t /Ktot,t - KR&D,t /Kp,t ),
               10

where Ktot := Kp,t + Kg,t and Kp,t captures the book value of private capital. This
specification mimics as closely as possible what we do in the data and produces a
negative coefficient consistent with our estimates. This result is very supportive of
our framework as this moment was not directly targeted by our calibration.


4.2    Inspecting the mechanism.
In this section, we discuss the role played by different elements in our model. We do
so by removing one element at the time from our benchmark calibration and compare
the most relevant changes in our simulated moments of interest. Since our goal is
to highlight the marginal relevance of each parameter, we do not recalibrate the
entire model and discuss only the subset of moments that change significantly across
different settings in table 8. For comparability, we adjust slightly the scale parameter
for intangible capital congestion, , to maintain average growth unchanged.

The role of the government sector. Without accounting for government in-
vestment, the model produces counterfactual results on the reallocation of resources
upon the arrival of volatility news shocks. As shown in figure 7, in this case the agent
finds it optimal to increase R&D investment in order to slowly increase growth and
compensate for the higher level of volatility.
   First of all, this is not consistent with our VAR evidence. Furthermore, because
of adjustment costs, this reallocation implies an appreciation of R&D capital and a
stronger depreciation of tangible capital when volatility increases. These results are
not consistent with what we document in table 2, as innovation intensive firms are
not a hedge against volatility shocks.
   The top portion of table 8 confirms that this setting predicts a stronger risk pre-
mium on regular capital and a counterfactually modest average HM L - R&D. This
setting implies also a higher private investment-to-GDP ratio which results directly
from the fact that we have eliminated the government sector and hence all savings
are employed for private investment.


                                           33
                       Table 8:      Inspecting the Mechanism
Moment                                Data         Benchmark              Altern. Model
                                Est.     St.Err.
                                                                         No Gov ( = 1)
E [(Ip + S )/Y ] (%)           15.06      (0.79)          31.45              39.76
     LEV
E rp,ex   (%)                   5.04      (1.98)          6.03                8.33
E HML-R&D LEV (%)               5.27      (3.74)          8.27                1.00
                                                                         No Vol (v = 0)
 (y ) (%)                       4.85      (0.90)          4.81                4.51
 (s) (%)                       10.20      (1.88)          8.29                7.72
 (Ig /Y ) (%)                   2.79      (1.00)          1.73                1.49
E HML-R&D LEV (%)               5.27      (3.74)          8.27                7.63
                                                                        CRRA ( = 1/2 )
 (itot )/ (y )                 2.14       (0.11)          1.70                1.64
 (s) (%)                       10.20      (1.88)          8.29                7.55
 (Ig /Y ) (%)                   2.79      (1.00)          1.73                1.12
     LEV
E rp,ex    (%)                  5.04      (1.98)          6.03                0.82
E HML-R&D LEV (%)               5.27      (3.74)          8.27                3.81
                                                                        CRRA ( = 10 )
 (y ) (%)                       4.85      (0.90)           4.81               3.88
 (c)/ (y )                     0.61       (0.11)           0.68               1.08
 (itot )/ (y )                  2.14      (0.11)           1.70               0.81
 (s) (%)                       10.20      (1.88)           8.29               3.90
E [(Ip + S )/Y ] (%)           15.06      (0.79)          31.45              19.71
 ((Ip + S )/Y ) (%)             3.41      (0.67)           2.57               0.30
(c,  ln(Ip + S ))               0.84      (0.41)           0.81               0.99
 (Ig /Y ) (%)                   2.79      (1.00)          1.73                0.35
     LEV
E rp,ex    (%)                  5.04      (1.98)          6.03                2.15
E HML-R&D LEV (%)               5.27      (3.74)          8.27                2.31
E rf (%)                        0.49      (0.50)           0.86              10.20
                                                                        PS (v = -0.015)
E [rg,ex ] (%)                                            0.00               -0.01
E HML-R&D LEV (%)               5.27      (3.74)          8.27                9.09
Notes: Empirical moments are computed using annual data from 1929 to 2014. All data
sources are discussed in Appendix A. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors adjusted
for heteroscedasticity. The entries for the model are obtained by repetitions of small sam-
ples. Our baseline calibration is detailed in table 6. `No Gov' (`No vol') refers to a setting
with no government sector (no volatility shocks). `PS' (`CRRA') denotes the case with
preference shocks (time-additive preferences).




                                             34
Fig. 7. The Model without Government versus VAR. This figure shows the re-
sponse to productivity volatility shocks of the ratio of total gross government investment
to output (Ig /Y ), detrended total gross private investment (Ip ); detrended gross private
R&D investment (IR&D ), and detrended private output (Yp ). The VAR-implied responses
are obtained as in figure 3, top panels. The model-implied responses are obtain from our
benchmark quarterly specification without the government sector ( = 1).


The role of volatility shocks. Removing time varying volatility produces several
intuitive and yet relevant results. First of all, output growth volatility declines by 30
basis points per year, i.e., a relevant amount in a setting with three different capital
stocks and endogenous labor. This moderation is even more evident when we focus
on the volatility of both R&D investment and the ratio of government investment-to-
GDP. We note that according to our model the cost of equity for innovation-intensive
firms would decline by 80 basis points. In this counterfactual scenario, if we do not
adjust the parameter , average R&D-capital increases and the average GDP growth
increases by almost 1% over a decade.

The role of preferences. Given our benchmark calibration, we can remove aver-
sion to volatility shocks by either setting the relative risk aversion to 1/2 or by setting
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) to 1/10. In figure 8 (top panels),
we show that when we lower our relative risk aversion to 1/2, the model produces
no reallocation with respect to vol shocks. Consistent with this finding, in table 8
we see that investments flows become smoother. Not surprisingly, the model-implied
risk premia decline substantially as news shocks are no longer separately priced. All
other macroeconomic moments remain almost unchanged given that we are keeping
fixed the IES.



                                            35
                                      (a) RRA=1/2




                                       (b) RRA=10

Fig. 8. The Model with CRRA. This figure shows the response to productivity volatil-
ity shocks of the ratio of total gross government investment to output (Ig /Y ), detrended
total gross private investment (Ip ); detrended gross private R&D investment (IR&D ), and
detrended private output (Yp ). The VAR-implied responses are obtained as in figure 3, top
panels. The model-implied responses are obtain from our benchmark quarterly specification
with RRA set to either 1/2 or 10.



   In contrast, increasing the risk aversion to 10 implies a much lower IES. In this case,
we face both excessively low risk premia and excessively high risk-free rate, at odds
with the data. On the macroeconomic side, all second moments depart substantially
from the data. Furthermore, the reallocation with respect to vol shocks goes in the
opposite direction of that found in the data (figure 8, bottom panels) and prescribes
an increase in economic activity across all horizons.




                                           36
5    Conclusions
We propose a novel way to think about economic slowdowns associated to high-
uncertainty periods. Specifically, focusing on U.S. micro data we show the existence of
a significant positive link between uncertainty and investment reallocation away from
innovation-oriented stocks. Furthermore, we confirm these dynamics in aggregate
data that account for government investment flows. Our empirical tests suggest that
this reallocation is a leading indicator of sluggish long-run growth.
    We rationalize these novel empirical findings in a production economy in which (a)
the representative agent has an explicit fear toward uncertainty; and (b) government
capital is productive and has very stable cash-flows because it gives up to monopolistic
rents. During periods of high uncertainty, private capital is perceived as extremely
risky, as the private sector has monopoly power and the present value of monopoly
rents is highly exposed to uncertainty shocks. With recursive preferences, there is
a motive to reallocate resources away from risky activities and invest more in safer
capital stocks. This reallocation generates a medium-run decline in growth broadly
consistent with the data.
    Future work should focus on the interplay between government investment and dis-
tortionary taxation. Furthermore, since government capital is related to uncertainty,
it should be used to explain the cross-section of equity returns.




                                          37
References
Abel, A., B. Bernankee, and D. Roushore. Macroeconomics. 2016.

Akcigit, U., J. Grigsby, T. Nicholas, and S. Stantcheva. Taxation and innovation in the 20th
century. Working Paper 24982 National Bureau of Economic Research September 2018.

Alfaro, I., N. Bloom, and Z. Lin. 2018. The Finance Uncertainty Multiplier.

Aschauer, D. 1988. Government spending and the "falling rate of profit.". Economic
Perspectives (May):11­17.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis. 2016. Measuring economic policy uncertainty*.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4):1593.

Bansal, R., and I. Shaliastovich. 2013. A Long-Run Risks Explanation of Predictability
Puzzles in Bond and Currency Markets. Review of Financial Studies.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron. 2004. Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
Pricing Puzzles. Journal of Finance 59:1481­1509.

Barro, R. J., J. Fernandez-Villaverde, O. Levintal, and A. Mollerus. 2017. Safe Assets.

Basu, S., and B. Bundick. Uncertainty shocks in a model of effective demand. Working
paper, NBER 2012.

Baxter, M., and R. G. King. 1993. Fiscal policy in general equilibrium. The American
Economic Review 83(3):315­334.

Belo, F., and J. Yu. 2013. Government Investment and the Stock Market. Journal of
Monetary Economics 60(3).

Belo, F., V. Gala, and J. Li. 2013. Government Spending, Political Cycles and the Cross
Section of Stock Returns. Journal of Financial Economics 107(2).

Berger, D., I. Dew-Becker, and S. Giglio. 2018. Uncertainty shocks as second-moment news
shocks. Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Berndt, A., H. Lustig, and S. Yeltekin. 2012. How does the u.s government finance fiscal
shocks? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(1):69­104.

Bloom, N. 2009. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77(3):623­685. ISSN
1468-0262.

                                            38
Bloom, N., S. Bond, and J. Van Reenen. 2007. Uncertainty and investment dynamics. The
Review of Economic Studies 74(2):391­415.

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. J. Terry. 2018. Really
uncertain business cycles. Econometrica 86(3).

Boskin, M. J., M. Robinson, and A. Huber. Government Saving, Capital Formation, and
Wealth in the United States, 1947-85 pages 287­356. University of Chicago Press 1989.

Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2014. Concepts and Methods of the U.S. National Income
and Product Accounts. NIPA Handbook.

Chan, L. K. C., J. Lakonishok, and T. Sougiannis.        http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/0022-
1082.00411 2001. The stock market valuation of research and development expenditures.
Journal of Finance 56(6):2431­2456. ISSN 1540-6261. doi: 10.1111/0022-1082.00411.

Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo. 2011. When is the government spending
multiplier large? Journal of Political Economy 119(1):78­121.

Comin, D., and M. Gertler. 2006. Medium Term Business Cycles. American Economic
Review 96(3):523­551.

Comin, D., M. Gertler, P. Ngo, and A. M. Santacreu. 2017. Stock price fluctuations and
productivity growth. Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Corhay, A., H. Kung, and L. Schmid. Competition, markups and predictable returns.
Working Paper, Duke University 2015.

Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel. 2006. Intangible Capital and Economic Growth.

Croce, M. M. 2014. Long-Run Productivity Risk A New Hope for Production-Based Asset
Pricing ? Journal of Monetary Economics.

Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerron-Quintana, J. F. Rubio-Ramirez, and M. Uribe. 2011.
Risk matters: The real effects of volatility shocks. American Economic Review 101(6):
2530­61.

Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerron-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. Rubio-Ramirez. Novem-
ber 2015. Fiscal volatility shocks and economic activity. American Economic Review 105
(11):3352­84.

Futagami, K., Y. Morita, and A. Shibata. 1993. Dynamic analysis of an endogenous growth
model with public capital. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 95(4):607­25.

                                            39
Gilchrist, S., J. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek. Uncertainty, financial frictions and investment
dynamics. Working paper, NBER 2014.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman. 1988. Investment capacity utilization
and the real business cycle. American Economic Review 78.

Gurkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and J. H. Wright. 2007. The u.s. treasury yield curve: 1961 to
the present. Journal of Monetary Economics 54(8):2291 ­ 2304.

Hayashi, F. 1982. Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation.
Econometrica 50.

Howell, S. T. April 2017. Financing innovation: Evidence from r&d grants. American
Economic Review 107(4):1136­64.

Jermann, U. J. feb 1998. Asset pricing in production economies. Journal of Monetary
Economics 41(2):257­275.

Jones, L., R. Manuelli, H. Siu, and E. Stacchetti. 2005. Fluctuations in convex models of
endogenous growth I: Growth effects. Review of Economic Dynamics 8:780­804.

Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng. 2015. Measuring uncertainty. American Economic
Review 105(3):1177­216.

Justiniano, A., and G. Primiceri. 2008. The Time Varying Volatility of Macroeconomic
Fluctuations. American Economic Review 98(3).

Kamps, C. The dynamic macroeconomic effects of public capital : theory and evidence for
OECD countries. Springer 2004.

Kelly, B., L. Pastor, and P. Veronesi. 2013. The Price of Political Uncertainty: Theory and
Evidence from the Option Market.

Kozeniauskas, N., A. Orlik, and L. Veldkamp. 2018. What are uncertainty shocks? Journal
of Monetary Economics 100.

Kozeniauskas, N., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran. 2019. The tail that wags the
economy: Belief-driven business cycles and persistent stagnation. Working Paper.

Kung, H.      http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304405X14001901 2015.
Macroeconomic linkages between monetary policy and the term structure of interest
rates.   Journal of Financial Economics 115(1):42 ­ 57.     ISSN 0304-405X.     doi: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2014.09.006.

                                              40
Kung, H., and L. Schmid. 2012. Innovation, Growth and Asset Prices.

Kung, H., and L. Schmid. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12241 2015. Innovation, growth,
and asset prices. The Journal of Finance 70(3):1001­1037. ISSN 1540-6261. doi: 10.1111/
jofi.12241.

Ludvigson, S., S. ma, and S. Ng. 2018. Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous
Impulse or Endogenous Response? One sentence.

Lustig, H., C. Sleet, and S. Yeltekin. 2008. Fiscal Hedging with Nominal Assets. Journal
of Monetary Economics 55(4):710­727.

McGrattan, E. R., and E. C. Prescott. 2009. Technology Capital and the U.S. Current
Account. American Economic Review, forthcoming 100:1493­1522.

Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi. 2012. Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock Prices.
Journal of Finance 64(4):1219­1264.

Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi. 2013. Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia. Journal of
Financial Economics.

Peterson, G. E. 1990. Is public infrastructure undersupplied? Boston FED Conference
Series 34:113­142.




                                          41
Appendix A: Data Description
In what follows, we detail the sources of our data by grouping them in major groups.


A.1 Aggregate Data
The national income and product accounts (NIPAs) are a set of economic accounts
produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). See Bureau of Economic Anal-
ysis (2014) for more underlying details on the construction of the data series.
   Government Investment. Data are from the NIPA table 3.1. The quarterly
data are seasonally adjusted. Government gross investment consists of spending by
both general government and government enterprises for fixed assets that benefit the
public or that assist government agencies in their productive activities. Put another
way, government gross investment is a measure of the additions to, and replacements
of, the stock of government-owned fixed assets. It consists of investment by both
general government and government enterprises in structures (such as highways and
schools), in equipment (such as military hardware), and in intellectual property prod-
ucts (software and research and development), and it includes own-account investment
by government. See Bureau of Economic Analysis (2014) for more details.
   Real Government Investment. Data are from the NIPA table 3.9.1. Units are
percent change from the previous period. The quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.
Quarterly (annual) data in chained 2012 dollars are not available prior to 2002 (1967),
so we use the avaiable percent change data series to construct the series of levels.
   Government Expenditures and Investment. Data are from the NIPA table
1.1.5. The quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. Compared to government invest-
ment, this data series also includes government expenditures.
   Private Investment. Fixed private investment data are from the NIPA table
1.1.5. The quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. See Bureau of Economic Analysis
(2014) for more details.
   Real Private Investment. Data are from the NIPA table 1.1.6. Units are billions
of chained 2012 dollars. The quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.
   Private Research and Development (R&D) Investment. Data are from
the NIPA table 1.5.5. Units are billions of dollars. The quarterly data are seasonally
adjusted.



                                          42
   Real Private Research and Development (R&D) Investment. The nomi-
nal series values are converted to real values using the implied deflator between the
reported nominal private gross investment (NIPA table 1.1.5) and real private gross
investment (NIPA table 1.1.6).
   Personal Consumption Expenditures. Data are from the NIPA table 1.1.5.
The quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.
   Real Personal Consumption Expenditures. Data are from NIPA table 1.1.6.
Units are billions of chained 2012 dollars. The quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.
   Gross Domestic Product. Data are from the NIPA table 1.1.5. The quarterly
data are seasonally adjusted.
   Private Sector Output. Data are "Gross value added: GDP: Business" from
the BEA. The quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.
   Real Private Sector Output. Data are "Real gross value added: GDP: Busi-
ness" from the BEA. Units are billions of chained 2012 dollars. The quarterly data
are seasonally adjusted.
   Total Factor Productivity Growth. Business sector TFP data are from the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
   Government and Private Capital. Capital stock data are from the NIPA table
5.10. We use the data series for fixed assets (structures, equipment, and intellectual
property products) and thus our total capital stock (Kg + Kg ) does not include in-
ventories. Capital stocks are accumulated totals computed from gross investment,
consumption of fixed capital, and other adjustments. See Bureau of Economic Anal-
ysis (2014) for more details.
   Employment. Data are from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Private
employment is measured as all the seasonally adjusted number of employees in all
private industries. Government employment is measured as the seasonally adjusted
number of employees across all levels of government.
   Price Index and Inflation. We use the "All items in U.S. city average, all urban
consumers, not seasonally adjusted" price index downloaded from the US Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) website. This price index is used both to deflate nominal data
from Compustat and to compute inflation.
   Integrated Volatility. We compute our quarterly integrated volatility measure
            1   N                 2
as 66 × N       i=1 (rm,i - rf,i ) where N is the number of daily observations in a given




                                           43
quarter and rm,i - rf,i is the market excess return for a given day. Market excess return
data were downloaded from the Kenneth R. French Data Library.
   Price-Dividend Ratio. Price and dividend data are from Robert Shiller's web-
site (http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm). These monthly data series
begin in 1871. We compute a quarterly price-dividend ratio data series by dividing
the third month's price by the sum of dividends in each quarter. See the website for
more details on the underlying data construction.
   Treasury Zero-Coupon Yields. Data are from the Federal Reserve website
(http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2006/200628/200628abs.html). We
aggregate the raw daily data to a quarterly frequency by taking the average within
each quarter. The resulting quarterly data series begins in 1961:Q2. See Gurkaynak
et al. (2007) for details on the computation of the underlying daily data series.
   Government Bond Returns. Data are from Ibbotson Associates. Returns
are available for one-month Treasury bills (TBILL), intermediate-term bonds (IT-
GOVBD), and long-term government bonds (LTGOVBD).
   Moody's Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield Spreads. Data are from the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.. The spreads are computed relative to the 10-year
Treasury Constant Maturity. The quarterly data series are computed as the quarterly
averages of the monthly series.
   Economic Policy Uncertainty. Data are downloaded from the Economic Policy
Uncertainty website (http://www.policyuncertainty.com/us_historical.html).
We use the US Historical News-Based Policy Index. This index is constructed based
on the results from keyword searches for terms related to economic and policy un-
certainty in major US newspapers. See the website and Baker et al. (2016) for more
details.


A.2      Micro Data
Compustat. Our full sample includes all firm-year observations with a non-missing
value for total assets (AT) and keeps only firms incorporated in the USA (fic=="USA").
The annual data begin in 1950. Investment is the sum of capital expenditures (CAPX)
and R&D expense (XRD). Nominal values are converted to real using our chosen CPI
index. The CPI index is available at a monthly frequency and it is merged onto the
Compustat data using the month of the end-of-period date (DATADATE). We also
merge on monthly data from CRSP using DATADATE. We identify industry using

                                          44
the standard industry classification code (SIC). Variables used to compute measures
of profitability are total revenue (REVT), and operating income before depreciation
(OIBDP). Total debt used in measures of leverage is the sum of total long-term debt
(DLTT) and debt in current liabilities (DLC). Book equity, which is used to compute
book leverage, is defined as the sum of the book value of stockholders' equity (CEQ)
and balance sheet deferred taxes (TXDITC) less the book value of preferred stock
(PST).
   CRSP. Market equity data are from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP). Before merging with Compustat, we filter observations to keep ordinary
common shares (SHRCD (10, 11)) that trade on the main US exchanges (EXCHCD
(1, 2, 3)). We merge the CRSP data with our Compustat sample using the linked
company code (LPERMNO) that connects the CRSP company code (PERMNO)
with the Compustat company code (GVKEY). The CRSP/Compustat Merged linking
table is provided by CRSP. Market capitalization in thousands is computed as the
product of the absolute value of close price (PRC) and shares outstanding (SHROUT)
divided by 106 .




                                        45
Appendix B : Additional Empirical Results
In this section we report additional results to support our reallocation findings. Table
B1 shows the composition of our top and bottom R&D intensity-sorted portfolios.

                        Table B1: R&D Intensity Portfolios
 Panel A: Top 10 Industries in R&D-Sorted Portfolios
                  Low-R&D                                          High-R&D
             Category               % Count                    Category              % Count
 Eating Places                           9.9        Biological Pds, Ex Diagnstics       12.3
 Variety Stores                          3.2        Prepackaged Software                11.0
 Grocery Stores                          3.2        Pharmaceutical Preparations         10.5
 Crude Petroleum and Natural Gas         3.0        Semiconductor, Related Device        5.7
 Women's Clothing Stores                 2.8        Electromedical Apparatus             3.5
 Misc Amusement and Rec Service          2.8        In Vitro, In Vivo Diagnostics        3.4
 Department Stores                       2.5        Cmp Integrated Sys Design            2.9
 Family Clothing Stores                  2.2        Computer Communications Equip        2.9
 Misc Shopping Goods Stores              1.9        Tele and Telegraph Apparatus         2.8
 Catalog and Mail-Order Houses           1.9        Computer Software and Services       2.7
 Total                                  33.5        Total                               57.8
 Panel B: R&D-sorted Portfolios Summary Statistics
                                           High-R&D                    Low-R&D
                                                      Portfolio returns
Mean                                          19.13                        13.71
Standard deviation                            32.60                        21.67
Sample size (number of months)                 540                          540
                                                   Portfolio characteristics
Market capital share                          11.94                       11.15
R&D/Assets                                    16.89                        0.04
Revenue/Assets                               102.34                       155.51
Book leverage                                 44.20                        59.88
Average number of firms                        439                          445

Notes: Panel A shows the top-10 industries in our baseline high and low R&D-sorted
portfolios. We count SIC codes across time and firms in each portfolio and report the most
frequent industries within each portfolio. Panel B reports summary statistics for our port-
folios. Returns are equal-weighted and presented in annualized percentages. The average
market capital share, R&D/assets, sales/assets, and leverage are presented in percentages.
R&D/assets is defined as annual research & development expenses divided by total assets
and is used as our benchmark measure of R&D intensity. Sales/assets is defined as annual
net sales divided by total assets. Leverage is expressed as a fraction of total assets.




                                               46
          Table B2: Reallocation across R&D-sorted Firms (EPU)
                                         R &D                           i
                 [·]i,tt+h = i + 0 + rnd Assets i,t EP Ut + z zt + cntrlt   i = 1, ..., N
                                                                                 R&D
Horiz.                             Inv.(%)                                       Assets (p.p.)
(years)                Balanced     90%T          80%T             Balanced       90%T            80%T
h=3       rnd             -0.41      -0.72         -0.90              -0.18         -0.24          -0.31
                         (0.14)     (0.17)        (0.13)             (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.05)
          Wald           27.00      55.92         85.91              59.78        105.67          42.89
                        [0.000]    [0.000]       [0.000]            [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.000]
          R2 Loss          -11        -13           -22                -75           -80            -79

h=4       rnd             -0.39        -0.59        -0.83              -0.23           -0.30       -0.42
                         (0.14)       (0.14)       (0.13)             (0.03)          (0.03)      (0.06)
          Wald           34.76        57.80        80.26              60.06          116.50       53.04
                        [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]            [0.000]         [0.000]     [0.000]
          R2 Loss          -12          -12          -22                -72             -79         -81

h=5       rnd             -0.42        -0.53        -0.71              -0.27          -0.36        -0.50
                         (0.13)       (0.12)       (0.13)             (0.04)         (0.03)       (0.06)
          Wald           31.08        47.83        61.49              60.40         146.56        66.58
                        [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]            [0.000]        [0.000]      [0.000]
          R2 Loss          -11           -9          -18                -71            -77          -78
                         N=96        N=196        N=273               N=96          N=196        N=273
Notes: Our quarterly data sample starts in 1972 and ends in 2016. Cumulative investment
growth rates, Inv., are annualized. All estimates are obtained through GMM using a
cross section of firms sorted on R&D intensity. Numbers in parentheses are Newey-West
adjusted standard errors. We test H0 : rnd  0 and denote a significance level of 1%, 5%,
and 10% with  ,  ,  , respectively. We also test the join hypothesis H0 : 0 = rnd = 0
and report the implied Wald test (p-value in square brackets) as well as the associated
reduction in R2 from removing all volatility terms (EP U and EP U · R&D/Assets) from
our benchmark specification. The price-dividend level is denoted as pd. The variable zt is
the residual from the regression pdt = pd + EP Ut + zt . The firm-level R&D intensity
average, R&D/Assetsi,t , is computed over 3-year subsamples. We control for firm-level
Tobin's Q and cash flow profitability, as well as for aggregate credit conditions as measured
by the 10-year Baa credit spread (cntrlt i ).



   Table B2 shows that our firm-level reallocation results apply also when we use a
broad measure of uncertainty such as the EPU measure by Baker et al. (2016).
   In table B3, we show that our firm-level results are unchanged when we include a
time fixed effect.




                                                 47
      Table B3: Reallocation across R&D-sorted Firms (Fixed Effect)
                                         R &D                            i
                 [·]i,tt+h = i + 0 + rnd Assets i,t iV olt + z zt + cntrlt   i = 1, ..., N
                                                                                   R&D
Horiz.                             Inv.(%)                                         Assets (p.p.)
(years)                Balanced     90%T           80%T              Balanced       90%T            80%T
h=3       rnd             -3.14      -4.81          -5.69               -1.25         -1.44          -1.88
                         (1.07)     (0.91)         (0.77)              (0.15)        (0.15)         (0.28)
          Wald             9.40     28.70          54.72               72.23         94.85          46.39
                        [0.009]    [0.000]        [0.000]             [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.000]
          R2 Loss           -3         -5            -10                 -56           -66            -69

h=4       rnd             -3.06         -4.43        -5.44              -1.41           -1.66        -2.55
                         (0.93)        (0.82)       (0.76)             (0.18)          (0.18)       (0.39)
          Wald           16.60         36.47        59.53              75.86          100.30        46.69
                        [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]            [0.000]         [0.000]      [0.000]
          R2 Loss           -4            -6          -12                -52             -63          -72

h=5       rnd             -3.06        -4.20         -4.94              -1.60           -1.94        -3.01
                         (0.85)       (0.75)        (0.78)             (0.21)          (0.18)       (0.43)
          Wald           28.70        42.04         43.24              64.91          126.35        50.35
                        [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.000]            [0.000]         [0.000]      [0.000]
          R2 Loss           -5           -6           -12                -50             -62          -69
                         N=96        N=196         N=273               N=96           N=196        N=273
Notes: Our quarterly data sample starts in 1972 and ends in 2016. Cumulative investment
growth rates, Inv., are annualized. All estimates are obtained through GMM using a cross
section of firms sorted on R&D intensity. Numbers in parentheses are Newey-West adjusted
standard errors. We test H0 : rnd  0 and denote a significance level of 1%, 5%, and 10%
with  ,  ,  , respectively. We also test the join hypothesis H0 : 0 = rnd = 0 and report
the implied Wald test (p-value in square brackets) as well as the associated reduction in
R2 from removing all volatility terms (iV ol and iV ol · R&D/Assets) from our benchmark
specification. Integrated return volatility and price-dividend level are denoted as ivol and
pd. The variable zt is the residual from the regression pdt = pd + ivolt + zt . The firm-level
R&D intensity average, R&D/Assetsi,t , is computed over 3-year subsamples. We control
for firm-level Tobin's Q and cash flow profitability, as well as for aggregate conditions by
including a time fixed effect.




                                                  48
         Table B4: Components of Government Gross Investment
Component                              Categories
Structures                             Buildings (residential, industrial,
                                       educational, hospital, and other)
                                       Highways and streets
                                       Sewer systems
                                       Water systems
                                       ...
Equipment                              Vehicles
                                       Electronics
                                       ...
Intellectual property products         Software
                                       R&D

Notes: Component breakdown as seen in NIPA table 3.9.5. Examples are from Bureau of
Economic Analysis (2014).


  Table B4 reports some of the BEA components and categories regarding govern-
ment investment, and figure B1 depicts the time series of both government investment
and capital to their private counterparts.




                                       Ig                                         Kg
     (a) Relative Gross Investment   Ig +Ip        (b) Relative Capital Stock   Kg +Kp


Fig. B1. Government Capital and Economic Fluctuations. The left panel shows
quarterly gross government investment (Ig ) as a share of total domestic investment (Ig +
Ip ), which also includes private gross investment (Ip ). The right panel shows the annual
stock of government capital (Kg ) as a share of the total domestic stock of capital (Kg +
Kp ), which also includes the private capital stock (Kp ). Our data sources are detailed in
Appendix A. For examples of government investment see table B4.




                                              49
   In figure figure B2(a), we show that there is something unique about government
investment that goes above and beyond the countercyclical behavior of total gov-
ernment expenditure. During recession periods, government expenditure increases
relative to total private expenditure (i.e., gross private investment plus consumption)
mainly through the public investment channel.




             (a) Average post-1950                           (b) Great Recession

Fig. B2. Reallocation During Recessions. In the left panel, we report the average path
of the variables of interest across the latest 10 NBER recessions starting from 1950. Time
t = 1 is the first quarter of the recession. The right panel focuses on the Great Recession only
(2007:Q4­2009:Q2). Total federal expenditure is denoted by G. Total private expenditure
is the sum of private consumption (C ) and gross private investment (Ip ). The subcomponet
of government expenditure associated to gross government investment is denoted as Ig . Our
data sources are detailed in Appendix A.



    This dynamic behavior has been even more pronounced during the Great Reces-
sion, with almost no sign of reversal three years after the beginning of the recession
(figure B2(b)).
    Given this observation, in table B5 we show reallocation effects across the gov-
ernment and the private sector. We note that periods of elevated uncertainty are
associated to a reallocation of both capital and labor from the private to the govern-
ment sector. Aggregate data confirm that uncertainty reduces the R&D investment
intensity in the private sector, whereas the government one remains unchanged.
    The VAR analysis in section 2.3 focuses on the sample period from 1972 to be
consistent with the other empirical evidence. However, it is possible to run this
analysis from 1961 given the availability of the underlying data. In figures B3 through


                                              50
           Table B5: Reallocation across Priv. and Gov. Sectors
Variable                          Private           Government                      PMG
                                Full Sample (T=540)
Investment(%)                       2.3                 1.4                           0.9
R&D/Assets(p.p.)                   0.05                0.08                          -0.02
Empl.(%)                            1.6                 1.2                           0.5
                            Top-20% iVol Periods (T=114)
Investment(%)                      -1.2                 1.1                           -2.3
R&D/Assets(p.p.)                   0.04                0.08                          -0.04
Empl.(%)                           -0.1                 0.9                           -1.0
Notes: Our sample starts in 1972 and ends in 2016. Investment and Empl denote the
forward-looking real growth rate of total investment and number of employees, respectively
(source: BEA and BLS). R&D/Assets(p.p.) refers to the forward-looking change in R&D
expense divided by assets over the same time-horizon in percentage points (source: BEA).
The panel `Top-20% iVol Periods' refers to months (T ) in which integrated US equity returns
volatility has been in its historical top-20th percentile.


B5, we show the equivalent of figures 1 through 3 using all available data. We find
that these figures are virtually unchanged compared to those in the main text.
   In figure B6, we show the response to both productivity level and productivity-
based uncertainty shocks from our main VAR specification (figure 3 only shows the
response to the latter). We observe that the role of productivity level shocks is similar
to that obtained using market volatility (figure 1).




                                            51
Fig. B3. Aggregate Capital Reallocation in a VAR with iVol. This figure shows the
response to both productivity growth shocks and volatility shocks of total gross government
investment (Ig ), total gross private investment (Ip ); gross private R&D investment (IR&D ),
and private output (Yp ). All results are based on the VAR specified in equations (2)­(3),
in which we use stock market integrated volatility to measure uncertainty. We control for
the 10-year Baa credit spread. All series are HP filtered and in log units. Our sources are
detailed in Appendix A. Our quarterly sample starts in 1961 and ends in 2016. Confidence
intervals are adjusted for heteroscedasticity.




                                             52
Fig. B4. Aggregate Capital Reallocation and Medium-Run Cycle. This figure
shows the response to volatility shocks of total gross government investment (Ig ), total
gross private investment (Ip ); gross private R&D investment (IR&D ), and private output
(Yp ). All results are based on the VAR specified in equations (2)­(3), in which we use stock
market integrated volatility to measure uncertainty. We control for the 10-year Baa credit
spread. In the top (bottom) panels, all series are HP (pass-band) filtered and in log units.
Our sources are detailed in Appendix A. Our quarterly sample starts in 1961 and ends in
2016. Confidence intervals are adjusted for heteroscedasticity.




                                             53
Fig. B5. Aggregate Capital Reallocation and Medium-Run Cycle (II). This
figure shows the response to productivity-based volatility shocks of total gross government
investment (Ig ), total gross private investment (Ip ); gross private R&D investment (IR&D ),
and private output (Yp ). All results are based on the VAR specified in equations (2)­(4),
in which we use stock market integrated volatility to measure uncertainty. We control for
the 10-year Baa credit spread. In the top (bottom) panels, all series are HP (pass-band)
filtered and in log units. Our sources are detailed in Appendix A. Our quarterly sample
starts in 1961 and ends in 2016. Confidence intervals are adjusted for heteroscedasticity.




                                             54
Fig. B6. Aggregate Capital Reallocation in a VAR with Productivity Vol. This
figure shows the response to both productivity growth shocks and productivity volatility
shocks of total gross government investment (Ig ), total gross private investment (Ip ); gross
private R&D investment (IR&D ), and private output (Yp ). All results are based on the
VAR specified in equations (2) and (4), in which we use productivity volatility to measure
uncertainty. We control for the 10-year baa credit spread. All series are HP filtered and
in log units. Our sources are detailed in Appendix A. Our quarterly sample starts in 1972
and ends in 2016. Confidence intervals are adjusted for heteroscedasticity.




                                             55
                       Table C1: Productivity Uncertainty
Data            Persistence of Log-Vol. Volatility of Log-Vol.                              Wald Test
                          (v )                   (v )                                     (H0 : bi
                                                                                                 v = 0 i)
Quarterly                 0.73                   0.14                                          20.95
                         (0.17)                 (0.06)                                         [0.01]

Notes: This table reports results from estimating the system of equations (C2)­(C4) aug-
mented with the following representation for log-volatility

                log(volt ) = cv + v log(volt-1 ) + v     v,t   + bv|sr   a,t   + bv|lr   x,t ,

in which v,t refers to a standardized volatility-specific shocks, as we control for both short-
run productivity shocks ( a,t ) and growth news shocks ( x,t ). Growth news shocks are
extracted by estimating xt = x xt-1 + x,t . Numbers in parentheses are Newey-West ad-
justed standard errors. Numbers in square brackets are p-values for the null hypotheses
that productivity volatility is constant (H0 : bi
                                                v = 0 i = 1, ..., 9).



Appendix C : Ex-ante Productivity Volatility
In the spirit of Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013), we form the following array of fore-
casting variables

                      Ft = [yt (1), yt (2), ...yt (6), inft , pdt , iV olt ],                        (C1)

where y (m) is the yield of a US Treasury bond with maturity m, inf denotes infla-
tion, and pd refers to the price-dividend ratio. We extract expected volatility from
productivity growth (a) by estimating the following equation

                           at+1 = µ + xt + explog(volt )             a,t+1                           (C2)
                               x t = bx F t                                                          (C3)

where xt captures the conditional mean of productivity and expected volatility is
specified by the following projection:

                                   log volt = bv
                                               0 + bv Ft .                                           (C4)

We estimate these equations and report summary results for quarterly data in table
C1. A standard Wald test rejects the null hypothesis that there is no predictability
in productivity volatility. Our volatility measure is persistent and volatile.


                                                56
Fig. C1. Productivity uncertainty. This figure shows conditional volatility of produc-
tivity growth. We recover this measures by estimating the system of equation (C2)­(C4)
by GMM. Our sources are detailed in Appendix A. Our sample starts in 1972 and ends in
2016.




   We show our fitted volatility processes in figure C1 and make two remarks. First,
our estimates replicate the time-pattern documented in the literature for other macro
quantities, as we capture both the post-1980 Great Moderation and the subsequent
turbulence period. Second, productivity volatility is countercyclical.




                                         57
Fig. C2. Relative Size of Government Capital and Future Growth. The vertical
axis refers to the residuals of the regression of forward moving average of aggregate an-
nual productivity growth (at,t+n /n, n = 5, 7, 10) on the forecasting variables denoted
as controlst mentioned in table 5. In each panel, on the horizontal axis we use one of
our measures of innovation capital (CapitalM easures). Our data sources are detailed in
Appendix A.




                                           58
