                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  U.S. TRADE POLICY IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

                                     Douglas A. Irwin

                                    Working Paper 26256
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w26256


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




I am grateful to Gene Grossman for helpful comments. This paper is forthcoming in the Annual
Review of Economics. 10.1146/annurev-economics-070119-024409. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Douglas A. Irwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
U.S. Trade Policy in Historical Perspective
Douglas A. Irwin
NBER Working Paper No. 26256
September 2019
JEL No. F13,N71,N72

                                          ABSTRACT

This survey reviews the broad changes in U.S. trade policy over the course of the nation's history.
Import tariffs have been the main instrument of trade policy and have had three main purposes: to
raise revenue for the government, to restrict imports and protect domestic producers from foreign
competition, and to reach reciprocity agreements that reduce trade barriers. These three objectives
­ revenue, restriction, and reciprocity ­ accord with three consecutive periods in history when
one of them was predominant. The political economy of these tariffs has been driven by the
interaction between political and economic geography, namely, the location of trade-related
economic interests in different regions and the political power of those regions in Congress. The
paper also addresses the impact of trade policies on the U.S. economy, such as the welfare costs
of tariffs, the role of protectionism in fostering American industrialization, and the relationship
between the Smoot-Hawley tariff and the Great Depression of the 1930s.


Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu
                          U.S. Trade Policy in Historical Perspective


1. Introduction

       A country's trade policy affects the prices that prevail in its domestic market and

therefore the allocation of the country's resources. It should come as no surprise, therefore, that

trade policy is politically contentious because dollars and jobs are at stake whenever import

duties are adjusted up or down. As a result, trade policy issues have been a perennial part of the

American political debate.

       This article focuses on what can be learned from the history of U.S. trade policy. It will

address some of the key questions about the political economy of trade policy and the economic

impact of those policies. This brief survey will not address how international trade itself has

shaped the U.S. economy, but concentrate on the factors driving trade-policy outcomes and the

economic consequences of some of those policy outcomes. In doing so, I draw extensively on

my recent book Clashing over Commerce: A History of U.S. Trade Policy, which provides a

comprehensive look at historical evolution of U.S. trade policy.

       Section 2 provides an overview of the three main purposes of imports tariffs ­ revenue,

restriction, and reciprocity, as will be explained below ­ and the three eras in which one of those

purposes was predominant. The interplay between political and economic geography will be

examined as some of the key political economy factors shaping trade policy. Along with the

rules of the political system, these underlying factors ensure that policy is stable and has a strong

status-quo bias. Section 3 examines how the history of U.S. trade policy sheds light on the

classic issues of gains from trade and costs of protection. Section 4 looks at the impact of trade

policy on the American economy by addressing three long-standing historical questions: How

large were the economic stakes in the contentious North-South conflict prior to the Civil War?

                                                  1
Did protective tariffs accelerate U.S. industrialization and promote economic growth in the late

nineteenth century? Did the Smoot-Hawley tariff of 1930 spark a trade war that led to the Great

Depression? Section 5 offers some concluding thoughts.



2. Three Eras of U.S. Trade Policy

         International trade consists of exchanging exports of domestic goods and services for

imports of foreign goods and services. Governments can either encourage this trade with

subsidies or discourage it with taxes. This gives us four possible trade policies to consider:

export taxes, export subsidies, import taxes, and import subsidies.

         With respect to the United States, two of these four policies have little relevance: import

subsidies are almost never employed by any country, the United States being no exception, and

export taxes are expressly prohibited under article 1, section 9 of the Constitution.1 This leaves

export subsidies and import taxes. The United States has sometimes employed export subsidies,

but never on a large scale because of their budgetary cost. 2 Instead, import tariffs have been the

central focus of U.S. trade policy since the establishment of the federal government in 1789. 3

         What objective is a government trying to achieve in levying taxes on imports? Three

objectives stand out: to raise revenue for the federal government, to restrict imports and protect

domestic producers from foreign competition, and to achieve reciprocity through agreements that

reduce trade barriers. In Clashing over Commerce, I dub these the "three R's" of trade policy:

revenue, restriction, and reciprocity.


1
  At the constitutional convention of 1787, Southern states insisted that export taxes be banned. These states
produced most of the nation's exports and feared that Northern states would enact such taxes at their expense; see
Irwin (2017, 64).
2
  The Export-Import Bank was created in 1934 to provide credit guarantees for exporters, but its overall financial
support for exports has been small. For a history of the bank, see Becker and McClenahan 2003.
3
  Import quotas and voluntary export restraints were infrequently used policy instruments until the mid-twentieth
century.

                                                         2
         At any point in time, all three objectives can be in play. Yet the history of U.S. trade

policy can be divided into three eras in which one of them is predominate. From 1790 to 1860,

revenue considerations were paramount in the setting of tariffs because import duties raised

about 90 percent of receipts of the federal government. From 1861 to 1933, government revenue

came increasingly from domestic taxes and therefore import duties were imposed mainly to

protect domestic producers from foreign competition. 4 And from 1934 until 2016, the primary

goal of trade policy has been to reach trade agreements with other countries, either multilaterally

through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the World Trade Organization

(WTO), regionally in agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)

or the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), or bilaterally in agreements with

countries such as Israel, Singapore, Australia, Korea, and others. (To judge from his Tweets,

President Trump approves of tariffs for their ability to achieve all three goals of revenue,

restriction, and reciprocity simultaneously.)

         Figure 1 shows the average tariff on total and dutiable imports from 1790 to 2018. 5 The

average tariff on total imports includes imports of all goods (dutiable and duty-free), whereas the

average tariff on dutiable imports includes goods that are subject to import duties. A large gap

between these two series appeared after the Civil War when some products (such as coffee and

tea, bananas and tin) were put on the duty-free list. These items were generally not produced in

the United States so that no domestic producer would be harmed by giving the goods free entry.



4
  After the Civil War, the federal government introduced other domestic taxes to raise revenue and import duties
accounted for only about half of the government's revenue. The revenue effects of tariffs were still important, as
Irwin (1998b) shows in the context of the Laffer Curve, but the goal of protecting import-competing producers was
considered more important. After the introduction of the income tax in 1913, import duties accounted for a very
small fraction of government revenue.
5
  This series is based on tariff revenue divided by total imports or dutiable imports. As has long been recognized,
this measure is far from perfect, but there is no ideal single measure of a country's tariff policy. See Anderson and
Neary (2005) and Irwin (2010).

                                                          3
Since the 1980s, free-trade agreements have also allowed some countries to export their goods to

the United States without facing any duties. Setting aside such imports, the average tariff on

dutiable imports can be interpreted, somewhat simplistically but still usefully, as the average

degree of protection given to domestic producers facing foreign competition.

        In Figure 1, one can see a rough delineation of these three eras. In the revenue period

from 1790 to 1860, average tariffs rose from about 20 percent to 60 percent and then fell back

down to 20 percent. In the restriction period from 1861 to 1933, the average tariff on dutiable

imports jumped to 50 percent and remained at about that level for several decades. In the

reciprocity period from 1934 to the present, the average tariff fell sharply, and then leveled off at

about 5 percent. (In 2018, there is a very slight uptick in the average tariff as a result of the

Trump administration's duties on imports from China and on imports of steel.)




                                                   4
Figure 1: Average tariff on dutiable and total imports, 1790-2018

          70
                                             Dutiable Imports          Total Imports
          60

          50

          40
percent




          30

          20

          10

          0
           1790 1810 1830 1850 1870 1890 1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 2010

Source: Irwin (2017, 6), updated with data from the U.S. International Trade Commission.

               Shifts in the average tariff often reflect deliberate changes in tariff rates enacted by

Congress in legislation or negotiated by the president in trade agreements. 6 Yet most tariff acts

and trade agreements maintained the continuity of existing policy by making only incremental

changes to the structure and rate of import duties. Many of the fluctuations seen in Figure 1 do

not reflect deliberate policy actions by the government, but movements in import prices

interacting with specific duties, which are a tax of a particular dollar amount per imported

quantity rather than a percent of the import value. For most of U.S. history, specific duties

comprised about two thirds of the rates in the tariff schedule. The ad valorem equivalent of




6
 From 1815 to 1930 (excluding the Civil War), Congress enacted 19 major revisions to the tariff schedule, about
every 6 years.

                                                          5
specific duties is inversely related to the price of imports. 7 As a result, exogenous fluctuations in

import prices have sometimes produced large changes in average tariffs, even when there was no

change in the actual rates of duty set by policymakers and applied to imports.

         For example, the sharp rise in prices during World War I followed by their equally sharp

fall after the war moved tariffs down and up and largely account for the downward spike in

Figure 1. Similarly, severe deflation during the Great Depression in the early 1930s followed by

rising prices in the mid-1930s helps account for the upward spike in tariffs during that period.

Most of the dramatic reduction in the average tariff during and after World War II reflects the

higher inflation of that period. The average tariff on dutiable imports dropped from 33 percent in

1944 to 12 percent in 1950; about two thirds of this decline was driven by higher prices and one

third by the tariff reductions negotiated at the first GATT conference in 1947. Irwin (1998a)

finds that about 80 percent of the decline in tariffs from their peak in the early 1930s to the early

1950s was due to higher prices.

         Although the average tariff on dutiable imports has fluctuated considerably over time, the

underlying tariff rates chosen by policymakers have been much more stable than the figure

suggests. The basic levels are set by policymakers to achieve the objectives of revenue,

restriction, or reciprocity. What political economy factors help determine the average height of

import duties and their structure across goods?

2.1 Political Economy and Policy Stability

         Under the Constitution, Congress has the primary authority over trade policy and

therefore it is the principal forum in which decisions about tariffs have been made. From 1790-



7
 See Crucini 1994 and Irwin 1998a. For example, a $5 specific duty on a $100 shirt would amount to a 5 percent ad
valorem duty. If the shirt's price fell to $50, the ad valorem equivalent would rise to 10 percent; if the shirt's price
rose to $200, the ad valorem equivalent would fall to 2.5 percent.

                                                           6
1930, Congress voted on legislation that set the rates of duty on all imports. Beginning in 1934,

however, Congress began delegating to the president the authority to negotiate trade agreements

and no longer votes on the tariff schedule itself. Congress now occasionally votes on whether to

grant such negotiating authority and, since 1979, on any agreements submitted by the president. 8

         The standard assumption is that members of Congress seek to be reelected and therefore

vote on legislation in a way that satisfies the interests of their constituents. 9 These constituent

interests tend to be producers, not consumers, because producers are usually better organized for

political action and employ many workers who are voters. The nation's Founding Fathers

recognized that various factions would seek to pressure legislators to vote for their own

economic benefit, especially on trade policy. As James Madison wrote in Federalist 10: "Shall

domestic manufactures be encouraged, and in what degree, by restrictions on foreign

manufactures? are questions which would be differently decided by the landed and the

manufacturing classes, and probably by neither with a sole regard to justice and the public

good." He was pessimistic about whether "enlightened statesmen will be able to adjust these

clashing interests, and render them all subservient to the public good." That concern, in part, is

why the founders created a political system that made the passage of legislation difficult, thereby

forcing different factional interests to compromise with each other.

         The nation's producer interests are not uniformly distributed across the country because

different regions specialize in different economic activities. This regional specialization can



8
  In the grants of negotiating authority since 1934, the president has been authorized to reduce tariffs by up to a
certain percentage. Starting with the Tokyo Round of trade negotiations (1973-79), international agreements have
gone beyond tariffs to include the regulation of nontariff barriers. These provisions require changes in domestic law
and hence Congressional approval is required.
9
   This is a reasonable presumption because this is how members of Congress behave and even what they tell us. In
1881, Senator Thomas Bayard observed: "The member of the Senate and House are the advocates and
representatives of different local interests all of which naturally seek to influence the transactions of the government
on their own behalf." Quoted in Irwin 2017, 700n81.

                                                           7
persist for many decades. 10 For example, for about two centuries, cotton has been produced in

Mississippi and Alabama, corn in Iowa and Illinois, wheat in Kansas and Nebraska, tobacco in

Kentucky and North Carolina, sugar in Louisiana and Florida, coal in Pennsylvania and West

Virginia, iron and steel in Pennsylvania and Ohio, and farm equipment in Illinois and Indiana. In

the twentieth century, automobiles have been produced in Michigan, aircraft in Washington, and

high-technology and intellectual-property-intensive products in California, and so forth.

         The persistence of this regional specialization is consistent with region-specific resource

endowments (such as arable land suitable for certain crops) or locational advantages that imply

significant adjustment costs in moving capital and labor between regions. These factors lock in a

state's production pattern for many decades. Political economy models of trade policy, such as

Baldwin (1984) or Grossman and Helpman (1994), reflect this fact by using a specific factors

framework, wherein capital and labor employed in a particular industry are not mobile across

sectors of the economy. This framework implies that trade-related interests cut along industry

lines, depending on whether they produce goods for export or produce goods facing competition

from imports: workers in exporting industries have an interest in low tariffs and workers in

industries competing against imports have an interest in high tariffs. 11

         Just as the geography of production tends to be stable over time, the pattern of trade ­ the

types of goods a country exports and imports ­ also tends to be stable over time. This is because

the deep determinants of trade (technology and factor endowments) evolve slowly. Being


10
   As Holmes and Stevens (2004, p. 2008) note, "For industries producing nontradable goods or services like retail,
there is little [geographic] specialization, while for tradable goods like manufactures, mining output, and agricultural
products, there is a substantial amount of specialization across regions."
11
   Other models focus on mobile factors of production and have political divisions based on different interests of
those factors (landowners, capital owners, different types of labor, etc.) rather than industry; see Hiscox (2002) for
historical evidence and Blonigen (2011) for recent evidence on the question of specific versus mobile factors.
Median voter models that treat trade policy decision as a national referendum, such as Mayer (1984), are an
interesting benchmark, but models that emphasize legislative voting, such as Grossman and Helpman (2005), are
more in line with historical experience.

                                                           8
resource rich, the United States has tended to export land-intensive agricultural products and

resource-intensive manufactured goods. For most of the nineteenth century, the United States

exported cotton, wheat, and other agricultural produce and imported manufactured goods and

consumer products (coffee) or raw materials (tin). Due to its high land-to-labor ratio, the United

States has always been a high wage country and a net importer of unskilled labor-intensive

manufactured goods, such as textiles and apparel. 12

         The stable geographic location of domestic production and the stable composition of

foreign trade means that regional economic interests are stable over time. Both factors produce a

stable political geography of Congressional voting on trade policy. Of course, should an

industry's geographic location shift or the composition of trade change, regional economic

interests will be affected and Congressional voting patterns would adjust accordingly. A good

example of an industry changing its geographic location is the gradual migration of the cotton

textile industry from New England, where it originally arose in the early nineteenth century, to

the South in the early twentieth century. A key example of a changing trade pattern is America's

shift from being a net importer to a net exporter of manufactured goods in the late nineteenth

century due to the exploitation of mineral resources. 13 Yet such changes tend to happen

gradually, which again means that stability is the general rule.

         These claims about the stability of policy are supported by looking at the geographic

configuration of Congressional voting, the structure of the tariff over time, and the pattern of

partisanship over trade issues.



12
  Of course, cotton exports were based on the mass use of unskilled (slave) labor before the Civil War.
13
  In the mid-1890s, the United States became a net exporter of natural-resource-intensive manufactured goods,
which slowly began to crowd out exports of cotton and other products. Wright (1990) examined the factor content of
U.S. trade in manufactures from 1879 to 1940 and showed that exports were intensive in non-reproducible natural
resources. Irwin (2003a) finds that the exploitation of the massive Mesabi iron ore range in the 1890s led to a sharp
increase in iron and steel exports.

                                                         9
2.2 Stable Congressional Voting

       Because political representation is based on geography, regional economic interests

should translate into consistent voting patterns in Congress over time. For most of the nation's

history, the most important political divide over trade policy has been a geographic one on a

North-South axis. This reflected a stark division in the location of trade-affected production. In

the early nineteenth century, a manufacturing belt developed that stretched across the Northeast,

including cotton textiles in New England and iron in Pennsylvania and Ohio. These industries

usually faced competition from imports. Meanwhile, the South produced agricultural crops such

as cotton and tobacco that were exported. Consequently, from the time of the 1787 constitutional

convention until the Smoot-Hawley tariff in 1930, Congressional voting on trade measures has

shown a distinctive North-South split.

       To illustrate the persistence of this divide, Figure 2 depicts voting in the House of

Representatives on two tariff bills more than a century apart, one in 1828 and another in 1929,

the last House vote ever on the tariff schedule. Despite the vast changes in the U.S. economy

over that century ­ including large-scale industrialization, mass immigration, westward

movement in population, and enormous technological change ­ the Congressional vote is

remarkably similar. Even today, representatives from the Rust Belt of old manufacturing

industries that stretches from upstate New York into the industrial Midwest are largely opposed

to trade agreements, while representatives from the South and West tend to be more favorable to

such agreements.




                                                10
Figure 2: House voting on the tariff in 1828 (left panel) and 1929 (right panel)




Source: Irwin (2017,16).



2.3 Stable Tariff Structure

       The structure of the tariff across goods has also been fairly stable over long periods of

time. Figure 3 presents a simple scatterplot of the average tariff for the major schedules of the

tariff code in 1880 and in 1939. The tariff rates in 1880, which are largely those that emerged

after the Civil War, are highly correlated with those prevailing nearly 60 years later.




                                                 11
Figure 3: Average Tariff Rate by Schedule, 1880 and 1939




                                  90
                                  80
  Tariff rate (percent) in 1939




                                  70                                             Wool         Tobacco
                                  60                                                          Spirits
                                  50                                             Silk
                                                                              Sugar
                                  40                                            Earthenware
                                                                   Cotton
                                                            Chemicals
                                  30                   Agriculture
                                                               Metals Sundries
                                  20                        Flax
                                                           Pulp
                                  10                   Wood
                                   0
                                       0   10     20     30     40      50      60      70    80    90
                                                              Tariff rate (percent) in 1880


Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, various issues.

                                   Such an outcome is suggested by the Grossman and Helpman (1994) model of the

political economy of trade policy. They derive an expression that explains the structure of tariff

rates across industries:

                                                                         -  
                                                                      =    
                                                              (1 +  )    +   

where Ii is an (exogenous) indicator that equals one if industry i is represented by a lobby group

(and zero otherwise), a is the weight put on social welfare in the objective function of politicians,

L is the (exogenous) share of the population that is represented by lobbies, xi/mi is the inverse

import market share in industry i (xi being domestic output and mi being imports in sector i), and

i is the elasticity of import demand. The protection received by a sector is higher when it is

organized, when its output is high relative to competing imports, and when the price

responsiveness of the corresponding trade flows is low. Unless the import share, the elasticity,


                                                                         12
the population share, or the weight on social welfare changes, the tariff rates would not be

expected to change.

       The biggest changes in the tariff usually have been the adjustment of the entire schedule

of rates up or down rather than adjustments to the scale of tariff rates across industries. Referring

to the equation above, this suggests that the weight on social welfare (a) may change more than

the factors affecting particular industries. Such shifts in policy arise from changes in the political

power of different political parties or regions of the country. Thus, a move to a lower level of

average tariffs (which comes from a change in the weight on social welfare in the model) does

not reflect one political faction being more "subservient to the public good" than another, as

Madison put it, but simply that an ascendant political faction puts greater weight on export-

oriented producer interests than on import-competing producer interests.

2.4 Partisan Divisions & Political Rules

       One implication of different regions having different trade-related economic interests is

that political parties will take opposing positions on trade policy issues if they draw on different

regions for their political support. Each of the three eras of trade policy identified above ­

revenue, restriction, and reciprocity ­ has occurred in a period in which one political party was

politically dominant and could implement its preferred policy. This is summarized in Table 1.

       In addition, political rules make it difficult to change policy and help lock-in the policy

preferences of the dominant party. The passage of legislation requires the approval of the House

of Representatives, the Senate, and the president. This usually can happen only when one party

has unified control of government, i.e., when one party controls all three entities. If there is




                                                  13
divided government, partisan differences make significant policy change unlikely and the status

quo remains secure. 14


Table 1: Three Eras of U.S. Trade Policy

 Period            Trade Policy Objective      Congressional Voting            Dominant Political    Region
                                                                               Party                 Represented
 1837-1860         Revenue                     Tariff Schedule                 Democrats             South


 1861-1933         Restriction                 Tariff Schedule                 Republicans           North


 1934-1993         Reciprocity                 Negotiating Authority &         Democrats             Mixed
                                               Trade Agreements




          From 1837 to 1860, from the start of the Second party system until the outbreak of the

Civil War, the Democratic party dominated American politics. Democrats drew their political

strength from the export-oriented South and their rallying cry was "a tariff for revenue only"

because of their opposition to protective tariffs. This is why the average tariff fell from the early

1830s to less than 20 percent by 1860, as shown in Figure 1. During this period there were 12

Congresses, 7 with unified governments (6 under the Democrats, 1 under the Whigs) and 5

divided governments. In other words, over this 34 year period, the Whig party from the North

that favored higher protective tariffs was only in power for two years. They succeeded in raising

tariffs in 1842, but the Democrats promptly reversed this in 1846 after they regained control of

government. During the 10 years of divided government, no changes were made to trade policy.




14
  The status quo bias applies mainly to the opposition to tariff reductions, as in Fernandez and Rodrik (1991), who
point out how domestic producers facing foreign competition are certain to lose but the gains to particular
consumers and exporters are uncertain.

                                                         14
          From 1861 to 1932, Republicans dominated American politics and drew their political

support from the North, where manufacturing interests were concentrated. They wanted high

duties to restrict imports, which is why tariffs jumped to 40-50 percent during the Civil War and

remained at that level for several decades. During this period there were 35 Congresses, 21 with

unified governments (17 Republican, 4 Democratic), and 14 divided governments. Over these 72

years, Democrats only had two opportunities to reduce tariffs, which they did in 1894 and 1913.

In each case, these reductions were immediately reversed when Republicans came back into

office.

          In each of these eras, the existing trade policy was heatedly disputed by the opposition

party. The status quo never went unchallenged, with one side or the other complaining that the

country would be ruined if tariffs were not raised higher or lowered further. And yet, despite all

the debate and controversy, it proved very difficult to dislodge existing policies once they were

established. Partisan dominance and political rules enforced a status quo bias that kept trade

policy relatively stable within the two eras.

          From 1933 to 1993, Democrats again dominated American politics and ensured that

reciprocity through trade agreements would reduce tariffs and keep them low. During this period

there were 30 Congresses, 16 unified governments (15 Democratic, 1 Republican), and 14

divided governments. During this 60 year period, very few changes were made to the overriding

goal of seeking reciprocal trade agreements, even during the two years (1953-55) in which the

Republicans had unified control of government.

          In the period since 1993, divided government has been more frequent, but the president

has usually been in favor of maintaining the status quo or furthering the reduction in trade




                                                  15
barriers. Donald Trump is the first president since 1930 who seems intent on raising import

tariffs and import restrictions, not lowering them in trade agreements.

       Figure 4 illustrates the partisan division on trade by showing the percentage of each party

in the House voting for lower tariffs (or trade authority or trade agreements) or against higher

tariffs. From the 1830s until the 1970s, Democrats were uniformly in favor of lower tariffs.

Republicans mainly voted in favor of protective tariffs, although after the Civil War they

supported reducing some duties on non-competing imports for consumers, such as tea and

coffee. After World War II, however, they began to support trade liberalization. From the early

1950s until the early 1990s, there was a historically anomalous period of bipartisan consensus

and the two parties voted in sync with one another. This was during the Cold War when foreign

policy concerns were salient and partisan divisions were suppressed (Bailey 2003). Since the

NAFTA vote in 1993, just after the end of the Cold War, Democratic support for lower tariffs or

trade agreements has diminished considerably. By this time, the political parties had clearly

switched positions on trade policy.




                                                16
Figure 4: Share of Party Voting (House) for Lower Trade Barriers, 1890-2015


                                          1

                                         0.9
 Share Voting for Trade Liberalization




                                         0.8
                                                               Democrats
                                         0.7

                                         0.6

                                         0.5

                                         0.4
                                                                Republicans                                                 NAFTA
                                         0.3                                                                    Trade Act
                                                                                                                 of 1974
                                         0.2                                   Trade Act of 1930    Trade Expansion
                                                                                                       Act of 1962
                                         0.1

                                          0
                                               1840   1860    1880      1900      1920       1940      1960        1980        2000   2020



Source: Irwin (2017, 658).

                                          This partisan repositioning largely reflects the fact that the parties switched which region

of the country they represented: the South flipped from being a region controlled by Democrats

to being dominated by Republicans (Kuziemko and Washington 2018), while the Northeast

became a stronghold of Democrats. Thus, the regions of the country did not change their trade

policy views, but the parties changed which regions of the country they represented.

2.5 Regime Changes

                                          The delineation of U.S. tariff history into three periods and three regimes ­ the revenue,

restriction, and reciprocity eras ­ suggests that there have been only two major shocks in

American trade politics that have brought about a shift from one objective to another. The shifts

between them resulted from exogenous shocks that realigned political power between regions of




                                                                                    17
the country and the political parties representing them. These shocks were the Civil War (1861-

65) and the Great Depression (1929-33).

         The Civil War redistributed political power away from the South and toward the North

and led to a political realignment in favor of the Republican Party and against the Democratic

party. Because Republicans from the North favored protective tariffs, the primary goal of trade

policy shifted from revenue to restriction and the average tariff rose accordingly. There was no

change in the institutional way in which tariff rates were determined, in that Congress still voted

on the tariff schedule in bills that required floor votes, but political power shifted in a way that

strengthened import-competing industries located in the North.

         The Great Depression led to a political realignment with the Democratic sweep in the

1932 election. This election ended Republican dominance of American politics and ushered in

more than five decades of Democratic political control of government. This realignment shifted

power to the political party that put greater emphasis on export-oriented interests in the South.

As a result, the primary goal of trade policy shifted from restriction to reciprocity and average

tariffs fell considerably.

         This transition was also marked by an important institutional change in policymaking,

namely the delegation of trade-negotiating authority to the president by Congress. In 1934, the

Democrats enacted the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act (RTAA), a landmark piece of

legislation that authorized the president to negotiate agreements to reduce tariffs with other

countries. 15


15
   Under the RTAA, the Roosevelt administration reached a number of bilateral trade agreements to reduce trade
barriers in the 1930s, but their impact on trade was relatively minor (Gowa and Hicks 2018). When the United States
became more actively engaged in world affairs during and after World War II, the RTAA proved critical to bringing
about important changes in U.S. trade policy. After the war, in an effort to roll back some of the protectionism of the
1930s, the United States helped organize a multilateral conference in 1947 that established the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The GATT is a legal text regarding commercial policy and remains the principal
framework of the world trading system today. In addition, the participating countries agreed on a package of tariff

                                                          18
        The RTAA changed the politics of U.S. trade policy. Congress no longer set import

duties in long and complicated tariff bills. Rather, the president was authorized to change import

duties in trade agreements with other countries. All Congress voted on was the negotiating

authority (which included permission to reduce tariffs) or, starting in 1979, the trade agreements

themselves. This shifted the locus of trade policy decision-making from the legislative branch,

which seemed susceptible to special interest politics and therefore biased in favor of higher

tariffs (Grossman and Helpman 2005), to the executive branch, which tended to link trade policy

to foreign policy and view trade policy in terms of the national interest. The RTAA also altered

the political balance of power toward export interests at the expense of import-competing

interests. By directly tying lower foreign tariffs to lower domestic tariffs, the RTAA encouraged

exporters to organize in opposition to high tariffs and in support of trade agreements (Haggard

1988, Schnietz 2000, Bailey, Goldstein, and Weingast 1997).

        The shift in U.S. trade policy toward trade liberalization was initially secure because the

Democrats were politically dominant for many decades after 1934 but became more established

when the traditionally protectionist Republicans began to support the RTAA and the GATT.

Republicans had consistently rejected the RTAA in the 1930s, but began to change their position

in the mid-1940s, as seen in Figure 2. This shift was less due to an ideological conversion in

favor of a liberal trade policy as to a new configuration of constituent economic interests and

changes in institutional incentives arising from the RTAA and World War II (Bailey, Goldstein,

Weingast 1997; Irwin and Kroszner 1998). In particular, World War II so damaged European

and Asian economies that foreign competition was no longer a concern for American producers,



reductions, a step toward reducing many trade barriers that had materialized during the Great Depression. Goldstein,
Rivers, and Tomz (2007) and Tomz, Goldstein, and Rivers (2007) found that bilateral trade among GATT
participants increased by 136 percent, on average, in the first two years of the agreement's existence, compared to
trade among nonparticipants.

                                                        19
many of whom now wanted access to foreign markets to expand their sales. In addition, an

important U.S. foreign policy objective at the time was helping allied countries rebuild their

economies and resist the threat of communism. These factors led to a bipartisan consensus that

trade liberalization was good for the economy and for the nation's foreign policy (Bailey 2003).

       In sum, a combination of political and economic forces gives rise to an underlying

stability to U.S. trade policy and makes it difficult to change the direction of policy, thereby

ensuring the persistence of the status quo. Two major events, the Civil War and the Great

Depression, led to a political realignment that altered the balance of power between contending

parties and regions and led to a change in the main objective of trade policy.



3. The Gains from Trade and Costs of Protection

       In addition to giving us insight into the political economy factors that have shaped U.S.

trade policy over the long run, history gives us a perspective on some classic issues of

international economics, such as the gains from trade and the costs of protection.

       Trade policy was a controversial matter well before the United States became an

independent country. The thirteen North American colonies came under the strict regulations of

the Navigation Acts, which artificially channeled most of the trade of the colonies through

Britain. About three quarters of colonial exports were "enumerated" and had to pass through a

British port before being re-exported to other destinations, a policy that reduced the price

received by planters in America. There has been a long debate about whether British mercantilist

policies enriched British shipping interests at America's expense and thereby contributed to the

tensions that gave rise to the American revolution.




                                                 20
         In a pioneering calculation, Lawrence Harper (1939) estimated that these trade

restrictions imposed a cost of about 2.3 percent of colonial income in 1773. This calculation did

not include the benefits to the colonies of being part of the British Empire, such as savings on

defense costs and lower insurance rates on shipping due to the protection provided by the Royal

Navy. 16 This does not mean that British mercantilist restrictions were unimportant in the calls for

American independence. About 90 percent of the economic cost of the Navigation Laws is

believed to have fallen upon the southern colonies, particularly tobacco planters in Maryland and

Virginia. This may have reduced the region's income by as much as 2.5 percent in 1770 and

pushed the region into supporting calls for economic independence. 17

         The incomplete data that we have from the period suggests that America's foreign

commerce was severely depressed during the Revolutionary War and into the 1780s. Trade

picked up in the 1790s but was highly volatile due to military conflicts in Europe. President

Thomas Jefferson was responsible for an unusual policy experiment when, with Congress's

support, he declared a complete embargo on shipping to and from the United States starting in

December 1807. (The ostensible reason for the embargo was to protect American ships and

sailors from getting caught in the fighting between Britain and France in the Atlantic.) By mid-

1808, the United States was almost reduced to a state of autarky, about as close to being

completely shut off from international trade as it has ever been in its peacetime history.

         The embargo entailed substantial economic costs during the 15 months it was in effect

from December 1807 to March 1809. The price of exported goods dropped 20-40 percent

immediately, and the price of imported goods rose by about 30 percent as the number of


16
   Taking these benefits into account, Thomas (1965) concluded that the net cost of British mercantilist policies to
the thirteen colonies was very small, amounting to just 0.6 percent of colonial income.
17
   See Ransom (1968). For example, if tobacco could have been sold directly to European customers, the income of
tobacco planters might have been anywhere from 15 to 35 percent higher (Sawers 1992).

                                                         21
American ships returning to U.S. ports slowed to a trickle and imports became increasingly

scarce. Irwin (2005) calculates that the static welfare cost of the embargo was about 5 percent of

GDP. Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodrídguez-Clare (2012) show that, for a broad class of models,

the gains from trade (as a share of GDP) can be expressed as 1 ­ D1/, where D is the share of

expenditure on domestic goods in the trade equilibrium and  is the trade elasticity. In the years

prior to the embargo, the import to GDP share was about 20 percent, imports were mainly final

goods so D is approximately 0.8, and the trade elasticity is commonly taken to be about 5. This

implies that the cost of moving to autarky was about 4.4 percent, very close to the other

calculation. 18

         Of course, the embargo was an extreme event. As Figure 1 showed, the average tariff was

in the 20-30 percent range in the 1840s and 1850s. How costly was protection at this time? The

tariff distorted production and consumption decisions and created a deadweight loss, as any tax

would. Using different methods, Harley (1992b) and Irwin (2010) arrive at similar estimates of

the deadweight loss of the tariff in 1859, about 0.5 percent and 0.2 percent of GDP, respectively.

The losses are very small because imports as a share of GDP were relatively small.

         After the Civil War, in the period of restriction, import tariffs were about 30 percent on

total imports and 50 percent on dutiable imports. These higher tariffs produced a much greater

deadweight loss. Irwin (2010) calculates the static deadweight welfare loss as a share of gross

                                                 2    1
domestic product using the standard formula 2      , where sn is the share of imports of

good n in GDP, n is the elasticity of import demand for good n, and n is the ad valorem tariff on

good n. As shown in Figure 4, tariffs resulted in a sizeable deadweight loss at about 1-1.5 percent



18
  Of course, these calculations may understate the welfare losses by ignoring the value of product variety and other
considerations.

                                                          22
of GDP immediately after the Civil War, but it declined rapidly to about 0.2 percent of GDP by

the early twentieth century. These historical estimates converge to modern calculations of the

deadweight loss of tariffs, the first of which were Stern (1964) and Magee (1972), and including

those now routinely calculated by the U.S. International Trade Commission (2017). While today

the static welfare loss from tariffs is sometimes dismissed as being small, we can see from

history that was not always the case.

Figure 5: Static Deadweight Loss from Tariffs (percent of GDP), 1859-2016

                 1.6


                 1.4


                 1.2


                  1
Percent of GDP




                 0.8


                 0.6


                 0.4                                                                        Kee, et al.
                                                                            Stern   Magee                 USITC
                 0.2

                                Pre-Civil War
                  0
                       1859 1869 1879 1889 1899 1909 1919 1929 1939 1949 1959 1969 1979 1989 1999 2009 2019


Source: Irwin (2010), updated with USITC (2017)

                       It is possible, however, that this deadweight loss was more than offset by an improvement

in the terms of trade. If a country has the power to affect the price of its exports or imports on




                                                              23
world markets, an import tariff or export tax can improve its terms of trade, potentially making

the country better off as a whole.

        This consideration is relevant because the United States produced about 80 percent of the

world's cotton in the decades prior to the Civil War and did not take the world price of cotton as

given. An export tax that would have been the most direct manner in which the country might

have increased the price of its cotton on world markets. Irwin (2003b) estimates that the export

demand elasticity for U.S. cotton was about -1.7 and therefore the hypothetical optimal export

tax would have been about 50 percent. Such a tax would have raised welfare by about 0.3

percent of GDP, or about 1 percent of the South's GDP, a relatively small amount. Of course,

such a policy would have been prohibited under the Constitution.

        Could the impact of an export tax have been replicated by an import tariff that indirectly

reduced exports? Using a computable general equilibrium model, James (1981) found that the

optimal (i.e., welfare-maximizing) tariff for the United States in 1859 was 35-40 percent, higher

than its actual level of 20 percent. Moving from the 20 percent tariff to the optimal tariff, he

finds, would have increased real income by about 2 percent. However, this result depends on the

tariff reducing exports of cotton, the good in which the country had market power. Harley's

(1992b) more detailed model found that import tariffs reduced exports of foodstuffs (the

marginal export) and not cotton (the infra-marginal export). He finds that the tariff failed to

reduce cotton exports, affect the world price of cotton, or increase national income.

        The other market-power based argument for using a tariff to improve economic welfare is

to exploit monopsony power and reduce the price of imports. There is much less empirical

evidence on this phenomenon. 19


19
  Some evidence is available in the case of sugar. The United States purchased about 20-25 percent of the world's
sugar production in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century and changed its tariff several times by

                                                        24
         One final note: the United States has never been a typical small open economy. It is a

large, economically diverse, continental-sized market which is much less dependent on

international trade than most other economies. This means that the magnitude of the gains from

trade and the costs of protection are smaller than elsewhere. However, even if the aggregate

effects of trade policy were modest, the impacts on different regions of the country have been

pronounced and have often had political consequences.



4. Economic Effects of Trade Policy

         The large size of the U.S. economy has meant that trade has played a limited role in the

nation's fortunes. As Figure 6 shows, for much of American history, merchandise exports and

imports were only about 5 percent of GDP. The exceptional periods were prior to 1820 and after

1980, when the trade shares were substantially higher. Of course, even when the trade share is

small, trade policy can still have a significant domestic impact since it affects the prices of traded

goods throughout the economy.

         This section looks at the economic effects of trade policy by focusing on three issues of

historical controversy: the role of tariffs in redistributing income across regions and groups

within the United States, in fostering the industrialization and economic growth of the United

States, and in contributing to the Great Depression of the 1930s.




substantially amounts. This variation gives us the opportunity to see how import prices responded to tariff changes.
Irwin (2019) examined high frequency data on sugar prices and found a pass-through asymmetry: tariff reductions
were fully passed through to consumers, whereas tariff increases were borne by both consumers and foreign
producers.

                                                         25
Figure 6: Merchandise Exports and Imports, percent of GDP, 1790-2018

                   25

                                                           Exports        Imports

                   20



                   15
  percent of GDP




                   10



                    5



                    0
                        1790   1810   1830   1850   1870      1890    1910     1930   1950   1970   1990   2010



Source: 1790-1928, Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition (New York:
Cambridge University Pres, 2006), updated with Bureau of Economic Analysis.

4.1 Income Distribution and Sectional Conflict

                    In the 1820s, a Congressional coalition including representatives from the North and the

Midwest pushed for higher tariffs in 1824 and 1828 (Irwin 2008). By 1830, as Figure 1 shows,

the average tariff on imports peaked at about 60 percent, the highest level ever. The South

fiercely opposed this development and the controversy sparked the nation's first major political

crisis after independence. South Carolina threatened to "nullify" (not enforce) federal tariff

legislation and even secede from the union unless tariffs were reduced. This crisis was defused

by the Compromise Tariff of 1833, which phased out tariff rates above 20 percent over a nine-

year period and essentially remained in place until the Civil War. This established lower tariffs

for revenue purposes as government policy for most of the remaining antebellum period.




                                                                     26
         Were the South's vociferous objections to a protective tariff justified? Southern critics of

the tariff charged that high tariffs on manufactured goods raised the cost of living for consumers

and harmed agricultural producers by indirectly reducing their exports. 20 In addition, they

argued, all the revenue from the tariff was spent in the North. Therefore, they viewed high

import duties as an unfair tax that redistributed income from consumers and farmers in the South

to businesses and capital-owners in the North. Tariff proponents in the North claimed that

protective duties helped American workers by expanding industrial employment and boosting

wages, while giving farmers a steady demand in the home market for the food and raw materials

that they produced.

         How much interregional income redistribution was the tariff responsible for? Economic

historians have constructed computable general equilibrium models to examine the impact of the

tariff on the incomes of different factors of production prior to the Civil War. In Harley's

(1992b) calculation for 1859, when the best data is available for the antebellum period, laborers

lost a small amount (about 0.5 percent of GDP) while capital-owners gained a small amount

(about 0.4 percent of GDP). The largest burden of the tariff was borne by land-owners (farmers

and planters), who lost 2-3 percent of GDP. 21 Like before the American Revolution when British

mercantilist policies placed a burden on Southern planters, the antebellum tariff hurt that same

group and gave rise to calls for secession.

         Another way to consider the incidence of the tariff and how it redistributed income is to

focus on how it changed the domestic prices of traded goods relative to non-traded goods. A



20
   The South had long recognized the Lerner Symmetry Theorem, that a tax on imports was also a tax on exports.
But as noted above, Harley found that import tariffs reduced marginal exports (food and grain) not infra-marginal
exports (cotton).
21
   Harley finds that the tariff had a limited impact on income distribution because the average tariff on imports had
fallen to less than 20 percent by 1859 and imports were a small share of GDP. Had it been possible to do his
calculation for the 1820s, the redistribution might have been greater because the tariff was much higher.

                                                          27
tariff increases the domestic price of importable goods relative to exportable goods, but the

benefit for import-competing industries is diminished because the tariff also increases the price

of non-traded goods. The higher prices of non-traded goods meant that the average 30 percent

tariff during the 1880s amounted to a 17 percent implicit subsidy to domestic import-competing

producers and a 10 percent effective tax on exports, according to Irwin (2007). The tariff also

redistributed about 8 percent of GDP among various affected groups, but the impact on

consumers was only slightly negative because exported goods (particularly food products)

loomed large in their consumption bundle.

        In sum, economists have long pointed out that trade policy involves distributional fights

over income and that the benefits or costs of trade may be concentrated on particular groups or

regions of the country. This was very much true in the past and it caused serious political conflict

over trade policy, pitting different regions of the country against one another. 22

4.2 Economic Growth and Industrialization

        Some of the most controversial questions in economic history hinge on whether trade

policy can increase economic growth by shifting resources into the manufacturing sector. In his

famous 1791 "Report on Manufactures," Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton argued that

government policies to subsidize and protect industry might help overcome the many inhibitions

and bottlenecks that hampered the start of domestic production. 23

        The United States began a policy of import substitution after the War of 1812, which

severely curtailed foreign trade and gave rise to domestic manufacturing. 24 An important but


22
   The China Shock is simply a recent example of this phenomenon; see Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2016).
23
   Irwin (2004) suggests that the report was less "protectionist" than commonly portrayed because Hamilton focused
more on promotion through subsidies than protection through tariffs.
24
   By preventing imported manufactured goods from reaching the American market, these disruptions encouraged
domestic industries to begin producing manufactured goods that had previously been imported, such as cotton
textiles in Massachusetts and iron and glass in Pennsylvania. There is a debate about whether these trade shocks
constituted a temporary or permanent boost to manufacturing. Rosenbloom (2004) argues that path dependence

                                                       28
controversial question is how much domestic manufacturing production was dependent on tariff

protection prior to the Civil War. Answering that question requires a counterfactual assessment

of what would have happened if tariffs had been much lower. The answer depends critically on

whether or not imports and domestic output were close substitutes for one another. 25

         The antebellum cotton textile industry has long been studied with these questions in

mind. 26 Taussig (1931, 35) suggested that domestic cotton manufactures were strong enough to

survive without tariff protection "almost certainly by 1832." Harley (1992a) disputed this view,

suggesting that removal of the tariff would have reduced domestic output of cotton textiles to

just 10 percent of domestic consumption even as late as the 1850s. Irwin and Temin (2001)

argued that textiles were differentiated products and that American and British producers

specialized in quite different varieties of cotton goods. Since domestic producers were insulated

from foreign competition by the different characteristics of their products, their evidence

suggested that the tariff was relatively unimportant to the survival of the domestic industry. For

example, they point out that the cotton textile duties were abruptly slashed in 1846 from about 70

percent to just 25 percent. Imports soared by a factor of three and increased their share of the

U.S. market from about 7 percent to about 15 percent, yet domestic production did not decline. 27



meant that the cotton textile industry might never have gotten off the ground without the interruption of trade. Irwin
and Davis (2003) use a new series on industrial production and find that the trade disruptions did not accelerate the
trend growth in production but shifted resources from trade-dependent industries (such as shipbuilding) to import-
substituting industries (such as cotton textiles).
25
   If imports and domestic goods were similar products (close substitutes), more imports would presumably reduce
domestic production; if imports and domestic goods were dissimilar products (imperfect substitutes), more imports
would leave domestic production relatively unaffected.
26
   Thus, whether the Tariff of 1816 was crucial to the preservation of early American industry is unclear. In the case
of cotton textiles, Zevin (1971, 128) concluded that "while the tariff may have had demand augmenting effects
which contributed to the cyclical recovery from the postwar depression, the tariff made no significant contribution to
the secular growth of American demand for New England mill products over the period from 1815 to 1833." In
Taussig's (1931, 35) view, the early progress of the cotton textile industry, "though perhaps somewhat promoted by
the minimum duty of 1816, would hardly have been much retarded in the absence of protective duties."
27
   Of course, in other industries where foreign-produced goods were a close substitute for domestically-produced
goods, the tariff may have been important in supporting domestic output. For example, the antebellum iron industry

                                                         29
         After the Civil War, Congress enacted much higher protectionist duties and the United

States became an industrial powerhouse. To what extent did the high tariffs help promote

industrialization and spur economic growth in this period? If economic growth is based on

capital accumulation, technological progress (productivity growth), and the shift of resources

(labor and capital) from agriculture to industry and services, then the question then becomes

whether protection helped promote capital accumulation, accelerate technological progress, and

shift resources toward manufacturing.

         In terms of capital accumulation, economic historians have concluded that the increase in

the investment rate was largely due to an increase in the savings rate, which was driven by the

growth of banking and financial intermediation. 28 The tariff seems to have played very little role.

In fact, De Long (1998) argues that the high tariff on intermediate goods (capital goods) raised

the cost of imported equipment, reduced capital accumulation, and thereby slowed economic

growth during this period.

         In terms of technological progress, the role of the tariff also seems relatively unimportant.

According to Kendrick's (1961) calculations, total factor productivity growth was highest in

non-traded sectors (such as transportation, services, utilities, and communications) rather than in

agriculture or manufacturing, the sectors most affected by trade. Productivity growth in the




was much more vulnerable to foreign competition than the cotton industry. Davis and Irwin (2008) find that
domestic iron production was about 30-40 percent greater than it would have been without tariff protection.
28
   The share of capital formation in GDP increased significantly around the time of the Civil War; net investment
rose from about 10 percent of GDP before the war to nearly 20 percent of GDP after. Economic historians have
concluded that capital accumulation was a savings-driven rather than an investment-driven phenomenon: the relative
price of capital goods and real interest rates declined sharply during this period, suggesting that a shift in the supply
of savings due to the development of financial markets dominated any shift in investment demand. The growth in
savings was facilitated by the National Banking Acts of 1863 and 1864, which helped stabilize the financial system
and encourage the entry of more than seven hundred banks during the Civil War era. Jaremski (2014) links these
developments to industrial growth in the Midwest.

                                                           30
service sector is usually explained by particular technological innovations ­ such as railroads,

electrification, and the telegraph ­ none of which seemed to depend on protective tariffs.

       Irwin (2001) suggests that protection might have increased growth slightly via by shifting

labor and capital resources from agriculture into manufacturing, but only by a small amount.

Broadberry (1998) concludes that the United States caught up with and overtook Britain in

overall labor productivity largely by shifting resources out of agriculture and improving its

relative productivity position in services. Thus, the service sector seems underrated as a factor in

driving late nineteenth century economic growth.

       Because the aggregate growth effects of trade policy are difficult to establish, more

research has been focused on whether tariffs promoted the growth of particular industries. Of

course, protecting domestic industries from foreign competition may not put the nation's capital

and labor resources into their best use, particularly if protected sectors never becomes efficient

enough to survive without protection. However, protection has the potential to increase national

welfare if the protected infant industry exhibits learning by doing in which production costs

decline with the accumulated production experience at the firm or industry level. In this case, the

more production experience, the lower the unit costs of domestic production due to the

acquisition of knowledge.

       Once again, this question can be addressed only by considering a counterfactual scenario

about how an industry would have developed in the absence of the tariff. The strongest

candidates for examples of "successful" protection have tended to be in the iron and steel

industry. Of course, factors other than the tariff also have to be considered in accounting for the

enormous expansion of America's output. The nation's abundance of natural resources, such as




                                                 31
coal in Pennsylvania and iron ore in Minnesota, has led many to believe that the iron and steel

industry would have developed even without the benefit of protection. 29

         The steel rail industry is sometimes proposed as one in which the country benefited from

tariff protection. The domestic steel rail industry grew rapidly under protection in the 1870s and

1880s, survived the phased reduction and eventual removal of import duties in the 1890s, and

eventually began exporting as American prices fell below British prices, evidence that it became

an internationally competitive industry. Head (1994) finds significant learning-by-doing effects

that are assumed to spillover perfectly between domestic firms. In performing a counterfactual

simulation of what would have happened under free trade, he finds that country-specific learning

by doing is so important that the domestic production never begins until almost 1913. The reason

is that, without tariffs, the domestic steel rail industry never gains much production experience

that would allow it to reduce its costs compared to British producers. 30 Despite strong learning

effects, the steel rail tariff hurt rail users in both the short and long runs, but the tariff's overall

effect on welfare was positive but small.

         The tinplate industry is also mentioned as a case in which infant industry protection was

potentially beneficial. The United States lacked any domestic production of tinplate until the

industry received protection under the McKinley tariff of 1890. The industry flourished and grew

strong enough to displace imports and even reduce its costs to British levels. In this case,

however, static and dynamic scale economies were not substantial and production technology

and experience was readily transferable across countries. The failure of the industry to develop


29
   In the case of pig iron after the Civil War, Irwin (2000a) finds that if the tariff had been eliminated in 1869,
domestic output would fall by about 15 percent and the import market share would rise from about 7 percent to
nearly 30 percent. This suggests that a substantial portion of the domestic industry could have survived a significant
tariff reduction.
30
   Head's simulation rules out international spillovers of learning-based knowledge, which implies that domestic
firms cannot adapt or build upon the production experience of British firms. This essentially ensures that initial
producers have an entrenched and virtually insurmountable advantage over subsequent rivals.

                                                          32
was due to the high tariff on iron and steel inputs (which accounted for nearly three quarters of

the production costs) rather than the lack of production experience. Irwin's (2000b) analysis

suggested that, in the absence of the McKinley tariff, the domestic tinplate industry would have

developed about a decade later as the domestic price of those inputs converged to the world

price. Although the tariff succeeded in accelerating the industry's development, welfare

calculations suggest that protection did not pass a cost-benefit test.

4.3 Smoot-Hawley and the Great Depression

         The Tariff Act of 1930, popularly known as the Smoot-Hawley tariff, was one of the

most controversial tariff acts ever enacted by Congress. (It also proved to be the last time

Congress revised the entire tariff schedule.) The legislation increased the average tariff on

dutiable imports from about 40 percent to 47 percent, but price deflation during the Great

Depression help push it up to almost 60 percent in 1932, as shown in Figure 1.

         The Smoot-Hawley tariff was enacted just as the world was slipping into a major

downturn. The Great Depression from 1929 to 1933 was an economic catastrophe for the United

States ­ real GDP fell by about 25 percent and the unemployment rate rose to more than 20

percent ­ and the world. As global trade contracted, trade barriers proliferated, and

unemployment soared with production falling around the world, the Smoot-Hawley tariff was

often blamed for having put the world economy into a tailspin. The degree to which the Smoot-

Hawley tariff was responsible for the severity of the Great Depression has been debated ever

since. 31


31
  On the general relationship between trade policy and economic growth and macroeconomic fluctuations, see
Eichengreen (2019). A related question is why protectionism became so widespread during the Great Depression.
Contrary to the presumption that all countries scrambled to raise trade barriers, Eichengreen and Irwin (2010) and
Irwin (2012) report substantial cross-country variation the degree to which countries adopted protectionist policies.
They find that countries that remained on the gold standard resorted to import quotas and exchange controls to
bolster their balance of payments position, whereas countries that left the gold standard and allowed their currencies
to depreciate did not adopt such extreme policies to restrict imports. While the 1930 tariff increase by the United

                                                         33
         As Irwin (2011) points out, the consensus among most economists is that Smoot-Hawley

did not play a significant role in generating the Great Depression. A higher tariff may have

changed the composition of domestic production between import-competing and export-oriented

industries but did not have large macroeconomic effects, either positive or negative. Monetary

policy and financial instability were much more important in driving the economic downturn.

The tariff increased the domestic price of imports by just 5 percent at a time when dutiable

imports were only 1.4 percent of GDP, making it implausible that a shock of this magnitude

could trigger the unprecedented economic contraction experienced after 1930. That said, Bond,

Crucini, Potter and Rodrigue (2013) suggest that resource misallocation and lost productivity

from the tariff could have magnified the negative impact of the trade channel.

         Perhaps the most important ramification of the Smoot-Hawley tariff was its role in

triggering retaliation against U.S. exports. Canada, which was heavily dependent on the U.S.

market, retaliated almost immediately and imposed tariffs significant enough to put a sizable

dent into American exports (McDonald, O'Brien, and Callahan 1997, Irwin 2011). The higher

U.S. tariff also abetted the formation of trade blocs that excluded the United States. Britain,

along with Canada, moved to establish imperial preferences that discriminated against U.S. trade,

as did other trade blocs that emerged during this period. These international developments helped

support the domestic political movement for reciprocal trade agreements.




States was an example of special interest politics in Congress, elsewhere in the world it was more a case of second-
best macroeconomic policy when monetary and fiscal policies were constrained by the gold standard and balanced
budget rules.

                                                         34
5. Conclusion

       This survey has focused on the changing political economy of U.S. trade policy in

historical context. The political geography of economic interests, particularly the North-South

division that has been evident for much of U.S. history, is key to understanding the trade policies

that have emerged. Equally important is the political dominance of certain parties, often

representing regional interests, that ensured either revenue, restriction, or reciprocity was the

main feature of trade policy. In addition, the survey has considered the impact of trade policy on

the development of American industries. Needless to say, there is ample scope for further work

on all of these topics, and especially work on how the political geography of trade policy has

been changing with the relative decline of manufacturing and the impact of the trade policies of

President Donald Trump.




                                                 35
REFERENCES

       Anderson, James E., and J. Peter Neary. 2005. Measuring the Restrictiveness of
International Trade Policy. Cambridge: MIT Press.

      Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2012. "New Trade
Models, Same Old Gains?" American Economic Review 102: 94-130.

       Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2018. "The China Shock:
Learning from Labor Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade." Annual Review of
Economics 8: 205-40.

       Bailey, Michael A. 2003. "The Politics of the Difficult: The Role of Public Opinion in
Early Cold War Aid and Trade Policies." Legislative Studies Quarterly 28:147­ 78.

       Bailey, Michael A., Judith Goldstein, and Barry R. Weingast. 1997. "The Institutional
Roots of American Trade Policy: The Origin and Effects of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements
Act." World Politics 49, 309-338.

       Baldwin, Robert E. 1984. "Rent-seeking and Trade Policy: An Industry Approach."
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 120: 662-677.

       Becker, William H., and William M. McClenahan. 2003. The Market, the State, and the
Export-Import Bank of the United States, 1934­ 2000. New York: Cambridge University Press.

        Blonigen, Bruce. 2011. "Revisiting the Evidence on Trade Policy Preferences." Journal
of International Economics 85:129-135.

       Bond, Eric W., Mario Crucini, Tristen Potter, and Joel Rodrigue. 2013. "Misallocation
and Productivity Effects of the Hawley-Smoot Tariff." Review of Economic Dynamics 16:120-
134.

        Broadberry, Stephen N. 1998. "How Did the United States and Germany Overtake
Britain? A Sectoral Analysis of Comparative Productivity Levels, 1870-1990." Journal of
Economic History 58, 375-407.

      Crucini, Mario J. 1994. "Sources of Variation in Real Tariff Rates: The United States,
1900-1940." American Economic Review 84, 732-743.

      Davis, Joseph H., and Douglas A. Irwin. 2008. "The Antebellum U.S. Iron Industry:
Domestic Production and Foreign Competition." Explorations in Economic History 45, 254-269.

        De Long, J. Bradford. 1998. "Trade Policy and America's Standard of Living: A
Historical Persepctive." In Susan Collins (ed.), Exports, Imports, and the American Worker.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.



                                               36
      Eichengreen, Barry. 2019. "Trade Policy and the Macroeconomy." IMF Economic
Review 67: 4-23.

       Eichengreen, Barry, and Douglas A. Irwin. 2010. "The Slide to Protectionism in the
Great Depression: Who Succumbed and Why?" Journal of Economic History 70: 872-898.

        Fernandez, Raquel, and Dani Rodrik. 1991. "Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in
the Presence of Individual-Specific Uncertainty." American Economic Review 81: 1146-155.

        Goldstein, Judith L., Douglas Rivers, and Michael Tomz. 2007. "Institutions in
International Relations: Understanding the Effects of the GATT and WTO on World Trade."
International Organization 61:37­ 67.

      Gowa, Joanna, and Raymond Hicks. 2018. "'Big' Treaties, Small Effects: The RTAA
Agreements." World Politics 70: 165-193.

      Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman. 1994. "Protection for Sale." American
Economic Review 94:833-850.

        Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan. Helpman. 2005 "A Protectionist Bias in Majoritarian
Politics." Quarterly Journal of Economics 120: 1239-1282

       Harley, C. Knick. 1992a. "International Competitiveness of the Antebellum American
Cotton Textile Industry." Journal of Economic History 52, 559-584.

      Harley, C. Knick. 1992b. "The Antebellum American Tariff: Food Exports and
Manufacturing." Explorations in Economic History 29, 375-400.

       Haggard, Stephan. 1988. "The Institutional Foundations of Hegemony: Explaining the
Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act of 1934." International Organization 42, 91-119.

       Harper, Lawrence A., 1939. The English Navigation Laws. New York: Columbia
University Press.

       Head, Keith. 1994. "Infant Industry Protection in the Steel Rail Industry." Journal of
International Economics 37, 141-165.

       Hiscox, Michael J. 2002. International Trade and Political Conflict: Commerce,
Coalitions, and Mobility. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

        Holmes, Thomas J., and John J. Stevens. 2004. "Spatial Distribution of Economic
Activities in North America." In Handbook on Urban and Regional Economics, Vol. 4, edited by
J. V. Henderson and J. F. Thisse. Amsterdam: North Holland.

     Irwin, Douglas A. 1998a. "Changes in U.S. Tariffs: The Role of Import Prices and
Commercial Policies," American Economic Review 88, 1015-1026.


                                               37
       Irwin, Douglas A. 1998b. "Higher Tariffs, Lower Revenues? Analyzing the Fiscal
Aspects of the `Great Tariff Debate of 1888,'" Journal of Economic History 58: 59-72.

       Irwin, Douglas A. 2000a. "Could the U.S. Iron Industry Have Survived Free Trade After
the Civil War?" Explorations in Economic History 37, 278-299.

        Irwin, Douglas A. 2000b. "Did Late Nineteenth Century U.S. Tariffs Promote Infant
Industries? Evidence from the Tinplate Industry," Journal of Economic History 60, 335-360.

      Irwin, Douglas A. 2001. "Tariffs and Growth in Late Nineteenth Century America." The
World Economy 24, 15-30.

       Irwin, Douglas A. 2003a. "Explaining America's Surge in Manufactured Exports, 1880-
1913." Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 364-76.

       Irwin, Douglas A. 2003b. "The Optimal Tax on Antebellum Cotton Exports," Journal of
International Economics 60, 275-291.

       Irwin, Douglas A. 2004. "The Aftermath of Hamilton's Report on Manufactures,"
Journal of Economic History 64, 800-821.

      Irwin, Douglas A. 2005. "The Welfare Costs of Autarky: Evidence from the Jeffersonian
Embargo, 1807-1809." Review of International Economics 13, 631-645.

      Irwin, Douglas A. 2007. "Tariff Incidence in America's Gilded Age," Journal of
Economic History 67, 582-607.

      Irwin, Douglas A. 2008. "Antebellum Tariff Politics: Regional Coalitions and Shifting
Economic Interests," Journal of Law and Economics 51, 715-742.

        Irwin, Douglas A. 2010. "Trade Restrictiveness and Deadweight Losses from U.S.
Tariffs." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2: 111-133.

      Irwin, Douglas A. 2011. Peddling Protectionism: Smoot-Hawley and the Great
Depression. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

      Irwin, Douglas A. 2012. Trade Policy Disaster: Lessons from the 1930s. Cambridge:
MIT Press.

      Irwin, Douglas A. 2017. Clashing over Commerce: A History of U.S. Trade Policy.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

       Irwin, Douglas A. 2019. "Tariff Incidence: Evidence from U.S. Sugar Duties, 1890-
1914." National Tax Journal, forthcoming.




                                              38
        Irwin, Douglas A., and Joseph H. Davis. 2003. "Trade Disruptions and America's Early
Industrialization." NBER Working Paper No. 9944.

       Irwin, Douglas A., and Randall S. Kroszner. 1999. "Interests, Institutions, and Ideology
in Securing Policy Change: The Republican Conversion to Trade Liberalization after Smoot-
Hawley." Journal of Law and Economics 42: 643-673.

       Irwin, Douglas A., and Peter Temin. 2001. "The Antebellum Tariff on Cotton Textiles
Revisited." Journal of Economic History 61, 777-798.

      James, John A. 1981. "The Optimal Tariff in the Antebellum United States." American
Economic Review 71, 726-34.

       Jaremski, Matthew. 2014. "National Banking's Role in U.S. Industrialization." Journal
of Economic History 74:109­ 40.

        Kee, Hiau Looi, Alessandro Nicita, and Marcelo Olarreaga. 2008. "Import Demand
Elasticities and Trade Distortions." Review of Economics and Statistics 90: 666­82.

       Kendrick, John W. 1961. Productivity Trends in the United States. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

       Kuziemko, Ilyana, and Ebonya Washington. 2018. "Why did the Democrats Lose the
South? Bringing New Data to an Old Debate." American Economic Review 108:2830-67.

       Magee, Stephen P. 1972. "The Welfare Effects of Restrictions on U.S. Trade." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 3: 645­707.

       Mayer, Wolfgang. 1984. "Endogenous Tariff Formation." American Economic Review
74: 970 85.

       McDonald, Judith A., Anthony Patrick O'Brien, and Colleen M. Callahan. 1997. "Tariff
Wars: Canada's Reaction to the Smoot-Hawley Tariff." Journal of Economic History 57, 802-26.

      Ransom, Roger L. 1968. "British Policy and Colonial Growth: Some Implications of the
Burden from the Navigation Acts." Journal of Economic History 28, 427-435.

        Rosenbloom, Joshua. 2004. "Path Dependence and the Origins of the American Cotton
Textile Industry." In David Jeremy and Douglas A. Farnie, eds. The Fibre that Changed the
World: Cotton Industry in International Perspective (Oxford: Oxford University Press.

      Sawers, Larry. 1992. "The Navigation Acts Revisited." Economic History Review 45,
262-284.




                                               39
       Schnietz, Karen. 2000. "The Institutional Foundations of U.S. Trade Policy: Revisiting
Explanations for the 1934 Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act." Journal of Policy History 12,
417-44.

      Stern, Robert M. 1964. "The U.S. Tariff and the Efficiency of the U.S. Economy."
American Economic Review 54: 459­70.

      Taussig, Frank. 1931. A Tariff History of the United States. 8th edition. New York:
Putnam.

       Thomas, Robert P. 1965. "A Quantitative Approach to the Study of the Effects of British
Imperial Policy upon Colonial Welfare: Some Preliminary Findings." Journal of Economic
History 25, 615-638.

        Tomz, Michael, Goldstein, Judith L., and Rivers, Douglas. 2007. "Do We Really Know
that the WTO Increases Trade? Comment." American Economic Review 97: 2005­18.

        United States International Trade Commission. 2017. The Economic Effects of Significant
U.S. Import Restraints, Ninth Update 2017. Investigation No. 332-325. Publication 3906.
http://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/pub3906.pdf.

      Wright, Gavin. 1990. "The Origins of American Industrial Success, 1879-1940."
American Economic Review 80: 651-668.

       Zevin, Robert B. 1971. "The Growth of Cotton Textile Production after 1815." In Robert
Fogel and Stanley Engerman (eds.), The Reinterpretation of America's Past. New York: Harper
& Row.




                                               40
