                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE SCHOOL TO PRISON PIPELINE:
         LONG-RUN IMPACTS OF SCHOOL SUSPENSIONS ON ADULT CRIME

                                    Andrew Bacher-Hicks
                                     Stephen B. Billings
                                      David J. Deming

                                     Working Paper 26257
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26257


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




We thank seminar participants at the 2019 NBER Summer Institute Economics of Education
meetings for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Andrew Bacher-Hicks, Stephen B. Billings, and David J. Deming. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The School to Prison Pipeline: Long-Run Impacts of School Suspensions on Adult Crime
Andrew Bacher-Hicks, Stephen B. Billings, and David J. Deming
NBER Working Paper No. 26257
September 2019
JEL No. I24

                                         ABSTRACT

Schools face important policy tradeoffs in monitoring and managing student behavior. Strict
discipline policies may stigmatize suspended students and expose them to the criminal justice
system at a young age. On the other hand, strict discipline acts as a deterrent and limits harmful
spillovers of misbehavior onto other students. This paper estimates the net impact of school
discipline on student achievement, educational attainment and adult criminal activity. Using
exogenous variation in school assignment caused by a large and sudden boundary change and a
supplementary design based on principal switches, we show that schools with higher suspension
rates have substantial negative long-run impacts. Students assigned to a school that has a one
standard deviation higher suspension rate are 15 to 20 percent more likely to be arrested and
incarcerated as adults. We also find negative impacts on educational attainment. The negative
impacts of attending a high suspension school are largest for males and minorities.

Andrew Bacher-Hicks                             David J. Deming
Harvard Kennedy School                          Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK St.                                      Malcolm Wiener Center for Social Policy
Cambridge, MA 02138                             79 JFK St
abacherhicks@g.harvard.edu                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                and Harvard Kennedy School
Stephen B. Billings                             and also NBER
University of Colorado                          david_deming@harvard.edu
Department of Finance
Leeds School of Business
Boulder, CO 80309
stephen.billings@colorado.edu
   I.      Introduction

        Early school experiences are important predictors of future criminal behavior. School

attendance reduces subsequent criminal activity (Anderson, 2014; Cook & Kang, 2016; Lochner

& Moretti, 2004), as does enrolling in a higher quality school and being exposed to more

advantaged peers (Billings, Deming & Rockoff, 2014; Cullen, Jacob, & Levitt, 2006; Deming,

2011). Yet there is little evidence of the exact mechanisms by which schools can have a long-run

influence on criminal activity.

        One possibility is school discipline. Schools with strict disciplinary policies such as zero-

tolerance may expose students to the criminal justice system at a young age, and there is a

positive correlation between being suspended in school and later-life engagement with the

criminal justice system (Fabelo et al., 2011). Beyond the use of sworn officers directly arresting

or reporting young offenders to school administrators (Owens, 2017; Weisburst, 2019),

disciplinary practices such as suspensions and expulsions may affect students' long-run

outcomes by leading them to associate with at-risk peers or by labeling them as troublemakers.

Because of these concerns, in 2014 the Obama administration urged schools to limit exclusionary

discipline practices (U.S. Department of Education [ED], 2014).

        In this paper, we study the impact of school discipline on the achievement, educational

attainment, and subsequent criminal activity of students. We first show that schools vary widely

in average suspension rates. Drawing on the teacher value-added literature, we estimate school

effects on suspensions by conditioning on student characteristics and student achievement. These

conditional suspension rates vary widely by school. Yet ­ unlike raw suspension rates,

conditional suspension rates are uncorrelated with measures of student body composition such as

the share of students who are nonwhite.



                                                  3
        To account for student sorting, we exploit a large and sudden boundary change in

Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools (CMS) in the fall of 2002, when about half of CMS students

attended a new school. We first estimate school effects on suspensions, using data prior to the

2002 boundary change. We then compare middle school (grade 6 through 8) students who lived

in the same neighborhood and were previously assigned the same schools, but who lived on

opposite sides of a newly drawn boundary. We find that students who are assigned to the

"stricter" school ­ as measured by conditional suspension rates ­ are significantly more likely to

be suspended in the 2002-03 school year, even though school effects are estimated using data

from before the redrawing of school boundaries, when the student body composition was much

different.1

        Our findings imply that a one standard deviation increase in conditional suspension rates

increases the actual number of days suspended per school year by about 16 percent. We then

estimate the relationship between conditional suspension rates and measures of educational

achievement, attainment, and subsequent criminal activity. We find that schools with greater

suspension effects have negative impacts on student outcomes. Students assigned to middle

schools that are one standard deviation stricter are 1.7 percentage points more likely to drop out

of school (a 15 percent increase) and 2.4 percentage points less likely to attend a 4-year college

(an 11 percent decrease).

        We also find large impacts on adult crime outcomes. Students assigned to middle schools

that are one standard deviation stricter are 3.2 percentage points more likely to have ever been




1This identification strategy was employed in Billings, Deming & Rockoff (2014), but they
focus on the impacts of a change in student racial composition on student outcomes. Here, we
implement this same identification strategy to control for student sorting, but create a measure of
school disciplinary effects that is independent of changes in school racial composition.
                                                 4
arrested (a 17 percent increase), 2.5 percentage points more likely to have ever been incarcerated

(a 20 percent increase), have 0.14 more adult arrests (a 25 percent increase) and 0.11 more

distinct incarceration spells (a 29 percent increase).

       The negative impact of attending schools with higher conditional suspension rates is

largest for minorities and males, suggesting that strict suspension policies expand pre-existing

gaps in educational attainment and incarcerations. However, we also find some limited evidence

of positive effects on the academic achievement of white male students, which highlights the

potential to increase the achievement of some subgroups by removing disruptive peers (Carrell &

Hoekstra, 2010).

       A key concern is whether variation in "strictness" across schools arises from policy

choices made by administrators versus underlying variation in school context. Our use of the

boundary change partly addresses this concern, because we show that schools' conditional

suspension rates remain highly correlated through the year of the boundary change, which

provides a very large shock to school context. We also show that school effects on suspensions

are unrelated to other measures of school quality, such as achievement growth, teacher turnover

and peer characteristics.

       We also test directly for the importance of administrative discretion by exploiting a

second source of variation - principal movement across schools. We find that conditional

suspension rates change substantially when new principals enter and exit, and that principals'

effects on suspensions in other schools predict suspensions in their current schools.2 While we



2
  In a contemporaneous paper, Sorensen, Bushway & Gifford (2019) estimate the impact of
principals on school suspensions and other outcomes using a principal switching design.
Reassuringly, they also find that principals have a sizeable impact on conditional suspension
rates. However, unlike the CMS context, they do not have quasi-experimental variation in
student characteristics within schools over time. Thus they are unable to separately identify the
                                                  5
ultimately cannot directly connect our estimates to concrete policy changes, the balance of the

evidence suggests that principals exert considerable influence over school discipline and that our

results cannot be explained by context alone.

         Our findings have important implications for school discipline and criminal justice

policies. School suspensions have large negative impacts on longer-term outcomes that mirror

the negative impact of early exposure to the criminal justice system (Aizer & Doyle, 2015;

Mueller-Smith, 2015; Dobbie, Goldin & Yang, 2018). Notably, our research design captures the

total impact of school discipline on the school population, including any positive spillover from

incapacitating disruptive peers. We find no statistically significant impact on achievement and

can rule out positive impacts of school discipline above 0.04 standard deviations. Thus, while we

cannot conduct a comprehensive benefit-cost analysis with the available data, it seems unlikely

that the gains from removing disruptive peers would outweigh the substantial long-term costs to

students who are suspended because of stricter disciplinary policy. While we find some positive

impacts for white male students, these are short-lived and do not translate into gains in

educational attainment or reductions in crime.



   II.      Institutional Context

   II.A. The Redrawing of School Boundaries

         Prior to the summer of 2002, CMS operated under a court-ordered desegregation plan

that used busing to achieve racial integration in schools. This use of race-based busing was a

continuation of past court cases and policies enacted to follow the landmark Supreme Court




impact of principals from school context more broadly. For example, they find that principals
with higher conditional suspension rates work in high-poverty, urban schools.
                                                 6
decision Brown vs. Board of Education in 1954. In 1997, a CMS parent sued the district because

their child was denied entrance to a magnet program based on race (Capacchione v. Charlotte-

Mecklenburg Schools). This case led to a series of court battles that ended in April of 2002 and

forced CMS to end race-based busing. Over the summer of 2002, school attendance boundaries

were redrawn under a court order that prohibited the use of race in student assignment. Decisions

about where to draw the boundaries were based only on school capacity and the geographical

concentration of students around a school (Smith, 2004; Mickelson et al., 2009; Billings et al.,

2014). This mechanical redistricting process rarely took advantage of environmental features

such as streams and major roads, and was controversial because it often bisected existing

neighborhoods.

       Figure 1 provides an illustration of redistricting for two middle schools in our sample.

The top panel shows school zone boundaries in the school year prior to the change and the

bottom panel shows boundaries in the school year following the change. In the center of both

panels, we outline one example census block group, where students in the same census block

group, who previously were assigned to the same school, are subsequently assigned to different

middle schools with substantially different suspension rates (i.e., share of students suspended per

year). Approximately half of students were reassigned to a new school over the summer of 2002.



   II.B. School Discipline in CMS

       Most public schools allow for considerable principal discretion in policies around school

suspension, with formal procedures reserved only for more serious long-term suspensions and

expulsions. The main guidelines regarding school discipline for our study are based on NC

Department of Education and the Charlotte-Mecklenburg student conduct handbook, which



                                                 7
outlines the procedures for student suspensions.3 School disciplinary policies involve a range of

discretionary practices such as parental meetings, after-school interventions, and in-school

suspensions. Even the process for short-term out-of-school suspension is almost completely at

the discretion of the principal and only long-term suspensions of 11 days or more require

superintendent approval.4 Concern regarding the potential negative long-term effects of school

suspensions made recent headlines and resulted in a moratorium on K-2nd grade suspensions.5

       Figures 2 and 3 present the distribution of school suspension rates across our sample of

middle schools. Figure 2 shows a wide range in the share of students ever suspended (in- or out-

of-school) in 2003, with a mean of 22 percent and a standard deviation of 10 percent. Much of

this variation could simply reflect differences in student characteristics. Because of this concern,

our preferred measure of school suspension effects conditions on student demographics and

baseline test scores. Figure 3 shows that even after including these controls, there is considerable

variation in conditional suspension rates across schools with a standard deviation of about 5.7

percent. Appendix Figures A1 and A2 show that using total days suspended generates similar

variation.




3
  The CMS student code of conduct is available online. (3/4/2019)
http://schools.cms.k12.nc.us/croftES/Pages/StudentCodeofConduct.aspx
4
  N.C. Gen. Stat. '115C-391(c). Principals have the authority to suspend, for up to ten days, any
student who violates the code of student conduct. Districts need not allow appeals from these
short-term suspensions. Stewart v. Johnston County Bd. of Educ. 129 N.C. App. 108, 498 S.E.2d
382 (1998). Suspensions of eleven days up through the end of the school year must be approved
by the superintendent.
5
  Recent press coverage (7/20/2016). CMS reviews school suspension policy.
https://www.wcnc.com/article/news/education/cms-reviews-school-suspension-policy/278241914
                                                 8
    III.      Data

           We use administrative records that track all CMS school students longitudinally from

1998-99 through 2010-11. The data include information on student demographics (e.g., gender,

race), state test scores for grades 3 through 8 in math and reading, and annual counts of days

suspended. These data also include students' home addresses in every year, which we use to

determine students' school assignments under the busing and post-busing regimes.

           We match CMS school records to longer-term criminal justice outcomes using

administrative data for all adult (defined in North Carolina as age 16 and above) arrests and

incarcerations in Mecklenburg County from 1998 through 2013.6 The arrest data include

information on the number and nature of charges, and the incarceration data include a time and

date of entry and exit, with stints in county jail and state prison both included in length of

incarceration for individuals who serve concurrently. These data allow us to observe future

criminal behavior of CMS students within Mecklenburg County, regardless of whether they

transfer or drop out of CMS schools.

           We also incorporate data on college attendance records from the National Student

Clearinghouse (NSC), a nonprofit organization that provides degree and enrollment verification

for more than 3,300 colleges and 93 percent of students nationwide. NSC information is

available through the summer of 2009 for every student of college age who had ever attended a

CMS school, including students who transfer to other districts or private schools or who drop out

of school altogether.




6
 We match students uniquely based on full name and date-of-birth using the same procedure that
has been incorporated and verified in Deming (2011), Billings et al. (2014), and Billings,
Deming and Ross (2019). We match 94 percent of criminal records to student records.
                                                  9
       We define residential neighborhoods within Mecklenburg County using the 371 block

groups from the 2000 Census with at least one CMS student. We use address records from each

school year to assign students to 2000 census geographies and middle school zones for both the

pre- and post-2002 boundaries.

       Our main analysis sample is restricted to the 2002-03 school year, as these are the

students who experienced the effect of the school boundary change. However, we use student

data prior to 2002-03 in the estimation of school effects. We focus our attention on middle

school students. We do not estimate school effects for elementary school suspensions, because

very few students are suspended during these years. Moreover, because our data on college

attendance and crime end in 2009 and 2013 respectively, we are not able to observe these

outcomes for many of the younger cohorts at the time of the boundary change. We exclude high

school students because they are legally able to drop out of school at age 16 and thus we are

concerned that they may leave the sample in ways that are correlated with the suspension effects

of their assigned high school.

       Sixth graders in 2002-03 who progress through school at the normal rate of one grade a

year would enter 12th grade in the 2008-09 school year. Because our data on crime extends

through 2013, we use two main measures of criminal activity: whether the individual was

arrested between the ages of 16 and 21 and whether the individual was incarcerated between the

ages of 16 and 21. This allows us to observe crime outcomes for all students who were in grades

6 through 8 in 2002-03. We also measure the number of arrests and number of incarceration

stints between the ages of 16 and 21. Notably, all the criminal justice outcomes are observed

long after students leave their middle school, so our results are not mechanically driven by

interaction between schools and the criminal justice system.



                                                10
         Our data on college attendance end in the summer of 2009, which limits our ability to

examine longer run measures of educational attainment such as college degree completion. Thus

we focus on seventh and eighth grade students and measure whether they attended college within

12 months of the fall after their expected high school graduation date.

         We restrict our sample to the approximately 98 percent of middle school students in

2002-03 with valid address information. Following Billings et al. (2014), we chose to further

limit our sample to the 88 percent of students who were enrolled in CMS in 2001-02 in order to

control for school and neighborhood prior to the boundary re-zone, leaving us with 26,246

students.

         Table 1 lists descriptive statistics for this sample. Overall, 48 percent of students are

black, 39 percent are white, and 8 percent are Hispanic. On average, 23 percent of students are

suspended at least once per school year, and the average suspension duration is 2.3 days.

Approximately 12 percent of our sample eventually drops out of CMS, while 23 percent attend a

4-year college within 12 months of their expected high school graduation. Between the ages of

16 and 21, 19 percent are arrested at least once and 13 percent are incarcerated at least once. 51

percent of students were reassigned to a new school in 2002-03. While well above the national

average in terms of suspensions and crime, CMS is fairly representative of large, urban school

districts in the Southern United States.




   IV.      Empirical Analysis

         There are two key parts to our empirical strategy. In the first part, we generate predictions

of school effects on suspensions. The goal of this step is to separate school effects on

suspensions from the characteristics of students they serve. We draw on methodology from the

                                                   11
teacher value-added literature, which estimates teacher effects on student achievement (e.g.,

Chetty et al., 2014; Kane & Staiger, 2008).

       While this literature on teacher value-added finds that teachers' estimated effects largely

capture their true causal effects, this method may not necessarily yield unbiased estimates of a

schools' causal effects on suspensions. Therefore, in the second part of our analysis we leverage

the re-zoning of CMS schools in 2002-03, when students who lived in the same neighborhoods

and previously attended the same school were assigned to different schools. Using variation in

school assignment from this natural experiment, we estimate the extent to which school effects

predicted prior to 2002-03 impact subsequent suspensions and long-run educational and criminal

outcomes.



    IV.A. Estimating School Effects

       To estimate school effects on suspensions, we generate suspension residuals after

controlling for observable student baseline characteristics. We use only data from school years

prior to the boundary re-zoning (i.e., 1999-00 and 2000-017) to fit the following OLS model:

                        ,, = 0 ,-1,-1 + 1 ,, + t +  + ,, ,

                                           where ,, =  + , + ,, .                                  (1)

,, represents the z-scores of the total number of days student i is suspended in year t, which

includes in-school and out-of-school suspensions. We also estimate several alternative

specifications using different outcome variables, including ISS z-scores, OSS z-scores, test score

z-scores, and indicator variable of whether a student was ever suspended in a given school year.


7
  We exclude 2001-02 (the year directly before the boundary re-zoning) when estimating school
effects because student test scores from this year will be used as control variables in our reduced
form models.
                                                12
Similar to the value-added literature (e.g., Chetty et al., 2014; Kane & Staiger, 2008), we control

for a vector of student-level observable baseline test scores (,-1,-1 ), comprising a cubic

polynomial of prior-year test scores on state English and mathematics tests. For students with no

baseline test information, we set test scores equal to zero and include an indicator variable for

having a missing test score. We also control for race, gender, special education status, and

limited-English proficiency (,, ), year fixed effects (t ) and grade fixed effects ( ).8

       Following Kane and Staiger (2008), we decompose the student-year level residuals from

Equation 1 (,, ) into the component that is attributable to schools ( ), the component that is

attributable to year-to-year school-level variation (, ), and the component that attributable to

student-level idiosyncratic error (,, ).9 Using these variance components, we generate an

empirical Bayes shrunken estimate of school effects by multiplying school-by-year level average

residuals from Equation 1 (, ) by an estimate of their reliability, accounting for the different

number of students in each school per year (, ):

                                                       2
                                                      
                             = ,  (                                  ).                             (2)
                                         2 + ( 2 + ( 2 /
                                                        , ))/2




8
  In our preferred specification, we do not include peer controls or school-level controls, since
Kane et al. (2013) find that including these controls adds bias to teacher value-added models. We
also do not include controls for lagged suspensions since suspensions in middle school are
endogenous to school effects for 7th and 8th graders and elementary school suspensions only exist
for 6th graders in the years used in Equation 1. However, we do test for balance on elementary
school suspensions and include it as a control in our reduced form models which use data from
later years.
9 We estimate the school-level variance ( 2 ) as the year-to-year covariance in school-by-year
                                            
                      2
average residuals:    = (, , ,-1 ). We estimate the student-level idiosyncratic variance
   2                                                                     2
( ) as the variance in within-school deviations in student outcomes:       = (, - ,, ).
                                                                2
Finally, we estimate the year-to-year school-level variation ( ) as the remainder of the total
             2                    2    2
variation:     = (,, ) -            -    .
                                                 13
        We present the distribution of our shrunken estimates of school effects (  ) in Figure 4,

both for suspensions and test scores. The standard deviation of   is 0.091 for suspensions and

0.038 for test scores.10 These results for test scores are consistent with prior work (Deming,

2014), and suggest substantially larger school effects on suspensions, relative to test scores. One

explanation for this difference is that school leaders--and their policies--likely have greater

direct control over suspensions than students' test score outcomes.



     IV.B. Impacts of Schools on Suspensions, Education, and Crime

        The re-zoning of CMS schools in the 2002-03 meant that students who live in the same

neighborhoods and previously attended the same school could be assigned to attend very

different schools in 2002-03. Following Billings et al. (2014), we leverage the variation caused

by this natural experiment, to estimate the effects of students who live in the same

neighborhoods and attended the same school in 2001-02, but were re-zoned into two different

schools in 2002-03. To do so, we estimate the following OLS model:

                                    = 0   + 1  + , +  +  .                                         (3)

Where  represents a range of student-level outcomes on student behavior (e.g., suspensions),

education (e.g., achievement, attainment) and criminal outcomes (e.g., arrests, incarcerations).

Similar to Equation 1, we condition on a third-order polynomial of baseline test scores,

elementary school suspensions, and demographic characteristics ( ), though these controls are




10
  For sensitivity analyses, we generate additional school effects on in-school suspensions (ISS),
out-of-school suspensions (OSS), an indicator of ever suspended in a given school year, and
school-year level average teacher turnover. The SD for school effects on ISS z-scores is 0.134,
school effects on OSS z-scores is 0.060, school effects on an indicator of suspensions is 0.037,
and school effects on teacher turnover is 0.029. We estimate the teacher turnover model at the
school-year level because teacher turnover does not vary at the student level.
                                                14
only included for precision.11 We also include fixed effects for the 2001-02 school zone-by-

neighborhood (, ) and cohort ( ).

       Our main parameter of interest is 0, which represents the relationship between predicted

school effects (  ) and outcome ( ). With old school zone by neighborhood fixed effects, 0 is

identified by students who live in the same neighborhood, were assigned the same school in

2001-02, and were assigned to different schools in 2002-03 as a result of the newly drawn

boundary. In neighborhoods where there is no new boundary,   will have the same value for all

students and thus will not contribute to the estimation of 0. We define neighborhoods using

census-block-groups (CBGs). CBGs contained a median number of 177 middle school students

in 2002-03. Despite this relatively small definition of neighborhood, 51 percent of students in our

sample had a new boundary drawn through their neighborhood.

       We focus on the reduced-form effect of being assigned to a new school. An obvious

alternative is to use the assigned school effect as an instrument for attended school effect as part

of a two-stage least squares (2SLS) procedure. However, we choose to follow the approach

described by Billings et al. (2014) for the same reasons they identify. Of primary concern is that,

to use a 2SLS procedure, we would need to account for differential exposure to the new school

zone boundaries (e.g., 6th graders will have more exposure than 8th graders) and the choice of

scaling requires strong assumptions about the cumulative effects of exposure to the treatment.

We also do not know the effects of schools outside of CMS, which presents problems for

students who leave the district. Even if we knew the appropriate scaling factor, it would be




11
   We can control for elementary school suspensions in this model because we have enough prior
years of data by 2002-03 to calculate elementary school suspensions for all middle school
students.
                                                 15
impossible to apply it to students who leave CMS. Therefore, we choose to focus our main

results on the reduced form effects of school assignment.



    IV.C. Balance Checks

           The primary threat to our identification strategy is that students are systematically sorted

across opposite sides of a newly drawn school boundary in a way that is correlated with school

suspension effects. This non-random sorting would confound our estimates of the effect of being

re-zoned to a school with a different suspension effect. We cannot measure the relationship

between unobserved student characteristics and predicted school effects, but we can test whether

students' observed baseline characteristics (e.g., race, gender, baseline test scores test scores) are

systematically correlated with being re-zoned to a school with higher or lower suspension

effects.

           To test this, we estimate a regression like Equation 3, except with   as the outcome

variable and demographics, prior test scores and prior suspensions as the key independent

variables, along with old school zone by neighborhood fixed effects. We then conduct an F-test

for the joint hypothesis that all the covariates are equal to zero. The results in Table 2 show that

none of the coefficients are individually statistically significant, and we fail to reject this

hypothesis that all coefficients are jointly equal to zero.




                                                    16
     V.      Main Results

          Table 3 contains our main results. We estimate the reduced form relationship between

assigned school suspension effects and a range of student outcomes.12 Because the outcomes

have different scales, we transform school effects into school-level standard deviation units for

ease of interpretation. The outcome in column (1) is the average number of days students are

suspended per year in middle school, beginning in the 2002-03 school year.

          A one standard deviation increase in the estimated school effect increases the average

annual number of days suspended per year by 0.38, a 16 percent increase. Columns (2) and (3)

show this result is split across an increase of 0.08 days for in-school suspensions and 0.31 days

for out-of-school suspensions, which correspond to increases of 18 and 16 percent respectively.

We also find increases along the extensive margin: a one standard deviation increase in school

effect increases the likelihood of being suspended in a given school year by 1.7 percentage

points, or 7 percent.

          Columns (5), (6), and (7) present results for educational achievement and attainment. The

outcome in column (5) is the average of standardized scores on math and reading state tests.13

          We find no evidence that school suspension effects have an impact on students' overall

academic achievement. Because we measure the net effect across all students in a school, this

may be due to a balancing of two opposing forces: negative effects of lost instructional time for

those students who were suspended and positive effects of reduced number of disruptive peers in




12
   As described above, we prefer a reduced form interpretation to these results, as it makes no
assumptions about the cumulative effects of attending a school for multiple years. Moreover,
when testing for differences across cohorts, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the first
stage is the same across all cohorts.
13
   To increase precision, we average across math and reading outcomes on state standardized
tests in middle school, beginning in the 2002-03 school year.
                                                  17
the classroom for students who were not (Kinsler, 2013). We investigate this trade-off in

heterogeneity analyses below.14

       While we find no evidence that suspensions impact achievement on state tests, the results

in columns (6) and (7) suggest that suspensions negatively affect educational attainment. Column

(6) shows that a 1 standard deviation increase in our suspension effect increases the likelihood

that a student ever drops out of CMS by 1.7 percentage points, a 15 percent increase. Column (7)

shows that a 1 standard deviation increase in our suspension effect decreases the likelihood of

attending a 4-year college by 2.4 percentage points, an 11 percent decrease.

       Columns (8) through (11) present results for adult crime. In column (8) the outcome is an

indicator for whether a student has ever been arrested in Mecklenburg County between the ages

of 16 and 21; in column (9), the outcome is an indicator for whether a student has ever been

incarcerated in county jail or state prison between the ages of 16 and 21. We find that students

assigned a school with a 1 standard deviation higher suspension effect are about 3.2 percentage

points more likely to have ever been arrested and 2.5 percentage points more likely to have ever

been incarcerated, which correspond to an increase of 17 percent and 20 percent of their

respective sample means. In addition to indicators of ever being arrested and incarcerated, we

examine number of distinct arrests and incarceration spells in columns 10 and 11. Students

assigned a 1 standard deviation higher suspension effect have an average of 0.14 more arrests

and 0.11 more incarcerations, which correspond to an increase of 25 percent and 29 percent over

their sample means.15



14
   We also find a zero effect (coefficient of 0.006 and standard error of 0.009) on an indicator for
taking the test. This suggests that the null effect on test scores is not driven by negatively-
selected students being suspended from school on the day(s) that the state test is administered.
15 In Appendix Table A1, we estimate nonlinear effects by dividing schools into terciles by

predicted suspension effect. We compare outcomes for students assigned to second- or third-
                                                 18
       In Appendix Table A2, we disaggregate arrests by type of crime. We find no effects on

serious violent crime (i.e., murder, manslaughter, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault), but

positive effects on serious property crime (e.g., arson, burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft)

and positive effects for all other crime (e.g. drugs, fraud/forgery, simple assault, trespassing,

vandalism etc.).



   V.A. School Effects on the Extensive Margin

       Thus far, our results have focused on the intensive margin: school effects on the number

of days students are suspended. An increase in the average number of days students are

suspended could be accomplished by suspending the same students for longer periods, or by

suspending more students. We also estimate school effects on the extensive margin by re-

estimating Equation 1 using an indicator of whether a student was suspended as the outcome (as

opposed to the number of days suspended in previous analyses).

       In Table 4, we present an analogous set of results using an indicator for ever being

suspended to estimate school effects. The results of this analysis are consistent with our main

results. Students assigned a school with a 1 standard deviation higher suspension effect are

suspended 0.33 more days per year and are 1.7 percentage points more likely to be suspended,

increases of 14 percent and 7 percent, respectively We do not find any statistically significant

effects on test scores or likelihood of dropping out of school, but we estimate a decrease in

likelihood of attending a 4-year college of 2.1 percentage points, a decrease of 9 percent. For




tercile schools, relative to those assigned a school in the lowest tercile of the school effect
distribution (i.e., least strict). These non-parametric results align with the main linear
specification, showing that effects increase in magnitude as students are assigned to stricter
schools.
                                                 19
adult arrest outcomes, we again find strong evidence that schools with strict discipline increase

adult crime. We find that students assigned a school with a 1 standard deviation higher

suspension effect are 2.6 percentage points more likely to have ever been arrested and 2.1

percentage points more likely to have ever been incarcerated, increases of 14 percent and 17

percent, respectively. The number of arrests increases by 0.12 and the number of incarceration

spells increases by 0.09, which are 21 percent and 24 percent, respectively.16



     V.B. Variation in Effects by Race and Gender

        Table 5 shows results by race and gender. We define minority students as black and

Hispanic and all other students as non-minority. Panel A shows that being assigned to a strict

school has larger effects for minority students across nearly every outcome. Assignment to a 1

SD higher suspension school increases the average number of suspensions for minority students

by 0.43 days, which is more than twice as large as the effect for non-minorities. Effects on adult

crime are also substantially larger for minority students: arrests increase by 4 percentage points

and incarceration by 3.1 percentage points, compared to 2.7 and 1.9 percentage points for non-

minority students. Differences are even larger for number of arrests and incarcerations. Panel B

presents results by gender. We find substantially larger effects for male students across nearly

every outcome.

        Panel C presents results by race and gender together. The negative effects of suspensions

are heavily concentrated among minority male students. Minority males assigned a 1 standard



16
   Schools have discretion in assigning ISS or OSS for most offenses. Because they are
substitutes, our main results focus on total suspensions across both types. However, in Appendix
Table A3, we also disaggregate our main results along the margin of ISS and OSS. The effects of
ISS and OSS are directionally consistent, though larger and more precise for ISS, suggesting that
it may be the more relevant discipline margin for our outcomes.
                                                20
deviation higher suspension school are suspended for 0.82 more days, more than three times the

effect for non-minority males. The negative long run effects of suspensions are also largest for

minority males. The most pronounced differences are the number of incarcerations and arrests,

where the effects are substantially larger than for other groups.17

           While the net impact of attending a school with a high conditional suspension rate is

negative, we do find small positive impacts on academic achievement for white male students.

White male students who attend a school with a one standard deviation higher conditional

suspension rate score about 0.06 standard deviations higher on middle school math and reading

tests. This is consistent with prior studies which show positive short-run academic benefits to

some students from removing disruptive peers from the classroom (e.g., Carrell & Hoekstra,

2010). However, unlike some other studies, we find that these benefits are short-lived (Carrell et

al., 2018). In fact, we find no long-run impact on educational attainment for white males and

substantial increases in adult arrests and incarcerations.



     VI.      Mechanisms

     VI.A. Student Characteristics

           One potential explanation for our main results is that school suspension effects are driven

by variation in exposure to peers. For example, using the same boundary change, Billings et al.

(2014) find that students have lower test scores when assigned to schools with higher

concentrations of minority students. If school effects on suspensions were correlated with




17
   In Appendix Table A4, we also present the results by gender and risk quartile, which we
estimate based on students' prior achievement, elementary suspensions, and demographics. We
find a similar pattern described above, where negative effects are concentrated among students
with the greatest risk of suspension.
                                                   21
characteristics of peers, our results could be driven by peer influence. Our identification strategy

­ which relies on variation in assigned school ­ is robust to any individual sorting after this

assignment, but could be affected by peers moving non-randomly into schools after rezoning.

        To test for the influence of peers, we re-estimate our main specification replacing the

outcome variable with characteristics of the actual peers in the assigned school. We present the

results of this test in Appendix Table A5. Our preferred estimates of school effects are unrelated

to peer characteristics at the 5 percent level; of the nine tests, one is significant at the 10 percent

level and the magnitude is small. As a point of comparison, we also test the relationship between

peer characteristics and a "naïve" school effect, which is generated using the same methodology

described in Equations 1 and 2, but does not control for student achievement or demographics.

The naïve estimate is significantly related (at the 1 percent level) to peer baseline test scores,

proportion black, proportion Hispanic, and proportion of students with limited English

proficiency. These results highlight the importance of controlling for student baseline

characteristics when estimating school effects on suspensions, and provide reassurance that peer

characteristics do not drive our results.



    VI.B. School Effects on Other Dimensions

        A second potential explanation for our results is that school effects on conditional

suspension rates capture broader measures of school quality. For example, Deming (2011) shows

that students who attend higher quality schools are less likely to be arrested and incarcerated.

        To test the hypothesis that school effects on suspensions are correlated with other

measures of school quality, we fit a model similar to Equation 1, but replace days suspended




                                                   22
with two other outcomes: students' test scores and schools' rates of teacher turnover.18 Figure 5,

presents scatterplots of the relationship between school effects on suspensions and school effects

on these two additional dimensions.

          We find little relationship between school effects on suspensions and effects on academic

achievement ­ the slope of the line in the top panel of Figure 5 is almost exactly zero. We do

find a slight negative correlation between school effects on suspensions and teacher turnover

(i.e., strict schools have a more stable teacher workforce), though this correlation is not

statistically significant. These results suggest that school suspension effects are largely distinct

from other measures of school academic quality or workforce stability.

          We test for the sensitivity of our main results to these additional school effects by re-

estimating Equation 3, including suspension effects, test score effects, and turnover effects

together in a "horse race" specification. The results are in Table 6.

          We find that the coefficients on suspension effects are nearly identical to our main results

(Table 3) and that the school effects on the other outcomes are not statistically significant

predictors of any of our outcomes at the 5 percent level. This serves as further evidence that our

main results are driven by school effects on suspensions rather than overall measures of school

quality or disruption.

          A related concern is that we may be capturing variation in teacher effects, rather than

variation in school effects. Rose, Schellenberg, and Shem-Tov (2019), for example, find that

teachers have effects on adult crime outcomes of their students that are orthogonal to their effects




18
     We stack math and reading test scores for precision.
                                                   23
on test scores. To compare the variation at the teacher and school levels, we re-estimate Equation

1 with teacher random effects nested within school random effects.19

        The results of this analysis, presented in Table 7, suggest that school effects are

substantially more important than teacher effects in driving variation in conditional suspension

rates. The school-level standard deviation for suspensions is 0.16, compared to only about 0.06

for teachers. However, consistent with other work, the opposite is true for academic

achievement, where the school-level standard deviation is only 0.09 but the teacher-level is 0.23.

These findings suggest that schools are much more important drivers of variation in suspension

rates for observably similar students, whereas teachers are more important determinants of

achievement.



     VI.C. School Leadership

        A third explanation is that school effects are driven by policies and practices of school

leadership. To test for this, we estimate school effects separately for each year from 2001

through 2011, using an equation similar to Equation 1.20 In Table 8 we present estimates of the

autoregression of the estimate for each year on the estimate from prior year. In column (1), we

show that--across all schools and years--the coefficient on the prior year is 0.937, with a




19
   Similar to Equation 1, we fit an OLS model of student suspensions (,, ) controlling for
students' baseline achievement (,-1,-1 ) students' demographic characteristics (,, ), year
fixed effects (t ) and grade-level fixed effects ( ): ,, = 0 ,-1,-1 + 1 ,, + t +  +
,, , where ,, =  + , +  + ,, . Like Equation 1, we decompose the error term
(,, ) into i.i.d. components for the school ( ), school-by-year (, ), and student (,, ). The
only difference is that we now include an additional component for teacher ( ).
20
   We exclude the first year in our panel (1999-00) because we do not observe if a school has a
new principal in that year.
                                                 24
standard error of 0.068. This indicates that the estimated effect from the prior year is a near

perfect predictor of the school effect in the current year.

        In column (2), we include a term interacting the prior-year school effect with an indicator

variable for a new principal in the current year and find that having a new principal attenuates

the year-to-year autocorrelation by approximately one-third, to 0.670.21 While school principals

are only one component of the leadership team within a school, this result indicates that a change

in leadership substantially attenuates the relationship of school effects across years. Column (3)

shows that changes in student composition in the summer of 2002 did not affect the strong

autocorrelation in our school suspension effect, which suggests that school effects persist across

large changes in student composition.

        As a second test of the effect of school leaders on suspensions, we estimate principal

effects on school suspensions and then measure the extent to which suspensions change as high-

or low- value-added principals switch schools. This strategy is inspired by the teacher switcher

quasi-experiments used in the value-added literature (Bacher-Hicks et al., 2014; Chetty et al.,

2014). The main limitation of this analysis is the small number of principal switches in our

sample.22

     As is common in the teacher effects literature, we fit a leave-out value-added model in which

we estimate principals' effects on suspensions using only data from other schools.23 For each




21
   In order to determine if a school has a new principal, we compare annual historical snapshots
of CMS school websites, which provide the name of each school's principal. We obtain this
information through the waybackmachine.org, which archives most internet pages.
22
   Though principal turnover is common, there are only nine principal switches in consecutive
years across the schools in our sample.
23
   The regression is similar to Equation 1, but includes principal-by-school level random effects
instead of school-level random effects. We therefore capture the effect of each principal on
suspensions in a given school. To avoid a mechanical relationship between principal effects and
                                                  25
principal making a switch, we have two leave-out predictions: one from the school they exited

and one from the school they entered. Using these predictions, we measure the extent to which

principals' estimated effects from other schools correspond to suspensions in their current

school.24 The results are in Table 9. Column (1) shows the relationship between principals'

estimated effects from the prior school and actual suspensions in the current school.

   We find that when principals who are predicted to be one standard deviation above average

enter a school, suspensions increase by 0.41 standard deviations. Column (2) presents consistent

evidence using principals' estimated effects from their future school. Relative to the years after

their departure, suspensions are 0.52 standard deviations higher in the years served by a principal

predicted to be one standard deviation above average. Finally, in column (3), we stack results

using principal effects based on both lagged and future schools, finding that a one-standard

deviation increase in principal effect corresponds to a 0.54 standard deviation increase in

suspensions.25 These findings align with the above analysis in Table 8 and provide additional

evidence that suspensions are affected by school leadership.26


suspensions, we only use data from a principal's tenure in other schools when predicting their
impact in a given school.
24
   We estimate an OLS regression on the full sample of 480 school-by-year observations from
2001 through 2011: ,, = -               , + ,, +  +  + ,, . ,, is average
                                                               -
suspension z-score of school s in year t with principal j. ,     is the estimated leave-school-out
                                     -
suspension effect of principal j. , is set to 0 for principals who do not switch (since they do
not have a leave-school-out VA estimate) and ,, is an indicator variable that is equal to
                                                         -
1 if a principal switches schools (i.e., has non-zero ,     ).  and  are school and year fixed
effects, respectively. Therefore,  captures the relationship between the leave-out principal
effects and mean suspensions, based on all years that the principal j is in school s (relative to all
other years with other principals for school s).
25
   We do not expect a coefficient of one since principals are the main leaders in the disciplinary
environment, but they do not have complete control over all school discipline due to the
influence of other administrators and assistant principals.
26
   Because we find evidence that principals influence school suspension rates, a concern is that
they may switch schools endogenously in response to the redrawn school zone boundaries
between 2002 and 2003. Principal movement is not uncommon in CMS. Between 2001 and
                                                 26
    VII.    Conclusion

        Misbehaving peers can have strong negative impacts on other students in the classroom,

and thus disciplinary policy is an important lever for schools and principals seeking to improve

learning outcomes. In this paper we use a large and sudden change in school assignment to

estimate the impact of suspensions on aggregate student outcomes. We find that stricter schools

have negative long-run impacts on students. Students who are quasi-randomly assigned to

schools with higher conditional suspension rates are significantly more likely to be arrested and

incarcerated as adults. This shows that early censure of school misbehavior causes increases in

adult crime ­ that there is, in fact, a "school to prison pipeline".

        We also find negative impacts on educational attainment and can rule out all but very

small increases in student achievement due to incapacitation of disruptive peers. While we find

some positive impacts for white male students, these are short-lived and do not translate into

gains in educational attainment or reductions in crime.

        A key concern in this study is whether variation in schools' conditional suspension rates

arises from policy choices made by administrators, or from underlying variation in school

context. While the large exogenous change in peers caused by the redrawing of school

boundaries partly addresses this concern, we ultimately cannot directly connect our estimates of

school "strictness" to concrete policy changes. However, school effects on suspensions are

uncorrelated with school effects on achievement, and are also unrelated to other measures of



2011, approximately 25 percent of schools have a new principal in any given year. However, the
number of schools with new principals in the year following the boundary change was quite
similar, at 28 percent, suggesting that there was not an atypical level of principal movement as a
result of the boundary change. As a test of the possible influence of endogenous principal
movement, in Appendix Table A6 we present our main results restricted to only schools without
any principal movement between 2002 and 2003. Though the smaller sample reduces precision,
the results are consistent with our main findings.
                                                  27
school quality such as teacher turnover or peer characteristics. We also show direct evidence that

a school's conditional suspension rate changes when it gets a new principal. Taken together, the

evidence suggests that principals and other school officials have considerable discretion over

discipline policy, and when they lean toward harsher discipline it has negative long-run impacts

on students, especially minority males.

       Our findings have important implications for school discipline and criminal justice

policies. In 2014, the Obama administration issued the first national guidance on school

discipline, urging schools to limit suspensions and other practices that remove students from the

classroom (ED, 2014). However, with a changing political climate and little causal evidence ­ in

support of or against ­ of the impact of exclusionary discipline on students, the U.S. Department

of Justice and Department of Education issued a joint statement in 2018 rescinding the Obama-

era guidance (ED, 2018). Our results contribute to this debate by demonstrating that exclusionary

discipline practices have large negative impacts on adult crime and educational attainment.




                                                28
References

Aizer, A., & Doyle Jr, J. J. (2015). Juvenile incarceration, human capital, and future crime:
       Evidence from randomly assigned judges. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2),
       759-803.


Anderson, D. M. (2014). In school and out of trouble? The minimum dropout age and juvenile
       crime. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(2), 318-331.


Bacher-Hicks, A., Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2014). Validating teacher effect estimates using
       changes in teacher assignments in Los Angeles (No. w20657). National Bureau of
       Economic Research.


Billings, S. B., Deming, D. J., & Rockoff, J. (2014). School segregation, educational attainment,
       and crime: Evidence from the end of busing in Charlotte-Mecklenburg. The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 129(1), 435-476.


Billings, S. B., Deming, D. J., & Ross, S. L. (2019). Partners in Crime. American Economic
       Journal: Applied Economics, 11(1), 126-50.


Carrell, S. E., & Hoekstra, M. L. (2010). Externalities in the classroom: How children exposed to
       domestic violence affect everyone's kids. American Economic Journal: Applied
       Economics, 2(1), 211-28.


Carrell, S. E., Hoekstra, M., & Kuka, E. (2018). The long-run effects of disruptive
       peers. American Economic Review, 108(11), 3377-3415.


Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., & Rockoff, J. E. (2014). Measuring the impacts of teachers I:
       Evaluating bias in teacher value-added estimates. American Economic Review, 104(9),
       2593-2632.




                                                29
Cook, P. J., & Kang, S. (2016). Birthdays, schooling, and crime: regression-discontinuity
       analysis of school performance, delinquency, dropout, and crime initiation. American
       Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(1), 33-57.


Cullen, J. B., Jacob, B. A., & Levitt, S. (2006). The effect of school choice on participants:
       Evidence from randomized lotteries. Econometrica, 74(5), 1191-1230.


Deming, D. J. (2011). Better schools, less crime? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4),
       2063-2115.


Deming, D. J. (2014). Using school choice lotteries to test measures of school
       effectiveness. American Economic Review, 104(5), 406-11.


Dobbie, W., Goldin, J., & Yang, C. S. (2018). The effects of pretrial detention on conviction,
       future crime, and employment: Evidence from randomly assigned judges. American
       Economic Review, 108(2), 201-40.


Fabelo, T., Thompson, M. D., Plotkin, M., Carmichael, D., Marchbanks, M. P., & Booth, E. A.
       (2011). Breaking schools' rules: A statewide study of how school discipline relates to
       students' success and juvenile justice involvement. New York: Council of State
       Governments Justice Center.


Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2008). Estimating teacher impacts on student achievement: An
       experimental evaluation (No. w14607). National Bureau of Economic Research.


Kinsler, J. (2013). School discipline: A source or salve for the racial achievement
       gap? International Economic Review, 54(1), 355-383.


Lochner, L., & Moretti, E. (2004). The effect of education on crime: Evidence from prison
       inmates, arrests, and self-reports. American economic review, 94(1), 155-189.



                                                 30
Mickelson, R. A., Smith, S. S., & Southworth, S. (2009). Resegregation, achievement, and the
       chimera of choice in post-unitary Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools. From the courtroom to
       the classroom: The shifting landscape of school desegregation, 129-156.


Mueller-Smith, M. (2015). The criminal and labor market impacts of incarceration. Unpublished
       Working Paper.


Owens, E. G. (2017). Testing the SchooltoPrison Pipeline. Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management, 36(1), 11-37.


Rose, E. K., Schellenberg, J., & Shem-Tov, Y (2019). The Effects of Teacher Quality on
       Criminal Behavior. Unpublished Working Paper.


Smith, Stephen S. Boom for Whom? Education, Desegregation and Development in Charlotte
       (Albany: SUNY Press, 2004).


Sorensen, L., Bushway, S. & Gifford, E. (2019). Getting Tough? The Effects of Discretionary
       Principal Discipline on Student Outcomes. Unpublished Working Paper.


US Department of Education. (2014). Guiding principles: A resource guide for improving school
       climate and discipline. Washington, DC. Retrieved from:
       https://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/school-discipline/guiding-principles.pdf


US Department of Education. (2018) Final Report of the Federal Commission on School Safety.
       Presented to the President of the United States. Retrieved from:
       https://www2.ed.gov/documents/school-safety/school-safety-report.pdf


Weisburst, E. K. (2019). Patrolling Public Schools: The Impact of Funding for School Police on
       Student Discipline and Longterm Education Outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management, 38(2), 338-365.

                                               31
Table 1. Summary of Sample Descriptive Statistics
                                                              Mean       SD
Male                                                          0.508    0.500
Black                                                         0.475    0.499
Hispanic                                                      0.078    0.267
White                                                         0.394    0.489
Limited English Proficiency                                   0.063    0.243
Special Education                                             0.097    0.296
Days Suspended                                                2.334    6.041
Days ISS                                                      0.438    1.343
Days OSS                                                      1.896    5.431
Ever Suspended Indicator                                      0.228    0.419
Ever ISS Indicator                                            0.163    0.369
Ever OSS Indicator                                            0.216    0.411
Test Scores (SD Units)                                        -0.036   0.996
Dropout Indicator                                             0.117    0.321
Attended 4-Year College Indicator                             0.229    0.420
Arrested Indicator (16-21)                                    0.187    0.390
Incarcerated Indicator (16-21)                                0.125    0.331
Number of Arrests (16-21)                                     0.569    1.779
Number of Incarceration Spells (16-21)                        0.391    1.487
Assigned New School in 2002-03                                0.505    0.500
N                                                                  26246

Notes: This table provides descriptive statistics for our main sample of students
in grades 6 through 8 in Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools (CMS) for the 2002-03
school year. Suspension outcomes are presented both in units of raw days and
indicators of ever suspended in 2002-03. Test scores are the average of students'
scores on the math and reading state tests and are standardized across the full
sample by year and grade. Due to data limitations on college attendance, college
outcomes are only presented for the 17,275 seventh and eighth grade students in
our sample, and are measured as any attendance within the 12-month period
after the student would have graduated on time from high school. Crime
outcomes are measured beginning at age 16 through age 21.




                                       32
Table 2. Tests of Covariate Balance

                                                              Predicted              Predicted
                                                           School Effect on       School Effect on
                                                             Suspensions            Test Scores
Prior-Year Days Suspended                                        0.001                 -0.000
                                                               (0.001)                (0.001)
Prior-Year Test Scores                                           0.001                  0.002
                                                               (0.002)                (0.003)
Black                                                            0.001                  0.007
                                                               (0.008)                (0.014)
Hispanic                                                        -0.011                 -0.001
                                                               (0.008)                (0.011)
Male                                                             0.001                 -0.003
                                                               (0.003)                (0.003)
Special Education                                               -0.001                  0.001
                                                               (0.004)                (0.005)
Limited English Proficiency                                      0.005                 -0.001
                                                               (0.009)                (0.009)
Indicator of Elementary School Suspensions                      -0.003                 -0.001
                                                               (0.003)                (0.005)
P-value for joint hypothesis F-test                              0.926                  0.804
N                                                               26246                  26246

Notes: In this table, we present the results of regressions of school effects on a set of baseline
variables. Each regression includes neighborhood by old school zone fixed effects and grade
fixed effects. We present the results for school effects on suspensions in column (1) and school
effects on test scores in column (2). In the second to last row, we present the p-value on an F-
test for the joint hypothesis that all the coefficients in each column are equal to zero. Test scores
are the average of students' scores on the math and reading state tests and are standardized
across the full sample by year and grade. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood by
old school zone level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                33
Table 3. Impacts of Days Suspended on Suspensions, Achievement, Attainment and Crime

                                                                                                                                             Number      Number
                                 Days        Days        Days        Susp.        Test                   4-Year     Arrested     Incarc.      Arrests     Incarc.
                                 Susp.        ISS         OSS      Indicator     Scores     Dropout      College     (16-21)     (16-21)      (16-21)     (16-21)
Sch. Effect on Suspensions     0.383***     0.078**     0.305**     0.017*       0.003       0.017*     -0.024**    0.032***    0.025***     0.140***    0.112***
                                (0.140)      (0.031)     (0.125)     (0.010)     (0.019)     (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.009)     (0.007)      (0.038)     (0.033)
N                                26246       26246       26246       26246       21153       26246       17275       26246        26246       26246        26246


Notes: In each column we present the coefficient, standard error, and sample size from a separate estimate of Equation 3. The results are interpreted as the effect
of being assigned to a school with a 1 SD increase in estimated school effect on days suspended. Each regression includes neighborhood by old school zone fixed
effects. In this sense, we are comparing students who attended the same school in 2001-02 and lived in the same neighborhood but were assigned different
schools in 2002-03. In addition to these fixed effects, all regressions control for lagged achievement on state tests, LEP status, SPED status, gender, race, and
grade level. Test scores are the average of students' scores on the math and reading state tests and are standardized across the full sample by year and grade.
Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood by old school zone level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                                               34
Table 4. Impacts of Suspension Likelihood on Suspensions, Achievement, Attainment and Crime

                                                                                                                                             Number       Number
                                 Days        Days        Days         Susp.       Test                   4-Year     Arrested      Incarc.     Arrests      Incarc.
                                 Susp.        ISS         OSS       Indicator    Scores     Dropout      College     (16-21)      (16-21)     (16-21)      (16-21)
Sch. Effect on Pr(Suspend)      0.331**     0.062**     0.269**      0.017**     0.004       0.014      -0.021**    0.026***     0.021***    0.122***     0.092***
                                (0.133)      (0.024)     (0.122)     (0.008)     (0.017)     (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.009)      (0.006)     (0.036)      (0.031)
N                                26246       26246       26246       26246        21153      26246        17275       26246       26246        26246       26246


Notes: Within each column and panel, we present the coefficient, standard error, and sample size from a separate estimate of Equation 3. The results are
interpreted as the effect of being assigned to a school with a 1 SD increase in estimated school effect on suspension likelihood. Each regression includes
neighborhood by old school zone fixed effects. In this sense, we are comparing students who attended the same school in 2001-02 and lived in the same
neighborhood but were assigned different schools in 2002-03. In addition to these fixed effects, all regressions control for lagged achievement on state tests, LEP
status, SPED status, gender, race, and grade level. Test scores are the average of students' scores on the math and reading state tests and are standardized across
the full sample by year and grade. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood by old school zone level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                                                35
Table 5. Variation in School Suspension Effects by Race and Gender
                                                                                                                                                                   Number        Number
                                            Days          Days          Days        Susp.         Test                     4-Year      Arrested       Incarc.      Arrests       Incarc.
                                            Susp.         ISS           OSS       Indicator      Scores      Dropout       College      (16-21)       (16-21)      (16-21)       (16-21)
Panel A: Effects by Race
Minority student (N=14493)                 0.434**        0.068       0.366*        0.012         -0.000       0.015        -0.016      0.039***     0.030***      0.193***     0.153***
                                           (0.218)       (0.044)      (0.199)      (0.014)        (0.023)     (0.013)      (0.012)       (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.053)      (0.045)
                                           [3.755]       [0.611]      [3.144]       [0.33]       [-0.504]     [0.157]      [0.172]       [0.259]      [0.183]       [0.865]      [0.613]
Nonminority student (N=11753)               0.207       0.128***       0.080       0.029**         0.029       0.017        -0.020      0.027**       0.019**       0.061**      0.044*
                                           (0.147)       (0.039)      (0.133)      (0.013)        (0.020)     (0.015)      (0.025)       (0.012)      (0.008)       (0.030)      (0.023)
                                           [0.831]       [0.185]      [0.646]      [0.107]        [0.521]     [0.066]      [0.297]       [0.098]      [0.054]       [0.205]      [0.118]
Panel B: Effects by Gender
Male student (N=13345)                     0.615***     0.145***      0.470**      0.030**        -0.007      0.031*        -0.019      0.044***     0.038***      0.230***     0.178***
                                            (0.228)      (0.050)      (0.212)      (0.014)        (0.021)     (0.016)      (0.014)       (0.013)      (0.010)       (0.059)      (0.052)
                                            [3.204]      [0.533]       [2.67]      [0.289]       [-0.128]     [0.137]      [0.199]       [0.257]      [0.185]       [0.896]      [0.645]
Female student (N=12901)                     0.131        -0.007       0.138        0.002          0.015       0.003        -0.029       0.020*        0.013         0.056       0.047**
                                            (0.118)      (0.036)      (0.106)      (0.009)        (0.020)     (0.010)      (0.021)       (0.011)      (0.009)       (0.036)      (0.024)
                                            [1.662]      [0.303]      [1.359]      [0.169]        [0.033]     [0.096]      [0.258]       [0.114]      [0.063]       [0.231]      [0.129]
Panel C: Effects by Race and Gender
Minority male (N=7320)                     0.824**       0.179**      0.646*         0.028        -0.023      0.037*        -0.022      0.054***     0.044***      0.319***     0.240***
                                           (0.368)       (0.077)      (0.349)       (0.020)       (0.029)     (0.019)      (0.018)       (0.014)      (0.013)       (0.081)      (0.070)
                                           [4.822]        [0.75]      [4.073]       [0.401]      [-0.618]     [0.185]      [0.139]       [0.354]      [0.272]       [1.373]       [1.02]
Nonminority male (N=6025)                   0.259       0.133***       0.126        0.048*       0.059**       0.022        0.006       0.049**      0.037***       0.113*       0.084*
                                           (0.234)       (0.045)      (0.207)       (0.026)       (0.026)     (0.017)      (0.030)       (0.020)      (0.013)       (0.059)      (0.045)
                                           [1.236]       [0.271]      [0.966]       [0.154]       [0.463]     [0.078]      [0.273]       [0.139]      [0.078]       [0.316]      [0.188]
Minority female (N=7173)                    0.060         -0.049       0.109        -0.005         0.020       -0.004       -0.020       0.027*        0.017         0.076       0.063*
                                           (0.186)       (0.043)      (0.166)       (0.012)       (0.020)     (0.015)      (0.024)       (0.017)      (0.016)       (0.050)      (0.034)
                                           [2.666]       [0.469]      [2.196]       [0.258]      [-0.392]     [0.129]      [0.206]       [0.162]      [0.092]       [0.346]      [0.196]
Nonminority female (N=5728)                 0.217*        0.136*       0.081         0.019        -0.004       0.009        -0.032        0.015        0.009         0.020        0.019
                                           (0.123)       (0.071)      (0.090)       (0.012)       (0.033)     (0.018)      (0.041)       (0.017)      (0.011)       (0.031)      (0.024)
                                           [0.405]       [0.095]       [0.31]       [0.057]       [0.581]     [0.054]      [0.322]       [0.054]      [0.028]       [0.088]      [0.045]
N                                           26246         26246        26246         26246         21153       26246        17275         26246        26246         26246        26246

Notes: Within each column and for each subsample, we estimate a separate regression of Equation 3. We present the coefficient, standard error in parentheses, and the sample means
of the outcome in brackets. Panel A presents the results by race. Panel B presents the results by gender. Panel C presents the results by race and gender. The results are interpreted as
the effect of being assigned to a school with a 1 SD increase in estimated school effect on days suspended. Each regression includes neighborhood by old school zone fixed effects.
In addition to these fixed effects, all regressions control for lagged achievement on state tests, LEP status, SPED status, g ender, race, and grade level. We define ``minority'' as black
and Hispanic students, and ``nonminority'' as all other ethnicities (including whites). Test scores are the average of students' scores on the math and reading state tests and are
standardized across the full sample by year and grade. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood by old school zone level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                                                         36
Table 6. Comparison of School Effects on Suspensions and School Effects on Test Scores

                                                                                                                                                      Number       Number
                                        Days         Days        Days        Susp.        Test                   4-Year      Arrested     Incarc.     Arrests      Incarc.
                                        Susp.        ISS         OSS       Indicator     Scores     Dropout      College      (16-21)     (16-21)     (16-21)      (16-21)
Sch. Effect on Suspensions            0.399***     0.080**     0.319***       0.016       0.002       0.014      -0.026**    0.033***     0.023***    0.144***     0.117***
                                       (0.138)      (0.033)     (0.121)      (0.010)     (0.019)     (0.010)     (0.012)      (0.009)      (0.006)     (0.040)      (0.033)
Sch. Effect on Test Scores             0.134*       0.016        0.118       -0.001       0.001       0.010       -0.001       0.006       0.012        0.058       0.064*
                                       (0.077)      (0.021)     (0.074)      (0.004)     (0.013)     (0.009)     (0.008)      (0.011)      (0.009)     (0.039)      (0.035)
Sch. Effect on Teacher Turnover         0.084       0.010        0.074       -0.002      -0.004      -0.007       -0.006       0.005       -0.002       0.029        0.032
                                       (0.096)      (0.028)     (0.082)      (0.006)     (0.010)     (0.006)     (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.036)      (0.031)
N                                       26246       26246       26246        26246        21153       26246       17275       26246        26246        26246       26246

Notes: Each column presents the coefficients, standard errors, and sample size from a separate estimate of Equation 3, which includes school effects on suspensions,
school effects on test scores and school effects on teacher turnover as predictor variables. The results are interpreted as the effect of being assigned to a school with a 1
SD increase in estimated effect. Each regression includes neighborhood by old school zone fixed effects. In addition to these fixed effects, all regressions control for
lagged achievement on state tests, LEP status, SPED status, gender, and race. Test scores are the average of students' scores on the math and reading state tests and are
standardized across the full sample by year and grade. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood by old zone and new school zone level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05
*** p < 0.01




                                                                                37
Table 7. Decomposition of Variance at School-, Teacher-, Year- and Student-Level
                                                         Days                     Test
                                                       Suspended                 Scores
School-level standard deviation                          0.160                    0.090
Within-school teacher-level standard deviation           0.059                    0.227
Within-teacher year-level standard deviation             0.312                    0.179
Idiosyncratic (student-level) standard deviation         0.815                    0.445
Total SD                                                 0.889                    0.538
N (student-year-course)                                 115967                   115967

Notes: This table uses student-year-course level data from grades 6 through 8 math and
reading classrooms in 2000 and 2001 to estimate the variance at the school, teacher, year, and
student-level idiosyncratic error. Each column presents a separate regression. The outcome in
the first column is the number of days suspended z-score. The outcome in the second column
is the average math and reading z-score. In each column, we report the raw standard deviation
of suspension and test score residuals and decompose this variation into components driven by
idiosyncratic within-year student-level variation, within-teacher year shocks, and within-
school teacher variation, and persistent school-level variation across years. The corresponding
variances to the standard deviations in rows 1 ­ 4 sum to total variance in row 5.




                                               38
Table 8. Persistence of School Effects Across Years and Leadership Changes
                                                           M1          M2                  M3
Lagged School Effect                                    0.937***   0.947***             0.948***
                                                         (0.068)     (0.062)             (0.062)
(Lagged School Effect) X (Indicator for New Principal)              -0.277**            -0.276**
                                                                     (0.124)             (0.123)
(Lagged School Effect) X (Indicator for 2003)                                             -0.012
                                                                                         (0.211)
Indicator for New Principal                                    0.014         0.013        0.013
                                                              (0.014)       (0.015)      (0.015)
N (school-by-year)                                              480           480          480

Notes: This table presents results of autoregressions of school-by-year effects on suspensions,
using data from 2001 through 2011. We estimate each school-by-year effect using only data
from each year and condition on baseline student test scores, student demographics, and grade
fixed effects. All autoregressions regressions in this table include year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the school level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                               39
Table 9. Principal Effects on Suspensions
                                                (1)          (2)             (3)
Principal Effect from Prior School           0.410**
                                             (0.183)
Principal Effect from Future School                        0.523**
                                                           (0.262)
Stacked (Prior or Future)                                                 0.538***
                                                                           (0.204)
N (school-by-year)                             480           480             480

Notes: This table presents results of regressions of principals' estimated effects on
school-by-year mean suspensions, using data from 2001 through 2011. We estimate
principal effects using only data from other schools. All regressions in this table
include school and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the school
level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                               40
Panel A. Before redistricting (2001-02 school year):




Panel B. After redistricting (2002-03 school year):




Figure 1. Redistricting for Two Middle Schools



                                             41
Figure 2. Distribution of Average Suspension Rates, by School

Notes: This figure plots the distribution of school average suspension rates, weighted by the
number of students in each school. Sample includes all schools serving students in grades 6
through 8 in 2003. The distribution has a mean of 0.216 and standard deviation of 0.097.




                                                42
Figure 3. Distribution of Average Residual Suspension Rates, by School

Notes: This figure plots the distribution of school average residual suspension rates, weighted by
the number of students in each school. Residuals are calculated at the student level, by
conditioning on student demographics, baseline test scores, grade, and year. Sample includes all
schools serving students in grades 6 through 8 in 2003. The distribution has a mean of 0.005 and
standard deviation of 0.053.




                                                43
Figure 4. Empirical Distribution of School Effects

Notes: This figure plots kernel densities of the empirical distribution of school effects on
suspensions and test scores, weighted by the number of students in each school. The standard
deviations of the suspension effect and test score effect are 0.090 and 0.034, respectively.




                                              44
Figure 5. Comparison of School Effects on Suspensions, Test Scores, and Teacher
Turnover

Notes: The top panel plots schools' estimated effects on test scores vs. their estimated effects on
suspensions. The bottom panel plots schools' estimated effects on teacher turnover vs. their
estimated effects on suspensions. Neither relationship is statistically significant.


                                                 45
                                                                              Appendix

Appendix Table A1. Non-Linear Impacts of Days Suspended on Suspensions, Achievement, Attainment and Crime

                                                                                                                                                Number       Number
                              Days         Days         Days        Susp.         Test                   4-Year      Arrested      Incarc.      Arrests      Incarc.
                              Susp.        ISS          OSS       Indicator      Scores     Dropout      College      (16-21)      (16-21)      (16-21)      (16-21)
Sch. Effect Tercile 2        0.724**       0.131      0.593**        0.005       -0.026       0.023       -0.040     0.056***     0.044***      0.269**      0.243***
                             (0.289)      (0.108)     (0.233)       (0.023)      (0.047)     (0.023)      (0.034)     (0.022)       (0.015)      (0.116)      (0.089)
Sch. Effect Tercile 3       0.892***      0.182*     0.710***        0.021       0.019        0.035       0.013      0.070***     0.052***      0.302***     0.259***
                             (0.315)      (0.093)     (0.271)       (0.023)      (0.050)     (0.025)      (0.035)     (0.021)       (0.013)      (0.107)      (0.082)
N                             26246        26246       26246        26246        21153        26246       17275        26246        26246        26246        26246

Notes: In each column we present the coefficients, standard errors, and sample size from a separate estimate of Equation 3, including indicators for school
effect terciles. The results are interpreted as the effect of being assigned to a second (or third) tercile a school, relative to a school with suspension effects in
the lowest tercile (i.e., the least strict schools). Each regression includes neighborhood by old school zone fixed effects. In this sense, we are comparing
students who attended the same school in 2001-02 and lived in the same neighborhood but were assigned different schools in 2002-03. In addition to these
fixed effects, all regressions control for lagged achievement on state tests, LEP status, SPED status, gender, race, and grade level. Test scores are the average
of students' scores on the math and reading state tests and are standardized across the full sample by year and grade. Standard errors are clustered at the
neighborhood by old school zone level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                                                  46
Appendix Table A2. Impacts of Days Suspended on Type of Arrest

                                                              Serious                                   Number of            Number of            Number of
                                      Serious Violent      Property Crime                             Serious Violent         Serious             Other (Non-
                                       Crime Arrest            Arrest             Other Arrest        Crime Arrests        Property Crime       Serious) Arrests
                                          (16-21)              (16-21)               (16-21)              (16-21)          Arrests (16-21)          (16-21)
Sch. Effect on Suspensions                  0.001              0.018***              0.013**               0.001               0.041**              0.099***
                                           (0.004)              (0.006)              (0.005)              (0.005)               (0.016)              (0.024)
N                                          26246                 26246                26246                26246                26246                26246

Notes: In this table we present the relationship between school suspension effects and subsequent type of arrest. Serious violent crimes are murder,
manslaughter, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault. Serious property crimes are arson, burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft. The results are interpreted
as the effect of being assigned to a school with a 1 SD increase in estimated school effect on days suspended. Each regression includes neighborhood by old
school zone fixed effects. In addition to these fixed effects, all regressions control for lagged achievement on state tests, LEP status, SPED status, gender,
race, and grade level. Test scores are the average of students' scores on the math and reading state tests and are standardized across the full sample by year and
grade. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood by old school zone level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                                               47
Appendix Table A3. Impacts by School Effects on ISS and OSS
                                                                                                                                                     Number       Number
               Days        Days         Days        Susp.         ISS         OSS          Test                  4-Year     Arrested     Incarc.     Arrests      Incarc.
               Susp.       ISS          OSS       Indicator    Indicator    Indicator     Scores    Dropout      College     (16-21)     (16-21)     (16-21)      (16-21)

Days ISS     0.381***    0.085***     0.296***      0.017*      0.022**        0.006       -0.004     0.012       -0.016    0.029***     0.022***    0.145***     0.118***
              (0.117)     (0.029)      (0.109)      (0.009)     (0.010)       (0.006)     (0.019)    (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.007)      (0.005)     (0.036)      (0.029)
N              26246       26246        26246        26246       26246         26246       21153      26246       17275       26246        26246       26246        26246

Days OSS       0.119       0.003        0.116        0.003        -0.010       0.009       0.016      0.023     -0.029**      0.020       0.016*       0.029        0.020
              (0.126)     (0.026)      (0.123)      (0.010)      (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.020)    (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.013)      (0.010)     (0.041)      (0.037)
N              26246       26246        26246        26246        26246        26246       21153      26246       17275       26246        26246       26246        26246

Ever ISS     0.341***    0.060***     0.281***     0.015**      0.016**        0.007       -0.005     0.011       -0.013    0.023***     0.016***    0.128***     0.098***
              (0.113)     (0.023)      (0.107)     (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)     (0.018)    (0.013)     (0.010)     (0.007)      (0.005)     (0.037)      (0.030)
N              26246       26246        26246       26246        26246         26246       21153      26246       17275       26246        26246       26246        26246

Ever OSS       0.170       -0.004       0.174        0.009        -0.010     0.017**       0.017      0.021      -0.025*      0.019       0.017*       0.044        0.019
              (0.133)     (0.034)      (0.126)      (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.008)      (0.019)    (0.014)     (0.013)     (0.012)      (0.009)     (0.046)      (0.042)
N              26246       26246        26246        26246        26246       26246        21153      26246       17275       26246        26246       26246        26246

Notes: Each cell presents the coefficient, standard error, and sample size from a separate estimate of Equation 3. The results are interpreted as the effect of being
assigned to a school with a 1 SD increase in estimated school effect on days suspended. Each regression includes neighborhood by old school zone fixed effects. In
this sense, we are comparing students who attended the same school in 2001-02 and lived in the same neighborhood but were assigned different schools in 2002-03.
In addition to these fixed effects, all regressions control for lagged achievement on state tests, LEP status, SPED status, gender, race, and grade level. Test scores are
the average of students' scores on the math and reading state tests and are standardized across the full sample by year and grade. Standard errors are clustered at the
neighborhood by old school zone level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                                                48
Appendix Table A4. Variation in School Suspension Effects by Suspension Risk Quartile

                                                                                                                                         Number       Number
                     Days                      Days         Susp.        Test                     4-Year      Arrested      Incarc.      Arrests      Incarc.
                     Susp.      Days ISS       OSS        Indicator     Scores      Dropout       College      (16-21)      (16-21)      (16-21)       (16-21)
Risk Quartile 1      0.068        0.038        0.030        0.008        -0.002       -0.017       -0.090       -0.006       0.013        0.003         0.029
                    (0.112)      (0.031)      (0.110)      (0.012)      (0.018)      (0.016)      (0.057)      (0.013)      (0.010)       (0.024)      (0.022)
Risk Quartile 2      -0.049       0.026       -0.075       -0.005       0.057**       0.014        -0.022       0.024        0.009        0.043         0.010
                    (0.097)      (0.028)      (0.094)      (0.011)      (0.024)      (0.020)      (0.028)      (0.020)      (0.011)       (0.042)      (0.022)
Risk Quartile 3      0.401      0.106***       0.296      0.042***       -0.030      0.031*        -0.004     0.050***      0.030**      0.125***      0.071**
                    (0.281)      (0.040)      (0.272)      (0.014)      (0.043)      (0.016)      (0.019)      (0.012)      (0.013)       (0.047)      (0.031)
Risk Quartile 4     0.802*        0.145       0.657*        0.014        -0.017       0.027        -0.013       0.036*      0.032**      0.263**       0.242**
                    (0.458)      (0.114)      (0.381)      (0.027)      (0.020)      (0.017)      (0.013)      (0.021)      (0.015)       (0.128)      (0.104)
N                    26246       26246        26246        26246         21153        26246        17275        26246        26246        26246        26246

Notes: Within each column and for each subsample, we estimate a separate regression of Equation 3. We present the coefficient, and standard error in
parentheses. Risk quartiles are defined by generating four equal sized groups of students, based on the predicted number of days suspended. We predict days
suspended using student demographics, prior achievement and elementary school suspensions. Quartile 1 indicates students least at risk of suspension; quartile
4 indicates those most at risk. The results are interpreted as the effect of being assigned to a school with a 1 SD increase in estimated school effect on
suspension likelihood. Each regression includes neighborhood by old school zone fixed effects. In addition to these fixed effects, all regressions control for
lagged achievement on state tests, LEP status, SPED status, gender, race, and grade level. Test scores are the average of students' scores on the math and
reading state tests and are standardized across the full sample by year and grade. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood by old school zone level. *
p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                                              49
Appendix Table A5. Relationship Between School Effects and Peer Characteristics

                           Mean         Proportion                                                                                                 Proportion
                          Baseline       Missing                                                                    Proportion      Proportion      Missing
                            Test         Baseline      Proportion     Proportion      Proportion     Proportion      SPED In         LEP In         SPED or
                           Scores       Test Scores      Black         Hispanic         White          Male         Prior Year      Prior Year        LEP
Preferred Sch. Effect       -0.009         -0.002         -0.006          0.006          0.005          0.003*         -0.002          0.008          0.001
                           (0.032)        (0.005)        (0.032)         (0.007)        (0.032)        (0.002)         (0.004)        (0.009)        (0.004)
Naïve Sch. Effect         -0.128***        0.011        0.095***        0.025***       -0.121***        0.002          -0.000        0.030***         -0.003
                           (0.018)        (0.007)        (0.025)         (0.007)        (0.024)        (0.002)         (0.004)        (0.007)        (0.005)
N                           26246          26246          26246          26246           26246          26246          26246          26246           26246

Notes: Within each column, we present the coefficient, standard error, and sample size from a separate estimate of Equation 3. The results are interpreted as
the effect of being assigned to a school with a 1 SD increase in estimated school effect. Each column contains a different outcome, identified by all other
students in the school and year. Each regression includes neighborhood by old school zone fixed effects and grade level indicators. Test scores are the average
of students' scores on the math and reading state tests and are standardized across the full sample by year and grade. Standard errors are clustered at the
neighborhood by old school zone level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                                              50
Appendix Table A6. Sensitivity of Main Results to Principal Switches

                                                                                                                                            Number      Number
                                 Days        Days       Days        Susp.       Test                   4-Year     Arrested      Incarc.     Arrests     Incarc.
                                 Susp.       ISS        OSS       Indicator    Scores     Dropout      College     (16-21)      (16-21)     (16-21)     (16-21)
Sch. Effect on Suspensions      0.391**     0.077*     0.315*       0.015       -0.005      0.016       -0.015      0.023*     0.021***    0.131***     0.111***
                                (0.188)     (0.040)    (0.173)     (0.014)     (0.023)     (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.013)      (0.007)      (0.047)     (0.036)
N                                18833      18833       18833       18833       15180       18833       12397       18833       18833        18833        18833

Notes: Sample includes students in grades 6 through 8 in 2003 who were assigned schools that did not have a new principal. Within each column, we present
the coefficient, standard error, and sample size from a separate estimate of Equation 3. The results are interpreted as the effect of being assigned to a school
with a 1 SD increase in estimated school effect on days suspended. Each regression includes neighborhood by old school zone fixed effects. In addition to
these fixed effects, all regressions control for lagged achievement on state tests, LEP status, SPED status, gender, race, and grade level. Test scores are the
average of students' scores on the math and reading state tests and are standardized across the full sample by year and grade. Standard errors are clustered at
the neighborhood by old school zone level. * p < 0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                                               51
Appendix Figure A1. Distribution of Average Days Suspended, by School

Notes: This figure plots the distribution of average number of days suspended, weighted by the
number of students in each school. Sample includes all schools serving students in grades 6
through 8 in 2003. The distribution has a mean of 2.158 and standard deviation of 1.332.




                                              52
Appendix Figure A2. Distribution of Average Residual Days Suspended, by School

Notes: This figure plots the distribution of average residual number of days suspended, weighted
by the number of students in each school. Residuals are calculated at the student-level, by
conditioning on student demographics, baseline test scores, grade, and year. Sample includes all
schools serving students in grades 6 through 8 in 2003. The distribution has a mean of 0.029 and
standard deviation of 0.719.




                                               53
