                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF BANKRUPTCY REFORM

                                           Tal Gross
                                      Raymond Kluender
                                            Feng Liu
                                     Matthew J. Notowidigdo
                                          Jialan Wang

                                       Working Paper 26254
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26254


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019

The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau or the United States. We thank Huan Zhao, staff at the California
Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development, and Carlos Dobkin for their assistance
accessing and compiling datasets used in this project. We are grateful to Amy Finkelstein, Paul
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Erik Hurst, Neale Mahoney, Brian Melzer, Scott Nelson, Christopher
Palmer, James Poterba, Amit Seru, Tavneet Suri, Heidi Williams, Jonathan Zinman, and seminar
participants at MIT, NYU, AEA, Harvard Business School (EM), Arizona, Wharton (BEPP), the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Microsoft Research, GWU, CFPB, Duke Fuqua, Harvard
Law School, WAPFIN, and NBER Summer Institute Corporate Finance and Law and Economics
sessions for thoughtful feedback and comments. Anran Li and Pinchuan Ong provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26254.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Tal Gross, Raymond Kluender, Feng Liu, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economic Consequences of Bankruptcy Reform
Tal Gross, Raymond Kluender, Feng Liu, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 26254
September 2019
JEL No. D14,G21,G28,K35,L13

                                         ABSTRACT

A more generous consumer bankruptcy system provides greater insurance against financial risks,
but it may also raise the cost of credit to consumers. We study this trade-off using the 2005
Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA), which raised the costs
of filing for bankruptcy. We identify the effects of BAPCPA on borrowing costs by exploiting
variation in the effects of the reform on bankruptcy risk across credit-score segments. Using a
combination of administrative records, credit reports, and proprietary market-research data, we
find that the reform reduced bankruptcy filings, and reduced the likelihood that an uninsured
hospitalization received bankruptcy relief by 70 percent. BAPCPA led to a decrease in credit card
interest rates, with an implied pass-through rate of 60­75 percent. Overall, BAPCPA decreased
the gap in offered interest rates between prime and subprime consumers by roughly 10 percent.


Tal Gross                                       Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Questrom School of Business                     Northwestern University
595 Commonwealth Ave.                           Department of Economics
Boston, MA 02215                                2001 Sheridan Road
and NBER                                        Evanston, IL 60208-2600
talgross@bu.edu                                 and NBER
                                                noto@northwestern.edu
Raymond Kluender
Harvard Business School                         Jialan Wang
Rock Center 217                                 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Soldiers Field Rd                               Department of Finance
Boston, MA 02163                                340 Wohlers Hall
rkluender@hbs.edu                               1206 S. Sixth Street MC-706
                                                Champaign, IL 61820
Feng Liu                                        jialanw@illinois.edu
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
Office of Research
1700 G Street NW
Washington, DC 20552
Feng.Liu@cfpb.gov
1       Introduction

In recent decades, the rate of consumer bankruptcy filings in the United States climbed from

0.3 percent of households annually in the early 1980s to 1.5 percent in the early 2000s (Board of

Governors, 2006). This five-fold increase in the bankruptcy rate was cited by lawmakers as a reason

to pass the 2005 Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA). The bill

implemented a number of provisions that collectively made filing for bankruptcy more onerous,

more expensive, and less financially beneficial.

    By making bankruptcy less attractive, BAPCPA was widely expected to reduce bankruptcy

filings. But there was considerable debate regarding how the reform would affect consumer credit

markets. Proponents of the bill argued that creditors would pass through higher debt-recovery rates

in the form of lower interest rates. Judge Richard Posner argued that "the new Act. . . should reduce

interest rates and thus make borrowers better off" (Posner, 2005). By contrast, critics of the reform

argued that a reduction in filings would not be passed-through to borrowers but would instead be

captured by lenders.1 Additionally, critics contended that claims of abuse were overstated, and

that the bill would harm filers struggling with medical expenses and job loss (Warren and Tyagi,

2005).

    This paper informs that debate by estimating how the decline in bankruptcy filings caused

by BAPCPA affected the interest rates offered to consumers in unsecured credit markets. Our

analysis consists of three main steps. First, we develop a stylized model of consumer bankruptcy to

study the relationship between the bankruptcy filing rate and the cost of borrowing. We show that

decreases in filing risk are associated with interest rate declines. The pass-through rate depends on

the amount recovered from those deterred from filing at the margin. All else equal, the higher

the average repayment rate for these marginal filers, the greater the change in interest rates.

We calibrate the pass-through expression under perfect competition to produce a benchmark of

expected interest rate pass-through of 87­112 basis points for a 1 percentage point change in the

bankruptcy filing rate.

    Second, we document that the reform indeed dramatically decreased the number of bankrupt-

    1
    For instance, Warren (2004) wrote that the "industry never said that the $44 billion it planned to recover from
bankrupt families would be passed on to customers. History suggests that it would not."


                                                        1
cies, using "excess mass" techniques borrowed from the recent literature studying bunching at tax

kinks (Saez, 1999; Kleven and Waseem, 2013). We use this approach in order to estimate the net

effect of BAPCPA after accounting for the large increase in bankruptcies just prior to the effective

date of BAPCPA in October 2015. In the months immediately before the reform, we estimate a

net increase in filings of more than 750,000, as consumers rushed to file for bankruptcy to discharge

their debts before the new bankruptcy code was implemented. Over time, however, we find that

the reform reduced the bankruptcy rate by roughly 50 percent. Net of the short-run increase during

the "rush-to-file," we estimate that there were roughly one million fewer bankruptcy filings in the

two years after BAPCPA than would have occurred without the reform.

    Third, we estimate the pass-through of the change in bankruptcy filings to interest rates by

exploiting variation in the effect of the reform on bankruptcy filings across the credit score spectrum.

To do so, we first estimate the effect of BAPCPA on the bankruptcy filing rate within each 10-point

credit score bin using detailed credit report data for a large sample of individuals. We combine

the change in filing risk with proprietary data on interest rates of credit card offers for the same

bins. We then estimate event study and difference-in-difference regression models that compare the

change in prices to the change in filing risk for each credit score bin before and after the reform.2

The key identifying assumption is that interest rates would have evolved similarly across credit-score

segments absent the reform. We provide evidence supporting this "common trends" assumption

with an event-study figure, which shows no differential trends across credit-score segments in the

years leading up to the reform. We also show that the results are robust to subprime-specific trends,

suggesting that the results are not driven by other factors differentially affecting the subprime credit

market during this time period.

    We find that a one percentage point decline in bankruptcy filing risk within a credit-score

segment decreases average interest rates by 67 basis points. Interpreting these estimates through

the lens of the stylized model, we conclude that between 60 and 75 percent of the cost savings

to creditors from the reduced bankruptcy filings were passed on to consumers. According to the


   2
     We focus primarily on the effect of BAPCPA on credit card interest rates. Lenders may also have responded
to BAPCPA by changing credit limits (in addition to changing prices), but we do not study such adjustments in
this paper. One benefit of focusing on price adjustments is that it is more straightforward to calculate pass-through
estimates and compare our results to a perfect-competition benchmark (full pass-through).


                                                         2
model, these results imply that the marginal consumers deterred by BAPCPA likely repaid a large

share of their unsecured debts instead of discharging their debts in bankruptcy.

    One of the central provisions of BAPCPA was a "means test" which restricted the options

available to high-income filers and was intended to "ensure that debtors repay creditors the max-

imum they can afford" (House Report, 2005). The means test was designed to shift filers with

higher incomes from Chapter 7 to Chapter 13 by eliminating the option to file under Chapter 7.3

While we find that BAPCPA lowered interest rates, we find suggestive evidence that this effect

was not in fact driven by a disproportionate decline in filing by high-income filers, as policymakers

had intended. Counter to the intent of the law, we find no change in the distribution of income

of bankruptcy filers when we proxy for income using the median income in the filer's ZIP Code.4

These findings are consistent with other research which has suggested that the cost of filing for

bankruptcy deters filings (Gross et al., 2014).

    We also find suggestive evidence that BAPCPA reduced the rate of bankruptcy filing following a

hospital admission. Building on the event-study approach of Dobkin et al. (2018a), we find that an

uninsured hospitalization increases the likelihood of filing for bankruptcy by 1.5 percentage points

prior to the reform, but by just 0.4 percentage points after the reform. While a hospitalization is

just one example of an adverse shock, to the degree that this finding generalizes to other types of

negative wealth shocks, these results suggest that the bankruptcies deterred by BAPCPA were not

limited to the most "abusive" filings and meaningfully reduced the insurance value of bankruptcy.5

    Taken together, the results in this paper suggest that BAPCPA reduced bankruptcy filings,

but not in the targeted way that proponents had intended. Nevertheless, the law still appears

to have provided meaningful benefits to many consumers in the form of lower credit card interest

rates. Our model reconciles these results by highlighting the importance of the average repayment


    3
      Chapter 7 bankruptcy offers filers a "fresh start." All qualifying debts are discharged in exchange for their
non-exempt assets. Chapter 13 bankruptcy offers filers a "reorganization." Chapter 13 filers lose no assets, but must
commit to a repayment plan out of their future income.
    4
      Additionally, we find only a small increase in the share of Chapter 13 filings and find that filings of both chapters
declined after the reform. These results suggest that the BAPCPA caused large declines in bankruptcy rates across
a broad range of consumers, swamping an effect of the means test on inducing consumers to switch between Chapter
7 and Chapter 13.
    5
      While the share of bankruptcies caused by hospitalizations appears to be small according to Dobkin et al.
(2018b), it is a frequently cited source of financial risk faced by households and one the bankruptcy system is
frequently referenced as insuring.


                                                            3
rates of marginal filers in determining the change in interest rates. The model also reveals that

high repayment rates for marginal filers is consistent with high costs of filing. This highlights the

stark trade-off for policymakers: marginal filers may benefit substantially from a more generous

bankruptcy system (getting a "fresh start" instead of repaying a larger share of their debts), but

these benefits come at the cost of higher interest rates for other consumers.

    This paper contributes to three main areas of research. First, it contributes new evidence on the

effect of the bankruptcy code on consumer credit markets. Gropp et al. (1997), Berkowitz and White

(2004), and Severino and Brown (2017) use cross-state variation in bankruptcy exemptions and find

that more-generous exemptions are associated with less readily available credit, and Chakrabarti

and Pattison (2016) find that the elimination of auto loan "cramdowns" under Chapter 13 reduced

interest rates on auto loans.6 This paper is also related to earlier evaluations of BAPCPA which

focused on aggregate interest-rate spreads (Simkovic, 2009) and student loans (Alexandrov and

Jim´
   enez, 2017). We also implement a time-series analysis, which shows some apparent narrowing

of interest rates between subprime and prime consumers, but our main results go beyond that simple

time-series analysis by exploiting variation in effects of the reform across credit-score segments. To

our knowledge, this paper provides the first event-study estimates of the effects of BAPCPA on

credit card interest rates.7

    Second, this paper provides new evidence on pass-through in consumer credit markets. Existing

research on pass-through in credit markets emphasizes sticky interest rates (and thus limited pass-

through), but this research typically estimates pass-through using shocks to the cost of funds rather

than shocks to default risk (e.g., Ausubel, 1991; Calem and Mester, 1995; Stavins, 1996; Stango,

2000; Calem et al., 2006; Agarwal et al., 2017). We thus contribute new evidence to this literature

by estimating how changes in bankruptcy filing risk are passed-through to credit card interest rates.


   6
     Cramdowns allowed borrowers to reduce the principal of their loan to the current market value of the vehicle.
   7
     Other related work on BAPCPA includes studies by Li et al. (2011), Morgan et al. (2012), and Mitman (2016).
Those papers argue that by reducing the substitutability between bankruptcy and foreclosure, BAPCPA increased
foreclosures and exacerbated the mortgage crisis. Albanesi and Nosal (2018) also evaluate BAPCPA and document
similar declines in bankruptcy filing rates for Chapter 7, which they attribute to liquidity constraints from the in-
creased cost of filing. They also document an accompanying rise in insolvency and, along with Han and Li (2011),
show that bankruptcy filers have better access to credit than the insolvent. Nakajima (2017) argues that BAPCPA
improved welfare by lowering default premia and improving consumption smoothing, but not for agents with temp-
tation. Relative to this work, this paper contributes event-study estimates of the effect of BAPCPA on interest rates
and estimates pass-through.


                                                         4
While a full reconciliation of the different pass-through estimates is outside the scope of this paper,

Grodzicki (2017) argues that credit card markets have become more competitive in recent years

following the costly adoption of screening technology, which is consistent with a large amount of

price responsiveness to changes in default risk due to bankruptcy reform.8

    Lastly, this paper is related to studies of the consumer bankruptcy system that calibrate struc-

tural models (Zame, 1993; Dubey et al., 2005; Livshits et al., 2007; Chatterjee et al., 2007; Mitman,

2016; Nakajima, 2017). Those models typically emphasize the trade-off between using bankruptcy

to smooth consumption across states of the world and the higher cost of smoothing consumption

over time, often while assuming perfectly competitive credit markets (and thus full pass-through

of the costs of lending to consumers). Our results suggest a large amount of pass-through from

bankruptcy reform to interest rates in consumer credit markets, which provides empirical evidence

in support of these modeling assumptions.

    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides background infor-

mation on bankruptcy before and after BAPCPA. Section 3 develops a simple model to guide an

assessment of the costs and benefits of bankruptcy reform. Section 4 describes our data sources

and sample construction. Section 5 evaluates how BAPCPA affected the number of filings, Section

6 then estimates the pass-through of this decline in bankruptcy to borrowing costs. Section 7

evaluates how the reform changed who declares bankruptcy. Section 8 concludes.


2    Institutional Background

In contrast to other developed countries, American consumers have historically enjoyed an ex-

ceptionally debtor-friendly bankruptcy system.9              In particular, American consumers filing for

bankruptcy have had the option to freely choose between a "fresh start" (liquidating outstand-

ing debts through Chapter 7) and a "reorganization" of debts (repaying debts on an installment

plan over several years through Chapter 13). Chapter 7 filers must forfeit all non-exempt assets in

exchange for discharge of their debt, while Chapter 13 filers are allowed to keep all of their assets
   8
     More broadly, this paper is also related to other empirical studies of pass-through in imperfectly competitive
markets, such as recent work on Medicare Advantage (Cabral et al., 2018) and the Spanish electricity market (Fabra
and Reguant, 2014).
   9
     Italy, for instance, had no form of consumer bankruptcy until 2015, and Germany only began allowing consumer
bankruptcy in 1999. Before then, consumers in those countries had few options to discharge their debts (Tabb, 2005).


                                                         5
but must repay their debt out of future income.

    Despite the potential financial benefits, consumer bankruptcy has historically been a relatively

rare phenomenon in the United States. In the late 1970s, just 0.3 percent of households filed for

bankruptcy in a given year. In 1978, the United States adopted a new bankruptcy code and legalized

advertisements by bankruptcy attorneys. A 1978 Supreme Court decision allowed banks to export

their home interest rates and so evade state usury laws.10 These changes in policy catalyzed the

growth of unsecured borrowing in the ensuing decades (White, 2007). By 1999, the bankruptcy

rate had increased to 1.5 percent, prompting creditors to lobby for a more-stringent bankruptcy

code.

    To make their case, credit-industry lobbyists pointed to a handful of high-profile cases of "ex-

emption shopping." For those bankruptcies, debtors moved across state lines to select the most-

beneficial bankruptcy regime, and this was held up as emblematic of the abuse rampant in the

bankruptcy system. A reform of the bankruptcy system was first drafted in 1998 and passed by

Congress in 2000, but pocket-vetoed by President Clinton. The bill was reintroduced each Congress

until it finally passed with broad bipartisan support in 2005. The Senate passed the bill on March

10, 2005, the House on April 14, 2005, and it was signed by President Bush on April 20, 2005. The

new bankruptcy code went into effect for all bankruptcies filed on or after Monday, October 17,

2005.

    BAPCPA made filing for bankruptcy less attractive in three primary ways. First, the law sought

to prohibit higher-income households from filing Chapter 7. To do so, lawmakers introduced a means

test which they referred to as "the heart of the bill" (House Report, 2005). The means test added

a "presumption of abuse" for filers whose income is above certain thresholds. Debtors are subject

to the means test if their income from the previous six full months before filing, adjusted for family

size, is more than the state median income (Parra, 2018).11 Debtors subject to the means test are


  10
      In Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corporation (439 U.S. 299 (1978)), the
U.S. Supreme Court ruled that state anti-usury laws regulating interest rates are not enforceable against nationally
chartered banks based in other states.
   11
      Virtually all income is included in this calculation with the notable exception of Social Security income. Those
with debts that are not "primarily consumer debts" (e.g. business investments) are also exempt from the means test.
Debtors can also "pass" the means test if they can demonstrate that their "disposable income" (income after allowed
deductions) is less than $182.50 or $109.59, if that is enough to pay unsecured creditors more than 25 percent of the
debt owed over five years.


                                                          6
functionally prohibited from filing Chapter 7, and can only file Chapter 13 (which, post BAPCPA,

required higher repayment). This created an incentive for borrowers to suppress their labor supply

and earnings below the state median in order to skirt the means test and file Chapter 7 or reduce

their repayment obligation under Chapter 13.12

    Second, BAPCPA limited the benefits of filing for bankruptcy along a number of dimensions.

Prior to BAPCPA, Chapter 13 filers could propose their own repayment plan and faced no incentive

to offer a repayment plan more generous than the relief they would receive under Chapter 7. After

BAPCPA, Chapter 13 filers are required to forfeit 100 percent of their disposable income for five

years to pay down their debts.13 The reform also limited the ability of filers to discharge some

purchases and "exemption shop" for the most-favorable state bankruptcy regime. Debtors who

move must now wait two years before they are allowed to file under their new state's exemptions.

Bankruptcy filers must wait a set number of years before they are allowed to file again. BAPCPA

increased the waiting period from six years to eight years for Chapter 7 and from six months to

two years for Chapter 13.

    Finally, BAPCPA made the process of filing for bankruptcy much more burdensome and ex-

pensive. Bankruptcy court fees themselves increased. Bankruptcy filers are now required to take

two educational courses: a credit-counseling course before filing and a financial-management course

before their debt is discharged. Filing requirements increased and bankruptcy attorneys were made

liable for any inaccuracies in the filing, which increased attorney costs by as much as $500 and sub-

sequently increased the fees they charged their clients, which are not dischargeable in bankruptcy

(House Report, 2005). Altogether, these changes increased the mean financial cost of filing from

$868 to $1,309 for Chapter 7 and from $2,260 to $2,861 for Chapter 13 (Lupica, 2012).




   12
      The incentive to suppress income prior to filing is relevant even if households cannot suppress it enough to
get under the state median. Chapter 13 repayment plans, which are paid over the subsequent five years, are based
on documented disposable income over the prior six months. As White (2007) points out, a reduction in monthly
earnings of $1 for the six months prior to filing costs filers $6 in the short-run but reduces their repayment requirement
by $60 ($1 each month over the next 60 months).
   13
      Allowances for living expenses vary by metropolitan area and are largely based on the Internal Revenue Service
policies for the treatment of delinquent taxpayers.


                                                            7
3     Economic Framework

This section develops a simple economic framework to determine the effects of an increase in the

cost of filing on bankruptcy filing rates and borrowing costs.14 In addition, we use the framework

to calibrate a benchmark for the expected magnitude of any potential effects on interest rates.


3.1        Model Set-up

There are I different types of individuals, with individual types indexed by i  {1, . . . , I }. The

types are intended to represent the credit score "segments" that we use in our empirical analysis.

There is a unit mass of each type, and individuals within each type are ex-ante identical and live for

two periods. In the first period, each individual borrows bi at interest rate ri , so that if the debt is

repaid in full in the second period, then (1 + ri )bi is repaid.15 In the second period, each individual

receives income y , drawn from distribution fi (y ), with associated cumulative distribution function

Fi (y ).

      After observing their income, y , individuals can either repay their outstanding debt, or they

can file for bankruptcy and retain all of their assets up to an exemption level, e. When individuals

file, they must also pay cost c, which captures all relevant fixed costs of filing: filing fees, legal

costs, hassle costs, and stigma.

      This leads to a simple decision rule: an individual will file for bankruptcy if income (net of full

repayment of debt) is less than the exemption amount minus the cost of filing (e - c); that is, if

y - (1 + ri )bi < e - c.16 When individuals file for bankruptcy, creditors recover max{0, y - e}. We

work through the case where individuals with income below c are insolvent and unable to file for

bankruptcy in Appendix Section A.3, but for simplicity here, we assume that fi (y ) has no support

below c for all types.


   14
      The model we develop is most closely related to the model of Wang and White (2000), who simulate various
bankruptcy reforms, but do not discuss the determinants of the magnitude of pass-through, which is one of the goals
of our analysis.
   15
      We treat bi as exogenous throughout this simple framework. In reality, changes in the bankruptcy code should
also affect the amount borrowed. We make this simplification in order to focus on the response of creditors to the
change in bankruptcy filings induced by BAPCPA. Given the relatively short-run nature of our empirical analysis,
we view this as the first-order impact of the changes to the bankruptcy code for our purposes.
   16
      Consistent with the fact that the costs of filing are not dischargeable, in the model c must be paid out exempt
assets.


                                                         8
3.2     Impact of Bankruptcy Reform on the Cost of Credit

Within the population of borrowers of each type, the probability of filing for bankruptcy can be
                                                 ), where y  represents the second-period income at
defined as pi = Fi (e + (1 + ri )bi - c) = Fi (yi          i

which a borrower of type i is indifferent between filing and not filing. Based on this decision rule,

we can calculate how the exemption level e and filing costs c affect filing and repayment behavior.

We are ultimately interested in the relationship between the bankruptcy code (i.e., e and c) and

the cost of borrowing (ri ), but we begin by estimating how changes in the exemption level and cost

of filing determine the share of individuals who choose to file, pi .

Remark 1. The direct effects of changes in the exemption level or the cost of filing on the share

of the population filing for bankruptcy are given by the following expressions:


                                                  pi /e = fi (y  ) > 0,

                                                  pi /c = -fi (y  ) < 0.


      The expressions above are of equal and opposite magnitude, implying that marginal changes in

the cost of filing and the exemption level have similar effects, with the magnitude determined by

the mass of marginal individuals who were indifferent to filing prior to the reform.

      Next we can examine the relationship between the bankruptcy code (i.e., e and c) and the cost

of borrowing, ri . As a benchmark, we assume that the credit market is perfectly competitive. We

thus define the equilibrium interest rate, ri , implicitly by setting the amount recovered by lenders

to be equal to the amount of borrowing: Ri (ri ) = bi .17 To calculate the effect of changes in e and

c on interest rates, we first define R(ri ):

                           e+(1+ri )bi -c                                        
           Ri (ri )                         (max{0, y - e})fi (y )dy +                           ((1 + ri )bi )fi (y )dy,
                       0                                                        e+(1+ri )bi -c
                           e+(1+ri )bi -c                             
                   =                        (y - e)fi (y )dy +                        bi (1 + ri )fi (y )dy .
                       e                                             e+(1+ri )bi -c
                       Recovered from bankruptcy filers                  Recovered from non-filers


  17
     An important implicit assumption in this setup is that each credit-score segment is priced separately and com-
petitively, and individual types are fixed and do not respond endogenously to either market prices or the policy
reform.


                                                                 9
    Using this expression, we can calculate the effect on the interest rate of a reform that changes

either the exemption level (de) or the cost of filing (dc) by implicitly differentiating the equation

Ri (ri ) = bi . In the Online Appendix, we derive the expressions for these two comparative statics

(dri /dc and dri /de), and we discuss the technical conditions for the two expressions to have equal

and opposite sign, just as in Remark 1 above.18 Next, using these two expressions we can derive an

expression for the pass-through of the reform-induced change in bankruptcy filings into borrowing

costs. In other words, we calculate dri /dpi in the case where the change in the probability of filing

has been affected by a reform that changes either the exemption level or the cost of filing, which

yields the following intuitive pass-through expression:


                                     dri    c/bi    1 + ri     c
                                         =        =        ·           > 0.                                           (1)
                                     dpi   1 - pi   1 - pi (1 + ri )bi


    The full derivation of this expression is given in the Online Appendix. In words, this expression

states that a bankruptcy reform that decreases bankruptcies (either by reducing exemptions or

raising filing costs) will decrease the interest rate, and the magnitude of the decrease will be

increasing in the change in the probability of filing. The ratio is scaled by c/bi , where c is the

amount repaid to creditors by the marginal filer. This suggests that for bankruptcy reform to have

a meaningful effect on interest rates, it must be the case that c/bi is not small. This requires

that marginal filers repay a meaningful share of their debts. Intuitively, this expression shows that

the pass-through of bankruptcy reform to interest rates requires that marginal filers must face

substantial (financial, hassle, or stigma) costs of filing.19

    In order to calibrate a realistic benchmark for the magnitude of pass-through, the last part of

Equation 1 separates the pass-through expression into a product of two terms. The first term is
            1+ri                                 c
the ratio   1-pi ,   and the second term,     (1+ri )bi ,   represents what creditors recover from the marginal

non-filer, c, over the expected repayment of non-filers, (1 + ri )bi . In other words, this second term

represents the counterfactual recovery rate for the borrowers who are deterred (at the margin)

   18
       The Online Appendix shows that the comparative statics for both reforms are equal and opposite sign if we are
                                 
willing to assume Fi (e)  Fi (yi  ). This is a reasonable assumption when the amount to be repaid (1 + ri )b  c, that
is, the amount to be repaid is close to the full cost of filing.
    19
       There is suggestive evidence that the collective cost of filing for bankruptcy is high. White (1998), for instance,
estimated that 15 percent of households could benefit from filing for bankruptcy at a time when just over one percent
did. Similarly, Indarte (2018) finds evidence in support of relatively large "all-in" costs of filing for bankruptcy.


                                                             10
from filing for bankruptcy. We calibrate the first term using measures of ri and pi for each credit-

score segment using the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Consumer Credit Panel (CCP) and

Mintel Comperemedia (Mintel) data on credit card offers. To capture a more accurate measure of

borrowing costs, we additionally scale up the credit card interest rates based on the Nelson (2018)

estimates of the difference between interest charges and fee-inclusive borrowing costs for the most

closely corresponding credit score bin.20

    To calibrate the second term in Equation 1, we calculate default rates for each credit-score

segment using the CCP. Specifically, we calculate the probability that a newly opened credit card

loan goes into 60-day default or is charged-off within 12 months after opening. To use the average

default rates in our calibration, we make two simplifying assumptions. First, we assume that

the 60-day default rate can be used as a reasonable proxy for the recovery rate. This may be a

reasonable assumption if the expected recovery rate is small conditional on a 60-day default, and

the recovery rate is very high if individuals have not reached 60-day default. Second, we assume

that the average default rate within a credit-score segment corresponds to the default rate for

the marginal individual deterred from bankruptcy by the reform. In our setting, this may be a

reasonable assumption since we use relatively fine credit-score segments in our main analysis: 10-

point credit score bins, with credit scores running from 500 to 840.21 Table 1 presents the weighted

average results of this exercise, split by prime and subprime.

    As shown in Appendix Table A1, most of the pass-through estimates are fairly tightly bunched

around the weighted-average pass-through estimate (though the very low credit-score segments

have somewhat lower pass-through estimates between 0.55 and 0.80). The limited amount of het-

erogeneity in the calibrated pass-through estimates is interesting, and reflects a kind of "balancing

out" of declining default rates, bankruptcy probability, and interest rates across the credit score

distribution. The limited heterogeneity is also reassuring for our empirical analysis, since our re-

   20
      Specifically, we estimate the mark-up due to fees by calculating the ratio between the fee inclusive charges and
interest charges from Table 6 (Pre-CARD Act Price Distribution on New Accounts) in Nelson (2018). We use the
credit-score-bin mark-ups from accounts with 6-11 months of cumulative borrowing. The mark-ups are similar to
those implied by the survey respondents in Stango and Zinman (2009).
   21
      On the other hand, the marginal individuals deterred from bankruptcy may remain persistently insolvent and
enter "informal bankruptcy" (Dawsey and Ausubel, 2002). In this case, the actual repayment rates of marginal
individuals will be lower, and our calibration will overstate the expected change in interest rates under perfect
competition. Ultimately, this would turn our pass-through estimates into a lower-bound of the true pass-through
rate.


                                                         11
                             Table 1. Benchmarking Interest Rate Pass-through

       (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)
                                                                                         Pass-through Calibration
  Credit Score     Population     Bankruptcy       APR       APR          60-Day         APR          APR
   Segment           Share           Rate                   w/ Fees     Default Rate                 w/ Fees
   Subprime           26%            3.1%         13.4%      23.1%         31.5%         0.80         0.87
     Prime            74%            0.3%         10.2%      12.8%          1.1%         1.09         1.12
      All            100%            1.0%         11.0%      15.5%          9.1%         1.02         1.05
Notes: This table reports pass-through estimates split by prime and subprime consumers. See main text for details
and Appendix Table A1 for analysis by 10-point credit-score segment. Subprime includes all individuals with credit
scores less than or equal to 620. The APR column comes from Mintel data on credit card offers, and the bankruptcy
and 60-day default rates (in both cases measured over the next 12 months) comes from the Consumer Credit Panel
(CCP). The pass-through estimate comes from combining the estimates in columns according to equation (1), using
the default rate to proxy for one minus the recovery rate, which is the first term in equation (1).


search design is based on comparing across credit-score segments with different values of dpi and

relating these changes in bankruptcy filing to changes in interest rates dri . As a result, we inter-

pret calibration estimates as providing a plausible magnitude that we can use to benchmark our

empirical results against and also providing evidence against substantial treatment-effect hetero-

geneity across credit-score segments. This means that the average effect that we estimate in our

difference-in-difference regressions may be informative for a range of credit scores, not just those

credit-score segments most affected by the bankruptcy reform.22

    We conclude by highlighting two simplifying assumptions of the model to keep in mind when

interpreting the empirical results. First, like most models of consumer bankruptcy in the literature,

we assume that individuals make rational bankruptcy filing decisions with full information. In

addition to appearing through the cost of filing, c, a relaxation of this assumption could allow

borrowers to under-estimate the financial benefit of filing.23 Second, the model assumes that the

market for loans is perfectly competitive. With imperfect pass-through, the same effect of reform

on filings will lead to smaller change in interest rates, since some of the incidence of the reform

will reduce firm profits. As a result, pass-through results that are smaller in magnitude than our

calibrated estimates could be interpreted as consistent with imperfect competition.



   22
      However, given that even this simple model highlights potential for treatment effect heterogeneity, we also report
results of two-way fixed effects models allowing for heterogeneous treatment effects in Appendix Table A8, using the
two-way fixed effects estimator developed by de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille (2019).
   23
      Finkelstein and Notowidigdo (2018) provide a framework which incorporates this type of misperception, which
may be more useful for welfare analysis if behavioral biases are important.


                                                          12
4        Data

Our analysis relies on three main data sets: legal dockets for all consumer bankruptcies in 78 (of 94)

United States bankruptcy courts; Mintel Comperemedia data on credit-card offers made to more

than 2,000 consumers each month; and hospital-discharge records for over half a million individuals

merged with a ten-year panel of their credit reports.

     Data on consumer bankruptcy filings come from the Public Access to Court Electronic Records

(PACER) system. This dataset includes more than three million filings from 78 bankruptcy courts

during our sample period of 2004 through 2007, roughly 86 percent of all filings in the United

States during that period. Throughout our analysis, we limit the sample to the years before 2008

in order to mitigate the effects of the Great Recession on our results. We validate the data for

each district by comparing the filings in the PACER records with the official totals published by

the Administrative Office of the United States Courts (AOUSC).24 Appendix Table A2 details the

sample coverage by chapter and quarter-year, and Appendix Section B.1 provides more details on

the sample.

     To study pass-through to credit-market pricing, we use Mintel Comperemedia (Mintel) data on

credit-card offers.25 Mintel collects credit card offers from a representative sample of households in

the United States, who are paid to send all direct-mail credit-card offers they receive to Mintel.26

The data includes demographic information on the households (age of head of household, household

composition), details on the credit-card offers (type of credit, interest rates, fees), and some limited

credit measures (importantly, these include the same credit score observed in the CCP). Data is

collected monthly and includes approximately 350,000 credit card offers (7,000 per month) and

100,000 individual-month observations (2,200 per month). Appendix Table A4 provides summary

statistics on offers and Appendix Section B.2 provides more details on the sample.

     To study the insurance value of the bankruptcy option, we analyze administrative hospital-


    24
      The sample does not include the universe of bankruptcies because 13 districts did not grant fee waivers, and we
drop 3 districts from the sample because the bankruptcies in the data do not match the AOUSC statistics.
   25
      We do not observe bankruptcy filings in the Mintel data, so we additionally use the Consumer Financial Pro-
tection Bureau Consumer Credit Panel (CCP) to estimate the bankruptcy filing risk for each credit-score segment,
combining public-record snapshots with credit score archives to estimate prospective filing probabilities.
   26
      The sample is representative of United States credit card holders. According to Fulford and Schuh (2015),
roughly 75 percent of American households hold at least one credit card.


                                                         13
discharge records from the California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development for the

universe of uninsured hospitalizations (and approximately 20 percent of individuals hospitalized

with insurance) between 2003 and 2007. Our sample links hospitalized individuals to their panel of

credit reports spanning the years 2002 to 2011. To isolate unexpected hospitalizations, we restrict

the sample to individuals ages 25 to 64 who are hospitalized for non-pregnancy-related reasons and

have not previously been to the hospital in the last three years. Appendix Table A9 provides pre-

hospitalization summary statistics and Appendix Section B.3 provides more details on the sample.


5   Effect of BAPCPA on Total Bankruptcy Filings

A first prediction of the model described in Section 3 is that higher costs of bankruptcy ought to

lead to fewer bankruptcies. This section tests that prediction empirically, first by studying the

effect of BAPCPA on total filings and then by studying the choice of chapter.

    Figure 1 plots the total number of consumer bankruptcy filings in the PACER sample by week

from January 2004 through December 2007. The most striking feature of Figure 1 is the dramatic

rush-to-file after BAPCPA was signed but before the bankruptcy code was changed. In the five

weeks before the law was implemented, from September 12th through October 16th , the filing rate

increased dramatically. In the final week before the implementation of the law, more than 400,000

households declared bankruptcy, roughly 13 times the typical weekly caseload.

    To quantify the number of excess filings before implementation and to test whether, on net,

the law led to a reduction in bankruptcies, we adapt "excess mass" methods from the tax-notch

literature (e.g., Chetty et al., 2011; Kleven, 2016) to generate a counterfactual time-series in the

absence of the changes to the bankruptcy code. We fit the following regression to the weekly filing

count in the period before BAPCPA was passed by the Senate (March 10, 2005):


                                      Filingst = t + m + t .                                     (2)


Here, Filingst are nationwide filings in week t, t is a linear time trend, and m are calendar-month

fixed effects. Appendix Table A3 presents results when we additionally control for the national

unemployment rate and to alternatively fit the counterfactual time-series through the passage of


                                                14
                              Figure 1. Time-Series of Bankruptcy Filings

                     Weekly consumer bankruptcy filings

           400,000



           300,000



           200,000
                            BAPCPA signed on
                            April 20, 2005

           100,000
                                                            BAPCPA implemented on
                                                            October 17, 2005

                 0
                     2004             2005                2006             2007               2008
          Notes: The sample consists of all consumer bankruptcy filings included in the PACER sample
          from January 2004 through December 2007. Each dot in the figure represents the total count
          of filings for that week.


the bill in the House (April 14, 2005) or its signing into law (April 20, 2005). The results are

qualitatively similar across these alternative approaches.

   We use Equation 2 to predict the counterfactual number of filings each week for the full sample

period and calculate the sum of the difference between the predicted and actual filings for each

week. Figure 2 presents this exercise by plotting the time-series of bankruptcy filings against the

estimated counterfactual. As expected, the predicted filings closely match actual filings before the

passage of the law. Actual filings diverge from the predicted time-series in September of 2005

in advance of the pre-BAPCPA filing deadline in mid-October. An excess of more than 750,000

households filed for bankruptcy between March 10, 2005 and October 17, 2005 relative to the

counterfactual time-series. To calculate the net effect of BAPCPA on filings, we account for the

filings which were intertemporally substituted before the implementation of the law.

   Table 2 presents the difference between the predicted and the realized number of filings from the

bill's passage in the Senate through the end of 2007. Column 1 presents the predicted number of

filings for the 30-week period ending in the index date. Column 2 presents the difference between the

realized and predicted filings for the same period. Column 3 presents the cumulative net difference

                                                     15
                        Figure 2. Excess and Missing Mass of Bankruptcy Filings

            400,000



              60,000

                                                               Excess mass

              40,000                                                   Predicted filings



              20,000

                                        Missing mass
                                                                         Actual filings
                   0
                       2004             2005                 2006              2007              2008
           Notes: The sample consists of all consumer bankruptcy filings included in the PACER sample
           from January 2004 through December 2007. The total count of filings for each week is plotted
           against the predicted number of filings for the week. The predicted number of filings are the
           result of estimating equation 2 on the total count of filings from January 2004 through the
           day that BAPCPA was passed by the Senate (March 10, 2005). The two data points before
           implementation of BAPCPA are censored in this figure: there were 108,745 filings during
           the week that began on October 3, 2005 and 427,947 filings during the week that began on
           October 10, 2005.


in filings from the counterfactual time-series.

    The more than 750,000 excess filings ahead of implementation suggest that debtors and their

attorneys anticipated the changes to the bankruptcy code to be significant. Due to the mandated

waiting period between filings, whose who file for bankruptcy must do so because the benefits of

filing today must exceed the loss of the option to file at another point in the future.27 For debtors

who rushed to file before the new bankruptcy code went into effect, we can infer that the benefit

from filing for bankruptcy under the previous system exceeded the option value of bankruptcy

under the new system.

    On net, the decline in filings after implementation exceeds the pre-implementation increase

in filings by July of 2006. The temporary "rush-to-file" effect was quickly overwhelmed by the

sustained reduction in filings under the new bankruptcy regime. As of the end of 2007, 114 weeks

  27
     Before BAPCPA, filers needed to wait 6 years after a Chapter 7 bankruptcy before filing again. BAPCPA
increased that waiting period to 8 years, a change that Appendix Figure A4 demonstrates was binding for the small
share of filers who file more than once.


                                                        16
                       Table 2. Difference between Realized and Predicted Filings

                                                                 (1)          (2)             (3)
              Weeks relative                                  Predicted   Realized        Cumulative
            to implementation         Index Date               Filings    Difference     Net Difference
                   -30                March 21, 2005
                    0               October 17, 2005          911,656       762,192           762,192
                    30                  May 15, 2006          879,729      -656,283           105,909
                    60             December 11, 2006          857,796      -481,442          -375,533
                    90                   July 9, 2007         889,823      -445,607          -821,140
                   114             December 24, 2007          659,619      -256,539         -1,077,679
Notes: This table presents a running sum of the net change in filings due to BAPCPA: the difference between
actual bankruptcies observed each week and the number of bankruptcies that would have been predicted based on
the counterfactual by estimating equation 2 from the beginning of the sample until BAPCPA was approved by the
Senate in March of 2005. Index date for each row refers to the end of the 30 weeks period presented. The overall
numbers are inflated to reflect the nation as a whole, based on our PACER sample coverage (see Appendix Table
A2).


after the implementation of BAPCPA, 1,077,679 filings were deterred.28 Appendix Figure A1

presents a similar exercise, but extending the pre-period back to 2002. This generates an estimate

of -1,109,094 which is consistent with the estimates using the 2004 through 2007 period.

     Bankruptcy reform clearly decreased the overall number of filings, but the introduction of

the means test also sought to shift more filings from "fresh start" bankruptcies (Chapter 7) to

repayment-plan bankruptcies (Chapter 13). Appendix Figure A2 plots the time-series for total

filings separately for Chapter 7 and Chapter 13. The time-series patterns are not markedly different

across the two chapters, as we might expect if the primary impact of the reform was a means-test-

driven shift in the chapter of filings; however, the decline in filings is larger among Chapter 7 filings.

The share of filings that were Chapter 13 remained persistently higher after the reform, as is clear

from Appendix Figure A3. Appendix Table A3 estimates the net change in overall filings through

2007 and shows that both Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 filings declined substantially.


6        Effects of Bankruptcy Filing Risk on Interest Rates

This section tests the other main prediction from the model developed in Section 3: that BAPCPA

reduced interest rates. We first estimate the change in filing risk for each credit-score segment. We
    28
      To calculate a confidence interval for the estimated net change in filings, we implement the bootstrapping
procedure described by Chetty et al. (2011). This leads to a 95-percent confidence interval with an upper bound of
1,125,242 and a lower bound of 1,034,709. Since we observe the full sample of bankruptcy filings, the standard errors
reflect error due to misspecification of Equation (2) rather than sampling error.


                                                         17
then use those estimates to implement a difference-in-difference regression model that tests how

offered interest rates change for each change in the risk of bankruptcy.


6.1     Pass-through to Interest Rates

In determining interest rates, creditors must predict the expected repayment rates on the credit

offered. A key input for determining repayment rates is the probability a borrower will discharge

their debt through bankruptcy. Filing for bankruptcy either reduces repayment to zero under

Chapter 7 or restructures the amount to be repaid under Chapter 13. As suggested by the model in

Section 3, reducing the generosity of the bankruptcy system ought to increase prospective repayment

rates, and thus decrease the cost of lending. We expect this decrease in the cost of lending to be

passed-through to borrowers in the form of lower interest rates. In this section, we test this

hypothesis by estimating the pass-through to interest rates on credit-card offers.

      We focus on credit-card offers for three reasons. First, credit cards are the most common method

of borrowing in the United States. Roughly 75 percent of Americans have at least one credit card

(65 percent of whom carry a balance) and total revolving debt was over $800 billion for most of our

sample period (Fulford and Schuh, 2015). Second, because credit-card debt is not collateralized, it

is the most likely to be discharged in bankruptcy and thus the most responsive type of credit to

changes in the bankruptcy code. Third, the Mintel dataset provides a clean measure of the cost

of credit supplied to households in the credit card market, allowing us to overcome measurement

challenges associated with other data sources.29

      We are interested in identifying the change in borrowing costs (dr) for a given change in

bankruptcy filing risk (dp). Our empirical approach to estimate pass-through is motivated by

the observation that the bankruptcy risk of a potential borrower varies substantially by their credit

score. This is evident in Figure 3, which plots the probability that borrowers across 40 equally sized

credit-score segments file for bankruptcy over the next 12 months for each available CCP observa-

tion. Filing risk conditional on credit score bin decreased significantly after the new bankruptcy

code was implemented.30

  29
      For instance, credit bureau data do not include prices. Other datasets, such as the National Mortgage Database,
include information on prices only conditional on loan take-up.
   30
      This was not driven by changes in the credit scoring formula across the sample period. We use the same credit


                                                         18
                                    Figure 3. Probability of Bankruptcy

                  12-Month Bankruptcy Filing Probability by Credit Score

            .04


                                          Pre-BAPCPA
            .03                                                                              Jun 2003
                                                                                             Jun 2004
                                                                                             Jun 2005
                                                                                             Dec 2005
            .02
                                                                                             Jun 2006
                                                                                             Dec 2006
                                                                                             Jun 2007
            .01     Post-BAPCPA



              0
                         500        550        600       650       700          750        800        850
                                                      Credit Score
           Notes: The sample consists of individuals in the CFPB CCP. This figure presents a binned
           scatter plot of the share of individuals who file for bankruptcy within the next 12 months. Each
           point represents the 12-month prospective filing rate for one of 40 equally sized credit-score
           segments from the time of the credit report observation.


    To parameterize the change in the probability of filing for bankruptcy, we define b as the

difference between the post-BAPCPA filing probability and the pre-BAPCPA filing probability for

each 10-point credit-score segment. This provides us with a continuous treatment variable which

we use to estimate pass-through as a function of changes in bankruptcy filing risk. In contrast to

the exercise in Section 5, which accounts for individuals who rushed to file for bankruptcy before

the law went into effect, here we focus on changes to prospective bankruptcy filing risk. We focus on

prospective filing risk because that is the relevant input into lenders' pricing decisions. Those who

rushed to file before BAPCPA went into effect likely increased the decline in prospective bankruptcy

filing risk, because they are not allowed to file for bankruptcy again for 8 years after BAPCPA.31

    We estimate the change in the prospective bankruptcy filing risk, b , by comparing the 12-month


score throughout the period and there were no major changes to the standard, commercially available credit-scoring
formulas over this period.
    31
       BAPCPA implemented a longer waiting period between filings, increasing the minimum time between Chapter
7 filings from six to eight years. Appendix Figure A4 demonstrates that this was binding for a small share of repeat
filers.


                                                         19
bankruptcy filing rates for each credit-score segment before and after the reform. In particular, we

take the average 12-month filing rate for each available quarter of the CCP before and after the

reform was implemented, and define b as the change in filing risk.32 Appendix Table A5 presents

the estimates of b . We use the change in bankruptcy filing probability, b , as our parameterization
                                                                                             dp
of the change in bankruptcy filing probability we describe in Section 3 (i.e.,               dc ).   This allows us to

estimate the response of interest rates with respect to bankruptcy filing rates, which maps to the
                                           dr
comparative static of interest (i.e.,      dp )   we derived.33

    Our empirical strategy involves a comparison of different credit-score segments. We compare

the changes in the interest rates offered to segments that experienced large declines in bankruptcy

filing risk to the interest rates offered to segments that experienced little change in bankruptcy
                                                               dr
filing risk. That comparison isolates the object of interest ( dp ) as long as the change in bankruptcy

risk across credit-score segments is not correlated with other time-varying determinants of interest

rates. That assumption would be violated if, for instance, the credit-scoring formula itself were

changing during this time period. Reassuringly, however, the credit-scoring formula was unchanged

during this time period and the distribution of credit scores was quite stable (Appendix Figure A5).

    Another key identification assumption is the standard parallel-trends assumption. That is, in

the absence of BAPCPA, the pre-period differences in offered interest rates across segments would

have evolved along parallel trends. That assumption would be violated if, for example, credit-

score segments that experienced larger declines in bankruptcy filing probability also experienced

larger changes in interest rate offers for reasons beyond the factors we can include as controls. For

instance, a concurrent expansion in the subprime mortgage market during this time period may

have affected the creditworthiness of subprime borrowers, and that portion of the market may have

been evolving along a different path. We address this concern by showing that the estimates below

are robust to the inclusion of subprime- and prime-specific time trends.

    32
       We use the prospective 12-month filing rate for each of the time periods plotted in Figure 3. To obtain the
difference in the average between the pre-period observations (observed quarterly from September 2003 to September
2005, missing December 2003) and the post-period observations (observed quarterly from December 2005 to December
2007), we regress 12-month bankruptcy filing risk by credit-score segment and quarter on indicator variables for each
10-point credit-score segment both on their own and interacted with an indicator variable for whether the observation
occurred in the post-period.
    33
       One could also regress Equation 4 using only the pre-reform bankruptcy filing risk. Appendix Table A6 presents
additional regressions that use only the pre-BAPCPA risk of filing for bankruptcy in lieu of the difference. The results
are consistent with estimates using the change in filing probability.


                                                          20
    The Mintel data consists of a repeated cross-section and the level of observation is a credit-card

offer. In our main specifications, we include lender-specific fixed effects (j ) to absorb differences

across lenders, credit-score-segment fixed effects to absorb time-invariant differences in prices across

credit-score segments (b ), and fixed effects for card category and application type (e.g., pre-

approved or invitation to apply) (i ). The estimating equation for the event study is:

                                           2007m12
                           yit = 0 b +               t (b × t ) + j + b + i + it .                               (3)
                                          t=2004m1


The dependent variable yit is the interest rate of offer i in month-year t. The variable b is the

"treatment" (the difference in the propensity to file before and after passage of BAPCPA for credit-

score segment b) and t , j , b , and i are fixed effects for each month and year combination, lender,

credit-score segment, and other offer features respectively.34 We two-way cluster standard errors

by credit-score segment and lender (Cameron et al., 2011).

    Our primary outcome is the regular annual percentage rate (APR). Appendix Figure A6 presents

the time-series of the regular APR, split by prime and subprime and adjusted for the prime rate.

We weight all credit-card offers using Mintel-provided weights designed to make the sample rep-

resentative of the overall mail volume of each campaign. This allows us to estimate effects that

are representative of the credit card market as a whole.35 In the appendix, we also examine the

adjusted APR, following Gross et al. (2016) in adjusting for whether the credit-card offer has an

introductory "teaser" rate by taking a weighted average of the introductory interest rate and the

regular interest rate over the first 12 months after origination.

    Figure 4 plots the coefficients of interest, t for each month t, with the regular APR as the

dependent variable in Equation (3). By allowing the t 's to evolve flexibly over time, this regression

allows us to assess the assumption that interest rate offers were evolving along parallel trends before

the passage of BAPCPA. Further, by refraining from imposing any ex-ante restrictions on when

interest rates should change, we can use the time pattern to gauge whether any changes in interest

rates appear after the passage of BAPCPA but before the law's implementation.
  34
     The other features of the credit-card offers are: card category, application type, and state of residence.
  35
     Mail volume represents the effective weight on each mail piece. For instance, the sum of all mail volume weights
in the full Mintel data for Chase Freedom cards in a given month should equal the total mailings for Chase Freedom
in that month, nationwide. In practice, the weights do not meaningfully affect the coefficients.


                                                         21
                    Figure 4. Effect of Decline in Filing Probability on Offered Interest Rates

                                             Interest Rate Response to 1pp Change in Filing Probability
                                     100



                                       0
           Event Study Coefficient




                                     -100



                                     -200          BAPCPA signed on
                                                   April 20, 2005


                                     -300
                                            2004               2005                 2006                  2007   2008
          Notes: The sample consists of credit card offers Year
                                                              made between January 2004 and December
          2007 included in the Mintel data. The points represent estimates of the t 's in equation 3. The
          dashed lines provide 95-percent confidence intervals for each point. The dependent variable
          is the rate spread for regular offered interest rate.


   In equilibrium, we would expect any changes to the bankruptcy code and interest rates to also

affect borrowing behavior. We expect offered interest rates to respond immediately to anticipated

changes in bankruptcy filing probability, while any secondary effect on borrowing would take longer.

Therefore, we are particularly interested in whether there exists a break in the evolution of interest

rate offers when BAPCPA was signed into law. We focus on the timing of passage (rather than

implementation) here because the bankruptcy code considers debts incurred in the months just

before filing as non-dischargeable; therefore, creditors could safely assume new lines of credit opened

between passage and implementation would be unlikely to be discharged before the new bankruptcy

code took effect.

   Figure 4 suggests a decline in offered interest rates ahead of BAPCPA's implementation. While

interest rates evolved similarly for the credit-score segments affected and unaffected by the reform

throughout the pre-period, we observe a sharp drop in the t 's following the passage of BAPCPA

in April 2005. The decline in interest rates among the credit-score segments who experienced a

decline in the probability of filing for bankruptcy is stark and persistent--the interest rate spread



                                                                               22
drops immediately upon passage of BAPCPA and remains below the pre-period level through the

post-period.

       Motivated by the pattern in Figure 4, we estimate a difference-in-difference regression to quantify
dr
dp .   Specifically, we estimate the change in offered interest rates for a one-percentage-point decline

in the 12-month probability of filing for bankruptcy:


                              yit = 0 b + 1 b × post + t + j + b + i + it ,                                   (4)


where, again, b is the difference in the probability of filing before and after the passage of BAPCPA

and j , b , and i are indicators for lender, credit-score segment, and offer features. In lieu of the

month-year indicators interacted with b , we simply interact b with a "post" indicator for the offer

coming after the BAPCPA was signed into law. Offers are weighted by mail volume and standard

errors are two-way clustered by credit-score segment and lender.
          Table 3. Pass-through of Change in Bankruptcy Filing Probability to Interest Rates

                                                 (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)

               Dependent variable:                           Regular Interest Rate
               Post-BAPCPA ×b                -101.3***     -60.4** -59.1** -66.7**             -66.6**
                                               (35.7)       (27.2)   (24.6)    (29.3)           (29.0)

               R2                              0.432         0.433      0.524       0.551       0.552

               Lender FEs
               Subprime ×t
               Card Category
               Application Type
               State FE

               N                              391,153      391,153     390,975     390,975     390,975
             Notes: The sample consists of credit card offers made to households from January 2004
             through December 2007. All columns report effects based on OLS estimates of equation 4 and
             include month-year and credit-score-bin fixed effects in addition to the additional controls
             listed. The outcome variable is the interest rate on credit card offers. Standard errors (two-
             way clustered by credit-score segment and lender) are in parentheses. Offers are weighted by
             the mail volume of the campaign. Asterisks indicate significance at the 1 percent (***), 5
             percent (**), and 10 percent (*) level, respectively.


       Table 3 presents the coefficients of interest, 1 , from Equation 4. The baseline specification in

column 3 includes month-by-year, credit-score segment, and lender fixed effects. In order to control

                                                          23
for other factors which may have changed differentially by credit-score segment and correlated with

b , such as the expansion of the subprime market, we include prime- and subprime-specific time

trends starting in column 4. The main coefficient declines by roughly forty percent with the inclusion

of time trends. That change in the coefficient is potentially attributable to the expansion of the

subprime credit market during our time period but is also partially mechanical given the trends

soak up some of our identifying variation. After accounting for prime- and subprime-specific time

trends, however, the estimates are very stable through the incremental inclusion of card category,

application type, and state-specific fixed effects.

   While there is limited evidence that the cost of funds is passed through to interest rates (e.g.,

Ausubel, 1991; Calem and Mester, 1995; Stavins, 1996; Stango, 2000; Calem et al., 2006; Agarwal

et al., 2017), monetary policy changes have been shown to differentially affect different types of

households (Coibion et al., 2017; Alexandrov et al., 2018). BAPCPA was passed in the middle

of a protracted rise in the Federal Funds Rate (FFR). Even though the reform did not coincide

with a sudden change in the FFR, one might be concerned that changes in the FFR affected some

credit-score segments more than others. To address that possibility, we control for an interaction

between the FFR and an indicator for subprime status. Appendix Table A7 presents estimates of

that regression. Reassuringly, the results are consistent with those presented by Table 3.

   Our preferred estimate of the relationship between interest rates and bankruptcy-filing risk

comes from the most-demanding specification in Table 3: a 67-basis-point decline in the interest

rate for each 1-percentage-point decline in the 12-month prospective bankruptcy filing risk. The

subprime market-wide reduction in offered interest rates is approximately 84 basis points (given an

average decline in the bankruptcy filing rate of 1.25 percentage points), which narrows the spread

on offered interest rates between prime and subprime borrowers by about 10%.

   We can use the pass-through expression derived in Section 3 to assess the magnitude of these
                                                       dr/dc
estimates. The perfect-competition benchmark for       dp/dc ,   above, is 105 basis points for each one-

percentage-point change in filing risk. The estimates of Equation (4) are of similar magnitude to

this benchmark. The estimate in column 4 of Table 3 represents pass-through of approximately 64

percent of the perfect-competition benchmark. While this exercise is not a conclusive statement on

the competitiveness of credit card markets, it does suggest that our estimates of pass-through are


                                                  24
of reasonable magnitude and consistent with some competitive pricing pressure as well as imperfect

competition.

      We document a decrease in the offered APR consumers face, but this could be offset by changes

to other credit card features. Ru and Schoar (2016) argue that when unsophisticated borrowers are

better credit risks, lenders rely on back-loaded features such as late fees and teaser rates. Appendix

Table A6 presents the same regressions presented by Table 3 but with late fees and interest rates

adjusted for the teaser rate as the outcome. We take a weighted average of the introductory (teaser)

interest rate and the regular interest rate over the first 12 months after origination following Gross

et al. (2016). We estimate a fairly precise zero change in late fees in response to a change in

bankruptcy filing risk: the 95-percent confidence interval rules out an increase in the late fee of

more than $1.72.36 The estimated effect for adjusted interest rates is smaller than the effect for

the regular interest rate due to the mechanically lower weight on the interest rate when accounting

for teaser rates, but otherwise consistent with the results of Table 3.

      These decreases in offered interest rates benefit consumers to the degree that they take advantage

of the lower rates. Consumers may not be especially strategic in doing so. Stango and Zinman

(2015) and Woodward and Hall (2012) document substantial dispersion in borrowing costs that

appear to be driven by consumers partaking in too little price-shopping. Similarly, Keys and Wang

(2019) and Gathergood et al. (2017) document that consumers tend to repay their credit card debt

based on anchoring and heuristics rather than minimizing borrowing costs. Nevertheless, as long

as consumers borrow using unsecured credit, the decrease in interest rates as a result of BAPCPA

are likely to have provided them with considerable savings.


6.2     Heterogeneity Analysis

A recent literature emphasizes potential sources of bias in panel event-study designs when the

treatment is staggered or potentially endogenous (Abraham and Sun, 2018; Athey and Imbens, 2018;

Borusyak and Jaravel, 2017; Callaway and Sant'Anna, 2018; Freyaldenhoven et al., Forthcoming;

Goodman-Bacon, 2018), but in our setting we have a single, plausibly exogenous policy change,


  36
    Appendix Table A4 shows that the mean late fee among prime consumers of $36.05 is actually slightly higher
than the late fee for subprime consumers, $34.73.


                                                     25
so endogenous timing is less of a concern. A second strain of this literature emphasizes that

heterogeneous treatment effects in a difference-in-difference design can generate negative weights

for some groups (de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille, 2019). That possibility presents a more-

direct potential threat to our identification strategy. de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille (2019)

show that two-way-fixed-effects models produce average treatment effects from a weighted sum of

the treatment effect for each group and time period. In the presence of heterogeneous treatment

effects, such models can produce negative weights even when treatment effects are positive for

every group and time period. The model in Section 3 suggests the possibility of treatment-effect

heterogeneity, and so Appendix Table A8 addresses this by re-estimating our main specification

using a recently developed two-way-fixed-effects estimator that allows for heterogeneous treatment

effects (de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille, 2019). Reassuringly, we find similar results using

this alternative estimator, and we also find no negative weights going into the average treatment

effect.37 This is consistent with the calibrations in Section 2, which show fairly tight bunching

around the weighted-average pass-through estimate across credit-score segments.

   We perform one additional heterogeneity analysis by examining how the response to the reform

varies by lender. Figure 4 and Table 3 demonstrate that lenders lower the interest rates on new

credit card offers in anticipation of a decline in the generosity of bankruptcy. Examining hetero-

geneity in the responses of lenders can serve to both clarify the mechanism behind those lower

interest rates and reveal some information about the structure of the subprime credit card market

during our sample period. The Mintel data include the name of the lender that issued each offer,

which we partial out in regression Equation (4). To understand how the responses to the change

in bankruptcy law varied by lender, we run Equation (4) separately for each lender.

   Appendix Figure A7 plots the lender-specific estimates on the vertical axis against the share

of the firm's offers that are made to subprime consumers on the horizontal axis. The size of each

circular marker corresponds to the number of credit card offers extended to subprime consumers

over our sample period. The pass-through estimates are quite heterogeneous by lender and the

effects we estimate in Table 3 are largely driven by the two prominent subprime lenders: Capital

One and HSBC. These two lenders are well-known to be leaders in the expansion of credit to

  37
       See the notes for Appendix Table A8 for additional discussion of this exercise.


                                                           26
subprime consumers. HSBC was additionally on the frontier of expanding credit to those with

recent bankruptcy filings, which suggests a familiarity with the relationship between the bankruptcy

system and repayment behavior (Jurgens and Wu, 2007). These results are also consistent with

the high levels of heterogeneity in risk-based pricing documented by Stango and Zinman (2015),

who show that variation in internal modeling across lenders results in substantial price dispersion

based on differential treatment of identical customer characteristics.


7     Effects of BAPCPA on Targeting and the Insurance Value of Bankruptcy

The previous section documents how a decrease in bankruptcy filings passed-through to lower

interest rates. This benefit to borrowers came at the cost of worsening the value of the bankruptcy

option. How we weigh these impacts depends on which potential bankruptcy filers were deterred.

Bankruptcy reform had the explicit goal of deterring "abusive" filings from higher-income filers

who could otherwise repay their debts. In this section, we evaluate whether the means test was

successful at shifting the distribution of filers away from lower-insurance-value bankruptcy filings,

and estimate the effect of the reform on the likelihood that a negative financial shock is insured by

bankruptcy.


7.1     Characteristics of Filers

A key goal of bankruptcy reform was to deter high-income filers from accessing bankruptcy relief

"opportunistically;" lawmakers referenced the income-based means test as the "heart of the bill"

House Report (2005). By excluding households with income above the state median from the option

to liquidate their debts, the law intended to target the bankruptcy code's most-generous provisions

to lower-income filers. If the means test was an important force altering the composition of filers,

we would expect to see the income of the average filer decrease.

      While much attention has been given to the means test, the reform's collective impact on the

composition of filers is ambiguous a priori. BAPCPA also made a number of additional changes to

the bankruptcy filing process which collectively increased both the hassle costs of filing (through

mandated credit counseling and financial management courses) and the liquidity requirements to file

(through increased filing and attorney fees). The increased liquidity requirements to file, especially,

                                                  27
may have deterred lower-income filers. The effect of hassle costs on the composition of filers is

ambiguous, and depends on both filers' opportunity cost of time and their ability to navigate the

requirements or to pay an attorney to help them do so.

   The overall impact of the reform on the income of filers depends on the relative deterrent effects

of these provisions across the income distribution. A cursory reading of the decline in filings, and

the decline in Chapter 7 filings in particular, suggests the means test may have been effective in

achieving its stated goals of deterring higher-income filers. This interpretation is belied by a closer

examination of the composition of filers. We examine how the income of filers evolved through the

reform by merging the filer's ZIP Code in the PACER sample with the median income for that ZIP

Code from the 2000 Decennial Census.
                                        Figure 5. ZIP Code Income Distribution of Bankruptcy Filers
                                             Zip Code Income Percentiles among Bankruptcy Filers by Year
                                    80,000
                                                        2004
                                                        2005
                                                        2006
                                                        2007
           Median Zip Code Income




                                    60,000




                                    40,000




                                    20,000

                                             0              20             40                60            80   100
                                                                                Percentile
          Notes: The sample consists of all consumer bankruptcy filings included in the PACER sample
          from January 2004 through December 2007, matched with the ZIP Code median household
          income measured in the 2000 decennial census. The figure plots the percentiles of ZIP Code
          median household income among filers for each year of 2004 through 2007.



   Figure 5 plots the full distribution of median ZIP Code income among filers for each year from

2004 through 2007. The distributions are strikingly similar--percentiles are virtually on top of

each other through the 60th percentile, at which point the post-BAPCPA distribution of filers

drifts slightly upward. As is clear from the figure, there is no stark change in the composition of


                                                                             28
filers.38 This suggests that the reform did not change the composition of filers by very much in

terms of income (at least with respect to their ZIP Code), and, if anything, average income appears

to creep upward after the reform. This surprising null effect ought to be explored by future research

that examines how BAPCPA changed households' bankruptcy decision rules.39

      Inspecting differences in the composition of filers before and after the reform can reveal how the

self-targeting properties of the bankruptcy system changed. However, to measure changes in the

insurance value of bankruptcy, we need to test how individuals facing the same negative financial

shocks were able to access bankruptcy before and after BAPCPA. The next section takes such an

approach.


7.2     Effect of BAPCPA on the Insurance Value of Bankruptcy

The results above demonstrate that BAPCPA deterred filings. To evaluate the cost of these deterred

filings, we next ask how expense shocks (specifically, health shocks requiring hospitalization) were

insured by bankruptcy before and after the reform. In the debate over bankruptcy reform, many

expressed concern over how reform might affect the insurance value of bankruptcy. Warren (2005)

argued against BAPCPA because the means test would "treat all families alike. . . A person who

had a heart attack is treated the same as someone who had a spending spree at the mall."

      This distinction between bankruptcies driven by medical costs and bankruptcies driven by

discretionary consumption is present in life-cycle models of the bankruptcy decision.40 Livshits et

al. (2007) demonstrate that the existence of expense shocks, such as medical costs, can make "fresh

start" (Chapter 7) bankruptcy regimes welfare-increasing despite increasing the cost of borrowing.

Particularly when markets are incomplete, bankruptcy may be the only mechanism by which an

individual can insure some negative events. We thus seek to estimate whether specific expense

shocks were insured by bankruptcy, before and after the reform. We test the likelihood that
   38
      Of course, income also varies within ZIP Codes and it is possible that there were large within-ZIP-Code changes
in the incomes of filers. Nevertheless, we view it as unlikely that the ZIP Code income measure is masking large
means-test-driven shifts in the income distribution of filers. This is consistent with anecdotal reports from bankruptcy
attorneys (Littwin, 2016) and other evaluations of the reform (Ashcraft et al., 2007; Albanesi and Nosal, 2018).
   39
      Several papers have used the means test as variation with which to study the effects of BAPCPA and bankruptcy
more generally. See, for example, the work of Chatterjee et al. (2007), Li et al. (2011), Mahoney (2015), Mitman
(2016), and Parra (2018)
   40
      Divorce, job loss, and unplanned pregnancies are additional shocks that are discussed as relevant to the welfare
implications of the bankruptcy code (Livshits et al., 2007; Fay et al., 2002; Keys, 2018), though medical expenses are
often pointed to as the most "blameless."


                                                          29
individuals experiencing hospitalization shocks, before and after changes to the bankruptcy code,

declare bankruptcy to obtain debt relief.

    We study the universe of uninsured hospitalizations between 2003 and 2007 in California, where

approximately 20 percent of residents lacked insurance during that time (California Healthcare

Foundation, 2010). For comparison, we study insured hospitalizations in parallel. The insured

include adults ages 25­64 hospitalized with either private or Medicaid coverage. Each hospitaliza-

tion is linked to the patient's credit reports, which we observe at the start of each year from 2002

through 2011. We limit the sample to those who were not hospitalized in the three years prior to

their hospitalization to isolate "health shocks."41

    In the ideal experiment, we would randomly assign different bankruptcy regimes to otherwise-

identical individuals experiencing a health shock. One might be concerned that the composition of

uninsured hospitalizations might be different before and after the reform.42,43 By isolating health

shocks for individuals who have not been hospitalized in the previous three years, we come close to

approximating this experiment. Hospitalizations are much less likely to be anticipated than other

sources of health insurance demand like chronic conditions requiring outpatient care. To further

address this concern, we re-weight the two sets of hospitalizations on their observable characteristics,

though it has little effect on our estimates. We use propensity score matching to reweight those

hospitalized in each period in order to match them on age, sex, race, zip code household income,

whether the hospitalization was for a chronic condition, and on the major diagnostic category.

Appendix Table A9 presents summary statistics by insurance status and hospitalization period.

    Following Dobkin et al. (2018a), we estimate event-study regressions, additionally splitting

the sample by whether the hospitalization occurred under the pre- or post-BAPCPA bankruptcy
   41
      The precipitating event will be a hospitalization, but estimated effects of the hospitalization will include all
sequelae (subsequent hospitalizations, poor health, lost earnings).
   42
      As observed by Mahoney (2015), changes in the bankruptcy code also changes the incentives for individuals to
purchase health insurance. This generates a concern that uninsured health shocks would be differentially selected
before and after BAPCPA. Two patterns in the data ameliorate these concerns. First, the means test does not appear
to be the primary driver of the change in bankruptcy filings. Second, at least in a coarse examination of the data, the
share of Californians without health insurance was broadly unchanged over our sample period (California Healthcare
Foundation, 2010). The estimated share of individuals lacking health insurance in California in each year from 2003
through 2007 was 19.1 percent, 19.5 percent, 19.9 percent, 19.6 percent, and 19.4 percent.
   43
      A related concern is that the financial consequences of a hospitalization may vary over time. California im-
plemented the "Hospital Fair Pricing Act" in 2007 which required hospitals to offer discounts or charity care to
individuals making less than 350 percent of the Federal Poverty Line. Appendix Figure A11 plots the implied effects
by year of hospitalization, and shows the results within the post-period do not look dramatically different between
2006 and 2007 hospitalizations.


                                                          30
regime. We define the pre-BAPCPA period to be January 2003 through December 2004 and the

post-BAPCPA period to be from October 2005 through December 2007.44

    We define event time m as the number of months relative to the hospitalization, which occurs

at m = 0. Omitting the month prior to the hospitalization (m = -1) and including calendar-year-

specific fixed effects, we specify a non-parametric event-study regression to estimate the evolution

of the outcome variable preceding and following the hospitalization:

                                                                                        -2            48
                                              yit = t + 1{Pre-BAPCPA}                          µm +         µm   + it .        (5)
                                                                                       m=-24          m=0




                                                  Figure 6. Effect of Hospitalization on Bankruptcy Filing

                                            Effect of Uninsured Hospitalization on Bankruptcy Filing
                                     .03
                                                   Pre-BAPCPA Hospitalizations
                                                   Post-BAPCPA Hospitalizations

                                     .02
           Event Study Coefficient




                                     .01



                                       0



                                     -.01
                                            -24           -12          0           12             24              36      48
                                                                       Months since hospitalization
           Notes: The sample consists of individuals aged 25­64 who are hospitalized without insurance
           in California, additionally split by the timing of the hospitalization (January 2003 through
           December 2004 for the pre-BAPCPA sample, October 2005 through December 2007 for the
           post-BAPCPA sample). The points represent the estimated effects of event time (i.e., the µr 's
           from the non-parametric event study in equation 5) and the lines represent the parametric
           event study in equation 6 with the pre-trends normalized between the two periods for ease of
           visual comparison.

    In order to estimate how frequently a hospitalization leads to bankruptcy, we also estimate

a parametric event-study specification. This allows us to calculate the "implied effect" at each

  44
     We exclude hospitalizations occurring between January 2005 and September 2005 to avoid those most likely to
coincide with the rush-to-file in October 2005.


                                                                                  31
month relative to hospitalization. We allow for a linear pretrend in event time m (months relative to

admission) and a flexible cubic spline with breaks at 0, 12, and 24 months in the post-period. These

allow us to estimate the effect of the hospitalization at any point, separately by the hospitalization

period:

                                                                    2
 yit = t + 1{Pre-BAPCPA} 0q m + 1q m2 {m > 0} +                         (s+2)q (m - 12s)3 {m > 12s}     + it .
                                                                  s=0
                                                                                                            (6)

   Figure 6 suggests that the parametric spline fits the non-parametric event-study coefficients

well. The identifying assumption requires that, separately for pre-BAPCPA and post-BAPCPA

hospitalizations, conditional on having a hospital admission and jointly estimated calendar-year

fixed effects, the timing of the admission is uncorrelated with deviations of the outcome from a

linear trend in event time.
                     Table 4. Implied Effects of Hospitalization on Bankruptcy

                                                       (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)

              Insurance Coverage:                       Uninsured                  Insured
              Hospitalization Period:                  Pre    Post              Pre      Post

              Implied Effect at 12 Monthsa            0.89       0.18          0.19         0.15
                                                      (.12)      (.08)         (.08)        (.05)
              Implied Effect at 24 Monthsb            1.49       0.43          0.37         0.25
                                                     (0.23)     (0.15)        (0.15)       (0.10)
              Pre-Hospitalization Mean                2.11       4.94          2.07         4.38

              p-value for Null of 12 Month               [<0.001]                     [0.84]
                 Pre/Post Equality

              N                                      53,611     62,912       164,207      145,502
            Notes: The sample consists of individuals aged 25­64 who are hospitalized in California,
            additionally split by the timing of the hospitalization (January 2003 through Decem-
            ber 2004 for the pre-BAPCPA sample, October 2005 through December 2007 for the
            post-BAPCPA sample) and insurance coverage (uninsured or insured which includes
            those with private insurance or Medicaid coverage). All columns report effects based
            on OLS estimates of equation 6. The outcome variable is whether an individual has
            filed for bankruptcy since the beginning of the sample (January 2002). Standard errors
            (clustered on the individual) are in parentheses. The universe of qualifying uninsured
            hospitalizations are included in the sample; estimates for the insured are weighted to
            adjust for individuals' sampling probabilities. All implied effects are significant with
            p-values less than or equal to .015.
            a
               The implied effect at 12 months is calculated from equation 6 as 144 × 2 + 1, 728 × 4
            b
               The implied effect at 24 months is calculated from equation 6 as 576 × 2 + 13, 824 × 4



                                                       32
   Figure 6 presents the results of both event studies for the probability an uninsured hospital-

ization resulted in a bankruptcy filing. The red-diamond markers trace the path of individuals

hospitalized in the pre-BAPCPA environment, while the blue-circle markers trace the path of those

hospitalized in the post-BAPCPA environment. The pre-BAPCPA hospitalizations result in a pro-

nounced spike in bankruptcy filings following hospitalization, increasing starkly around the time

debt is typically sent to collections (around 180 days after the hospitalization). The rate of fil-

ings remains persistently higher for the subsequent four years. By comparison, those hospitalized

after changes to the bankruptcy code were implemented display a muted filing response to the

hospitalization.

   Table 4 provides estimates of the "implied effect" of the hospitalization at 12 and 24 months,

separately by bankruptcy regime and insurance coverage. The implied effect is the deviation of the

parametric coefficients from the linear pretrend, which we interpret as the impact of the hospital-

ization on whether or not the individual has filed for bankruptcy.

   After the reform, uninsured hospitalizations were much less likely to be discharged through

bankruptcy. At 24 months post-hospitalization, the pre-BAPCPA uninsured are 1.49 percentage

points more likely to file for bankruptcy due to the hospitalization. After implementation, the

implied effect of the hospitalization on filing for bankruptcy is just 0.43. While the share of

individuals eligible to file for bankruptcy is smaller post-BAPCPA, this is a mechanical result of

the construction of a stock variable for ever filing for bankruptcy over the sample period. As further

reassurance on this point, the insured demonstrate a similar increase in the share of individuals

who have filed for bankruptcy in advance of their hospitalization (4.38 percent from 2.07 percent

versus 4.94 percent from 2.11 percent for the uninsured), but a substantially smaller decline after

the reform. The marked decline in the implied effect of a hospitalization on filing for bankruptcy

indicates that bankruptcy reform significantly reduced the share of uninsured individuals who access

bankruptcy as implicit health insurance.

   This effect does not appear to be driven by differences in medical debt. Uninsured hospitaliza-

tions result in a similar amount of debt sent to collections under both bankruptcy regimes, but 70

percent fewer bankruptcy filings after the reform. Appendix Table A10 shows the implied effect

on debt sent to collections 24 months after the hospitalization increased from $6,700 to $6,900


                                                 33
after the reform. While hospitalizations in and of themselves may make up a small share of over-

all bankruptcy filings (Dobkin et al., 2018b), to the degree that uninsured health shocks can be

generalized to other types of uninsured shocks, these results suggest that the reform meaningfully

reduced the insurance value of bankruptcy.


8        Conclusion

The option to file for bankruptcy provides a form of insurance for American households by providing

a process for them to discharge their debts. However, by limiting the ability of borrowers to

commit to repayment, the option of bankruptcy increases the cost of borrowing, and hence the cost

consumers face to smooth their consumption over time. This paper uses changes to the bankruptcy

code to evaluate this trade-off empirically.

     We find that the 2005 bankruptcy reform induced a net reduction of more than one million

bankruptcy filings in the two years after implementation. We demonstrate that this reduction in the

risk of bankruptcy filing was passed-through to consumers in the form of lower borrowing costs. The

results suggest that a 1-percentage-point reduction in bankruptcy filing risk leads to a 66 basis-point

decline in offered credit-card interest rates. Using our model to calibrate a perfectly competitive

benchmark, these results imply a pass-through rate of roughly 60 percent. The incomplete pass-

through that we find lines up with recent results using other shocks to the consumer credit market

(such as Agarwal et al. 2014), and is consistent with some degree of imperfect competition.45

     Policymakers intended the law's means test to deter higher-income filers, but we find that the

income distribution of filers remained essentially unchanged in the wake of the reform. In addition,

we find that those hospitalized without health insurance were less likely to declare bankruptcy after

the reform. This suggests that BAPCPA decreased the insurance value of bankruptcy.

     Collectively, the findings emphasize the trade-offs in determining the optimal generosity of

    45
     The pass-through results are somewhat larger in magnitude than the estimates reported by Agarwal et al.
(2014), but our focus is on interest rates instead of credit limits. A full accounting for the difference in pass-through
estimates is outside the scope of this paper, but we speculate that the salience and persistence of the shock that we
are studying may account for some of the difference between the estimates. In particular, the BAPCPA reform was
widely publicized and well-understood; the huge "rush-to-file" by consumers that we document strongly suggests that
other market participants (such as creditors) were likely well-aware of the new law, as well. Additionally, the reform
was likely expected to be permanent, which could help creditors overcome their reluctance to modify interest rates
in the face of adjustment costs.


                                                           34
the bankruptcy code. More-generous insurance comes at the cost of higher interest rates. This

paper's estimates can inform debates over future changes to the bankruptcy system, changes to

other social-insurance programs, and to the regulation of credit markets. To infer the overall

welfare impact of the reform would require, at the very least, quantifying the money-metric loss of

insurance value for the marginally deterred filers, as well as the gain from lower interest rates for

the affected credit-score segments. Strategic borrowing responses to the reform are also difficult to

weigh: less generous bankruptcy may decrease moral hazard attributable to the option to discharge

debts (Indarte, 2018); but, reducing the generosity of bankruptcy also reduces its salutary effects on

entrepreneurship (Fan and White, 2003). We do not make the assumptions or impose the structural

framework required to perform this welfare exercise. Nevertheless, the results above identify and

quantify a number of the critical inputs for this exercise, which we leave for future research.




                                                 35
References

Abraham, Sarah and Liyang Sun, "Estimating Dynamic Treatment Effects in Event Studies
 with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects," Technical Report, Working Paper 2018.

Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel,
 "Regulating consumer financial products: Evidence from credit cards," The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 2014, 130 (1), 111­164.

  ,   ,  , and    , "Do Banks Pass Through Credit Expansions to Consumers Who Want to
  Borrow?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 133 (1), 129­190.

Albanesi, Stefania and Jaromir B Nosal, "Insolvency after the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform,"
 National Bureau of Economics Research Working Paper #24934, 2018.

Alexandrov, Alexei and Dali´ e Jim´enez, "Lessons from Bankruptcy Reform in the Private
 Student Loan Market," Harvard Law & Policy Review, 2017, 11, 175.
                             ¨
  , Daniel Grodzicki, and Ozlem      Bedre-Defolie, "Consumer Demand for Credit Card Ser-
  vices," Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Office of Research Working Paper, 2018, (2018-
  03).

Ashcraft, Adam B, Astrid Andrea Dick, and Donald P Morgan, "The Bankruptcy Abuse
 Prevention and Consumer Protection Act: Means-Testing or Mean Spirited?," Staff Report,
 Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2007, 279.

Athey, Susan and Guido W Imbens, "Design-based analysis in difference-in-differences settings
 with staggered adoption," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
 Paper #24963 2018.

Ausubel, Lawrence M, "The failure of competition in the credit card market," American Eco-
 nomic Review, 1991, pp. 50­81.

Berkowitz, Jeremy and Michelle J White, "Bankruptcy and small firms' access to credit,"
 The Rand Journal of Economics, 2004, 35 (1), 69.

Board of Governors, "Report to the Congress on practices of the consumer credit industry in
 soliciting and extending credit and their effects on consumer debt and insolvency," 2006.

Borusyak, Kirill and Xavier Jaravel, "Revisiting event study designs," Technical Report,
 Working Paper 2017.

Cabral, Marika, Michael Geruso, and Neale Mahoney, "Do larger health insurance subsidies
 benefit patients or producers? Evidence from Medicare Advantage," American Economic Review,
 2018, 108 (8), 2048­87.

Calem, Paul S and Loretta J Mester, "Consumer behavior and the stickiness of credit-card
 interest rates," American Economic Review, 1995, 85 (5), 1327­1336.

  , Michael B Gordy, and Loretta J Mester, "Switching costs and adverse selection in the
  market for credit cards: New evidence," Journal of Banking & Finance, 2006, 30 (6), 1653­1685.

California Healthcare Foundation, "California Health Care Almanac," Technical Report, Cal-
 ifornia Healthcare Foundation 2010.

                                              36
Callaway, Brantly and Pedro HC Sant'Anna, "Difference-in-differences with multiple time
 periods and an application on the minimum wage and employment," Working Paper, 2018.

Cameron, A Colin, Jonah B Gelbach, and Douglas L Miller, "Robust inference with
 multiway clustering," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2011, 29 (2), 238­249.

Chakrabarti, Rajashri and Nathaniel Pattison, "Auto Credit and the 2005 Bankruptcy
 Reform: the Impact of Eliminating Cramdowns," Working Paper, 2016.

Chatterjee, Satyajit, Dean Corbae, Makoto Nakajima, and Jos´           e-V´ictor R´
                                                                                  ios-Rull, "A
 quantitative theory of unsecured consumer credit with risk of default," Econometrica, 2007, 75
 (6), 1525­1589.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri, "Adjustment Costs,
 Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax
 Records," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 749­804.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Lorenz Kueng, and John Silvia, "Innocent By-
 standers? Monetary policy and inequality," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2017, 88, 70­89.

Dawsey, Amanda E and Lawrence M Ausubel, "Informal bankruptcy," in "Twelfth Annual
 Utah Winter Finance Conference" 2002.

de Chaisemartin, Cl´  ement and Xavier D'Haultfoeuille, "Two-way fixed effects estimators
  with heterogeneous treatment effects," National Bureau of Economics Research Working Paper
  #25904, 2019.

Dobkin, Carlos, Amy Finkelstein, Raymond Kluender, and Matthew J Notowidigdo,
 "The Economic Consequences of Hospital Admissions," American Economic Review, 2018, 108
 (2), 308­52.

  , , , and , "Myth and Measurement-The Case of Medical Bankruptcies," The New England
  Journal of Medicine, 2018, 378 (12), 1076.

Dubey, Pradeep, John Geanakoplos, and Martin Shubik, "Default and punishment in
 general equilibrium," Econometrica, 2005, 73 (1), 1­37.

Fabra, Natalia and Mar Reguant, "Pass-through of emissions costs in electricity markets,"
  American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (9), 2872­99.

Fan, Wei and Michelle J White, "Personal bankruptcy and the level of entrepreneurial activity,"
  The Journal of Law and Economics, 2003, 46 (2), 543­567.

Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle J White, "The Household Bankruptcy Decision,"
  American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (3), 706­718.

Finkelstein, Amy and Matthew J Notowidigdo, "Take-up and Targeting: Experimental
  Evidence from SNAP," National Bureau of Economics Research Working Paper #24652, 2018.

Freyaldenhoven, Simon, Christian Hansen, and Jesse M Shapiro, "Pre-event trends in the
  panel event-study design," American Economic Review, Forthcoming.




                                              37
Fulford, Scott and Scott Schuh, "Consumer revolving credit and debt over the life cycle and
  business cycle," Technical Report 15-17, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Research Department
  Working Papers 2015.

Gathergood, John, Neale Mahoney, Neil Stewart, and Joerg Weber, "How Do Individuals
 Repay Their Debt? The Balance-Matching Heuristic," National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper #24161, 2017.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew, "Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing," Tech-
 nical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #25018 2018.

Grodzicki, Daniel, "The Evolution of Competition in the Credit Card Market," Working Paper,
 2017.

Gropp, Reint, John Karl Scholz, and Michelle J White, "Personal Bankruptcy and Credit
 Supply and Demand," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (1), 217­251.

Gross, Tal, Matthew J Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang, "Liquidity Constraints and Con-
 sumer Bankruptcy: Evidence from Tax Rebates," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2014, 96
 (3), 431­443.

  , , and , "The Marginal Propensity to Consume over the Business Cycle," National Bureau
  of Economic Research Working Paper #22518, 2016.

Han, Song and Geng Li, "Household Borrowing after Personal Bankruptcy," Journal of Money,
 Credit and Banking, 2011, 43 (2-3), 491­517.

House Report, "Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 Report
 of the Committee on the Judiciary House of Representatives to Accompany S. 246," Technical
 Report 109-31 April 2005.

Indarte, Sasha, "The Impact of Debt Relief Generosity and Liquid Wealth on Household
  Bankruptcy," Working Paper, 2018.

Jurgens, Rick and Chi Chi Wu, "Fee Harvesters: Low-credit, High-cost Cards Bleed Con-
  sumers," National Consumer Law Center Report, 2007.

Keys, Benjamin and Jialan Wang, "Minimum Payments and Debt Paydown in Consumer
 Credit Cards," Journal of Financial Economics, 2019, 131 (3).

Keys, Benjamin J, "The Credit Market Consequences of Job Displacement," Review of Eco-
 nomics and Statistics, 2018, 100 (3).

Kleven, Henrik J and Mazhar Waseem, "Using notches to uncover optimization frictions and
 structural elasticities: Theory and evidence from Pakistan," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 2013, 128 (2), 669­723.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, "Bunching," Annual Review of Economics, 2016, 8 (1), 435­464.

Li, Wenli, Michelle J White, and Ning Zhu, "Did Bankruptcy Reform Cause Mortgage
  Defaults to Rise?," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2011, 3 (4), 123­47.

Littwin, Angela, "Adapting to BAPCPA," American Bankruptcy Law Journal, 2016, 90, 183.


                                               38
Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt, "Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start,"
  American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (1), 402­418.

Lupica, Lois R, "The Consumer Bankruptcy Fee Study," American Bankruptcy Institute Law
 Review, 2012, 20, 17.

Mahoney, Neale, "Bankruptcy as implicit health insurance," American Economic Review, 2015,
 105 (2), 710­46.

Mitman, Kurt, "Macroeconomic Effects of Bankruptcy and Foreclosure Policies," American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2016, 106 (8), 2219­55.

Morgan, Donald, Benjamin Iverson, and Matthew Botsch, "Subprime foreclosures and the
 2005 bankruptcy reform," Economic Policy Review, 2012, (March), 47­57.

Nakajima, Makoto, "Assessing bankruptcy reform in a model with temptation and equilibrium
 default," Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 145, 42­64.

Nelson, Scott, "Private Information and Price Regulation in the US Credit Card Market," Work-
 ing Paper, 2018.

Parra, Carlos, "How Does Consumer Bankruptcy Protection Impact Household Outcomes?,"
 Working Paper, 2018.

Posner, Richard, "The Bankruptcy Reform Act," Becker-Posner Blog, 2005. https://perma.cc/
 XQ2G-5NS7.

Ru, Hong and Antoinette Schoar, "Do credit card companies screen for behavioral biases?,"
 National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #22360, 2016.

Saez, Emmanuel, "Do taxpayers bunch at kink points?," Working Paper 7366, National Bureau
  of Economic Research September 1999.

Severino, Felipe and Meta Brown, "Personal Bankruptcy Protection and Household Debt,"
  Working Paper, 2017.

Simkovic, Michael, "The Effect of BAPCPA on Credit Card Industry Profits and Prices," Amer-
  ican Bankruptcy Law Journal, 2009, 83, 1.

Stango, Victor, "Competition and pricing in the credit card market," Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2000, 82 (3), 499­508.

   and Jonathan Zinman, "What do consumers really pay on their checking and credit card
  accounts? Explicit, implicit, and avoidable costs," American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (2),
  424­29.

   and , "Borrowing high versus borrowing higher: price dispersion and shopping behavior in
  the US credit card market," The Review of Financial Studies, 2015, 29 (4), 979­1006.

Stavins, Joanna, "Can demand elasticities explain sticky credit card rates?," New England Eco-
  nomic Review, 1996, pp. 43­55.

Tabb, Charles J, "Lessons from the Globalization of Consumer Bankruptcy," Law & Social
  Inquiry, 2005, 30 (4), 763­782.

                                             39
Wang, Hung-Jen and Michelle J White, "An optimal personal bankruptcy procedure and
 proposed reforms," The Journal of Legal Studies, 2000, 29 (1), 255­286.

Warren, Elizabeth, "The Phantom $400," Journal of Bankruptcy Law and Practice, 2004, 13
 (2).

  , "Hearing before the Committee on the Judiciary," One Hundred Ninth Congress February 2005.

   and Amelia Warren Tyagi, "What's Hurting the Middle Class," Boston Review, September
  2005.

White, Michelle J, "Why don't more households file for bankruptcy?," Journal of Law, Eco-
 nomics, & Organization, 1998, pp. 205­231.

  , "Bankruptcy Reform and Credit Cards," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2007, 21 (4), 175­
  200.

Woodward, Susan E and Robert E Hall, "Diagnosing consumer confusion and sub-optimal
 shopping effort: Theory and mortgage-market evidence," American Economic Review, 2012, 102
 (7), 3249­76.

Zame, William R, "Efficiency and the role of default when security markets are incomplete,"
  American Economic Review, 1993, pp. 1142­1164.




                                             40
A     Model Derivations and Extensions

For simplicity, we omit subscript i in this section.

A.1    Interest Rate Comparative Statics
We begin by stating a formal proposition that summarizes the effects of bankruptcy reform on
interest rates:

Proposition 1. Under perfect competition, the effect of a change in the exemption level or a change
in filing costs on interest rates is given by:

                              cf (y  ) + (F (y  ) - F (e))
                      dr/de =                              ,
                                -bcf (y  ) + b(1 - p)
                                     -cf (y  )
                      dr/dc =                        ,
                              -bcf (y  ) + b(1 - p)

     In each case, the sign of the numerator is unambiguous. Both dr/de and dr/dc include cf (y  ),
the additional amount of debt discharged rather than repaid by marginal filers who are induced
to file by changes in the exemption level or cost of filing. For intuition on this term, recall that
filers repay y - e and non-filers repay (1 + r)b in full, and at y  = e + (1 + r)b - c, this difference
is c. Therefore, c represents the amount that is not repaid to creditors by marginal filers, whose
prevalence is represented by f (y  ). Naturally, increases in filing costs and exemptions have opposite
effects on the decision to file.
     The second term in the numerator of dr/de represents the additional amount discharged rather
than paid back to creditors due to changes in repayment behavior for infra-marginal filers. If this
group is small (for example, because not many filers lie in the mass between e and y  ), then the
second term becomes less important. Changes in the cost of filing have no effect on the amount
recovered by creditors for infra-marginal filers.
     Both expressions have the same denominator, which has an ambiguous sign due to the negative
first term. It is counter-intuitive that the sign of dr/dc is ambiguous--one would expect a less-
generous bankruptcy code to unambiguously lead to lower interest rates. However, there is an
additional indirect effect that complicates such a prediction. An increase in c and e changes the
decision rule, causing fewer individuals to file for bankruptcy. Thus r increases until the share of
individuals filing, p, increases to restore R(r) = b. The sign is determined by the share of non-filers
(1 - p) who repay in full against the additional repayment c from marginal filers.
     The derivation of the above result is given in the next subsection.

A.2    Derivations
We derive the following proposition.
Proposition 2. Under perfect competition, the effect of a change in the exemption level or a
change in filing costs on interest rates is given by:

                                             cf (y  ) + (F (y  ) - F (e))
                                dr/de =                                   ,
                                               -bcf (y  ) + b(1 - p)
                                                    -cf (y  )
                                dr/dc =                             .
                                             -bcf (y  ) + b(1 - p)



                                                   41
    Recall, with the assumption of perfect competition, we can implicitly define the interest rate r
by setting the repayment rate to creditors equal to the amount of borrowing (R(r) = b). Observing
that R(r) - b = 0, we can take partial derivatives in order to apply the implicit function theorem
to derive dr/de and dr/dc. The direct effects of e and c are straightforward, but the effect of r on
R(r) is ambiguous:

                        R
                          =         cf (y  )         >0
                        c
                                 Reduces filings
                        R
                          =                -cf (y  ) - F (y  ) + F (e)                   <0
                        e
                                 Increases filings & reduces recovery (among filers)
                        R
                          = -bcf (y  ) +                           b(1 - p)                   0
                        r
                                 Increases filings    Increases recovery among non-filers

   Using the partial derivatives above, the proposition follows by the implicit function theorem,
and
                                 dr    R/c         -cf (y  )
                                    =-     =
                                 dc    R/r   b(1 - p - cf (y  ))
                                 dr    R/e   cf (y  ) + F (y  ) - F (e)
                                    =-     =                            .
                                 de    R/r      b(1 - p - cf (y  ))
                                                                 dp       dp
   We also want to derive the total derivatives for              de and dc , which we use to derive the empirical
                          dr/dc     dr/de                        dp
object of interest (i.e., dp/dc and dp/de ). To obtain           de , we can make the following substitutions:

                                      dp/de = p/e + p/r  dr/de
                                                         dr
                                            = f (y  ) + bf (y  )
                                                         de
                                                        1 - F (y  )
                                            = f (y  )                  .
                                                      1 - p - cf (y  )
                          dp
We can do the same for    dc :

                                      dp/dc = p/c + p/r  dr/dc
                                                          dr
                                            = -f (y  ) + bf (y  )
                                                          dc
                                                          1 - F (y  )
                                            = -(f (y  )                  .
                                                        1 - p - cf (y  )
                                                dp dr dp               dr
   We can use the total derivatives for         dc , dc , de ,   and   de   to define:

                                      dr/dc    c/b
                                            =
                                      dp/dc   1-p
                                      dr/de   cf (y  ) + F (y  ) - F (e)
                                            =                            ,
                                      dp/de       bf (y  )(1 - F (e))

as desired.


                                                           42
A.3    Incorporating Insolvency
We can extend the model in Section 3 to incorporate insolvency; that is, the case where we require
income of at least c to file bankruptcy so that individuals with income y < c are insolvent and
unable to file for bankruptcy.
    The filing rule now becomes
                                     c  y  e - c + (1 + r)b.
                                                                      ) - F (y  ), where y  , y  are upper
The filing probability is now p = F (e - c + (1 + r)b) - F (c) = F (yh        l           h    l
and lower bounds of filers' income. We assume individuals who cannot afford to file for bankruptcy
repay the debt. This reflects wage garnishment or aggressive debt collection. We will assume that
whenever y < c, individuals repay y . As before, individuals with y > e - c + (1 + r)b repay (1 + r)b.
   Assuming perfect competition, the equilibrium interest rate is implicitly defined by R(r) = b,
and the new expression for the expected amount recovered from the population R(r) is

                          c                           e+(1+r)b-c                        
       R(r) =                 yf (y )dy      +                     (y - e)f (y )dy +                (1 + r)bf (y )dy .
                      0                           e                                    e+(1+r)b-c
                Recovered from insolvent         Recovered from bankruptcy filers       Recovered from non-filers

    We can walk through the propositions and empirical object derivations to see how incorporating
insolvency changes the expressions. We will find that, while it adds another group of marginal filers,
the expressions are qualitatively similar as in the model without insolvency.
    Proposition 3 The direct effect of a change in the exemption level on probability of filing
bankruptcy, and the effect of a change in the cost of filing on probability of filing bankruptcy are
given by the following


                                          p/e = f (e + (1 + r)b - c)
                                                        
                                                  = f (yh ) > 0,
                                          p/c = -f (e + (1 + r)b - c) - f (c)
                                                         
                                                  = -f (yh ) - f (yl ) < 0.

    The signs are the same as those in the model without insolvent individuals, but a change in the
cost of filing now affects two marginal groups: those on the margin of insolvency (yl = c); and, the
margin in the main model at the asset exemption level: (yh    = e + (1 - r )b - c). An increase in the

cost of filing shifts both groups from filing to non-filing.
    We can also derive the effects of changes to the bankruptcy code (i.e., c, e) on interest rates,
by re-deriving Proposition 2.
Proposition 4 The total effect of a change in exemption level or cost of filing on interest rates are
given by the following:
                                                         ) + F (y  ) - F (e)
                                                   cf (yh        h
                                           dr/de =             ) - cf (y  )) ,
                                                   b(1 - F (yh          h
                                                     -c(f (yl ) + f (yh
                                                                       ))
                                           dr/dc =            ) + cf (y  )) .
                                                   b(1 - F (yh          h




                                                               43
To derive these expressions, first note that R(r) - b = 0, then
                                                                               
R/r = b(y - e)f (y )|y=e+(1+r)b-c - b(1 + r)bf (y )|y=e+(1+r)b-c +                          bf (y )dy
                                                                              e+(1+r)b-c
                              
       = b(1 - F (yh ) - cf (yh )),
R/c = yf (y )|y=c - (y - e)f (y )|y=e+(1+r)b-c - (1 + r)bf (y )|y=e+(1+r)b-c
       = c(f (yl ) + f (yh
                         
                           )),
                                                                                                       e+(1+r)b-c
R/e = (y - e)f (y )|y=e+(1+r)b-c - (y - e)f (y )|y=e - (1 + r)bf (y )|y=e+(1+r)b-c +                                -f (y )dy
                                                                                                   e
                         
       = -cf (yh ) - F (yh ) + F (e).

   We can apply the implicit function theorem to obtain our desired total derivatives:

                                                 R/e
                                       dr/de = -
                                                 R/r
                                                     ) + F (y  ) - F (e)
                                               cf (yh        h
                                             =             ) - cf (y  )) ,
                                               b(1 - F (yh          h
                                                 R/c
                                       dr/dc = -
                                                 R/r
                                                                   ))
                                                 -c(f (yl ) + f (yh
                                             =            ) - cf (y  )) .
                                               b(1 - F (yh          h

     The signs and intuition of these total effects are the same as those in the model without insolvent
individuals, with additional terms to reflect the filers on the margin of insolvency.
                                                 dr/dc
     Before we derive the empirical object ( dp/dc     , we again calculate the total derivatives on the
filing probability:

                                                                       dr      
                   dp/de = p/e + p/r  dr/de = f (yh )+                    bf (yh )
                                                                       de
                                            1 - F (e)
                           = f (yh )            ) - cf (y  )
                                       1 - F (yh         h
                                                                                     dr
                    dp/dc = p/c + p/r  dr/dc = -f (yh ) - f (yl ) +                          
                                                                                        bf (yh )
                                                                                     dc
                                                        1 - F (yh)
                                   
                           = -(f (yh ) + f (yl ))            ) - cf (y  ) .
                                                    1 - F (yh         h

   The intuition is similar to cases discussed above. Deriving the empirical objects without ap-
proximation,

                                               cf (yh ) + F (y  ) - F (e)
                                       dr/de                  h
                                             =           )(1 - F (e))     .
                                       dp/de       bf (yh
                                              dr/dc      c/b
                                                    =         ) .
                                              dp/dc   1 - F (yh
                                               )  F (e), then
   As before, if we are willing to assume F (yh




                                                        44
                                                     )
                                                cf (yh
                                  dr/de                            c/b
                                                           )) = 1 - F (y  ) .
                                  dp/de  bf (yh )(1 - F (yh             h


B        Data Appendix

B.1        PACER Bankruptcy Records
Gross et al. (2014) contacted every bankruptcy court in the US and requested a waiver of PACER
fees; 81 districts granted the research team a waiver. They downloaded the dockets for each court
from the 1990s through 2011.
    For the purposes of this paper, we validated that dataset by comparing the annual counts of
bankruptcies to administrative records. We discarded three districts if their annual counts scraped
from the PACER database diverged from the official administrative record by more than 10 percent
in any year between 2004 and 2007.46 The final sample consists of 78 districts over that time period.

B.2        Consumer Financial Production Bureau Consumer Credit Panel (CCP) and
           Mintel Data
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Consumer Credit Panel (CCP) is a 1-in-48 random
sample of U.S. consumers with credit records. Our primary use of the CCP is to estimate the
bankruptcy filing risk for each credit-score segment. To do so, we combine all public record snap-
shots in the CCP. We eliminate any duplicate public records to obtain a clean index file, which
we merge with the full credit score archives for consumers. Consumers without a credit score are
dropped. For each consumer, we allot them to a credit-score segment (defined as the 10-point credit
score bins). The small number of consumers with credit scores below 440 are allocated to that bin.
At each point in time, we estimate the share of the consumers in that credit-score segment who
file for bankruptcy over the subsequent 12 months. Individuals without credit scores are dropped
from the sample.
     Data on credit card offers are from Mintel Comperemedia, accessed through the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau. Mintel Comperemedia conducts proprietary market research by sur-
veying United States households, who forward all incoming marketing mail. We focus on credit
card offers. The data include rich information on each credit card offer, including card categories
(Affinity Cards, Co-Branded, Credit Cards, Lifestyle Cards, Retail Cards, Secured Cards), applica-
tion type (Confirmed, General, Guaranteed Approval, Pre-Approved, Pre-Qualified, Pre-Selected),
and the lender. They additionally include information on the offered interest rate, and whether
(and for how long) an introductory ("teaser") rate might be applied. Importantly for our purposes,
the offers are coupled with information on the consumer who received the offer, including their
credit score and state of residence. We drop offers associated with consumers who are missing
credit scores and offers for which interest rates are missing. The data is a repeated cross-section,
surveying around 2,500 individuals each month and include between 5,900 and 12,079 credit card
offers over our sample period (with both the mean and median number of offers around 8,000 per
month).

B.3        Hospitalizations Data
We use hospital discharge data from the California Office of Statewide Health Planning and De-
velopment (OSHPD). The hospitalizations data are merged with credit reports and vital records
    46
         Those three districts were MOE, MTB, and NYN.


                                                         45
using social security numbers as described in the Online Appendix of Dobkin et al. (2018a). All
data production and analysis happened on-site at OSHPD's Sacramento office and all output was
reviewed by OSHPD staff to confirm privacy was protected.
    The hospital discharge data includes a unique identifier, dates of admission and discharge, details
about the health event (e.g., diagnosis codes), and demographic information. It also includes an
indicator for insurance coverage which includes Medicaid, private insurance, and "self-pay." We use
the primary payer of the index admission to define insurance coverage.
    We sample non-pregnancy related admissions with a non-missing social security number from
2003 through 2007. We additionally use hospitalizations from 2000 to 2010 to limit the sample to
admissions which were the first in three years for the individual, in order to isolate health "shocks."
We select the universe of "self-pay" (uninsured) hospitalizations. For those insured with Medicaid
or private coverage (insured), we sample a random 20 percent of individuals whose admission
originated through the Emergency Department, and a random 10 percent of individuals whose
admission was not through the Emergency Department. We construct reweights according to the
inverse probability an individual was sampled. We restrict to ages 25 to 64. For additional sample
selection and summary statistics, see Dobkin et al. (2018a).
    We convert the credit report variable for bankruptcy filings from a flow into a stock by defining
a cumulative indicator variable based on whether the individual has filed for bankruptcy since
entering the sample in 2002. This allows the event study specification to exploit variation in the
timing of the hospitalization to identify the effect of the hospitalization on the likelihood of filing
for bankruptcy.
    Finally, we define whether hospitalizations were exposed to the "pre-BAPCPA" or "post-
BAPCPA" bankruptcy regime. We define those hospitalized between January 2003 through Decem-
ber 2004 as facing the pre-BAPCPA bankruptcy code and hospitalizations between October 2005
through December 2007 for the post-BAPCPA sample. Most hospitalization-induced bankruptcies
occur in the first 18 months following the hospitalization. In order to limit the impact of intertem-
porally substituted bankruptcies filed during the rush-to-file period just before BAPCPA went into
effect, we limit the pre-BAPCPA sample to those hospitalized by the end of 2004. Any individuals
hospitalized in or after October 2005 faced the post-BAPCPA bankruptcy code.




                                                  46
C   Appendix Tables




                      47
                            Table A1. Benchmarking Interest Rate Pass-through

      (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                                                                                         Pass-through Calibration
 Credit Score     Population    Bankruptcy        APR          APR        60-Day         APR          APR
  Segment           Share          Rate                       w/ Fees   Default Rate                 w/ Fees

     500             6.5%           4.1%         12.5%        24.0%         55.7%         0.52           0.57
     510             1.5%           4.3%         12.2%        22.6%         44.4%         0.65           0.71
     520             1.5%           4.2%         13.3%        24.7%         40.4%         0.71           0.78
     530             1.5%           4.1%         13.8%        24.5%         37.0%         0.75           0.82
     540             1.5%           3.7%         14.0%        24.9%         32.4%         0.80           0.88
     550             1.6%           3.4%         13.9%        23.6%         29.0%         0.84           0.91
     560             1.6%           3.0%         13.9%        23.7%         25.4%         0.88           0.95
     570             1.6%           2.5%         13.9%        22.7%         21.3%         0.92           0.99
     580             1.7%           2.3%         13.8%        22.6%         17.5%         0.96           1.03
     590             1.7%           1.9%         13.9%        21.7%         14.8%         0.99           1.06
     600             1.7%           1.8%         14.4%        22.5%         12.2%         1.02           1.10
     610             1.8%           1.6%         14.1%        21.0%          9.9%         1.04           1.11
     620             2.0%           1.5%         13.7%        20.4%          8.0%         1.06           1.12
     630             2.0%           1.3%         13.4%        19.0%          6.2%         1.08           1.13
     640             2.2%           1.2%         13.2%        18.7%          5.1%         1.09           1.14
     650             2.4%           1.1%         13.0%        17.4%          3.9%         1.10           1.14
     660             2.6%           1.0%         12.3%        16.5%          3.2%         1.10           1.14
     670             2.6%           0.9%         11.6%        14.7%          2.7%         1.10           1.13
     680             2.8%           0.8%         11.1%        14.0%          2.1%         1.10           1.13
     690             2.9%           0.6%         10.8%        13.6%          1.6%         1.10           1.13
     700             3.4%           0.5%         10.3%        12.9%          1.3%         1.09           1.12
     710             3.6%           0.3%         10.1%        12.5%          1.0%         1.09           1.12
     720             3.6%           0.3%          9.8%        12.1%          0.7%         1.09           1.12
     730             3.8%           0.2%          9.7%        12.0%          0.6%         1.09           1.12
     740             4.2%           0.1%          9.5%        11.7%          0.5%         1.09           1.11
     750             3.9%           0.1%          9.5%        11.6%          0.4%         1.09           1.11
     760             4.1%           0.1%          9.4%        11.5%          0.3%         1.09           1.11
     770             4.2%           0.0%          9.4%        11.4%          0.2%         1.09           1.11
     780             4.9%           0.0%          9.3%        11.3%          0.2%         1.09           1.11
     790             4.7%           0.0%          9.4%        11.4%          0.2%         1.09           1.11
     800             4.9%           0.0%          9.4%        11.5%          0.1%         1.09           1.11
     810             4.6%           0.0%          9.5%        11.5%          0.1%         1.09           1.11
     820             3.3%           0.0%          9.5%        11.5%          0.1%         1.09           1.11
     830             1.9%           0.0%          9.4%        11.4%          0.1%         1.09           1.11
     840             1.2%           0.0%          9.6%        11.6%          0.0%         1.10           1.12

    Weighted averages              1.05%        11.03%        15.46%       9.06%         1.016          1.052
Notes: This table reports pass-through estimates for each credit-score segment. See main text for details. The lowest
credit-score bin combines all credit scores below 500. The "interest rate" column comes from the credit card offers
data, and the bankruptcy rate comes from the Consumer Credit Panel (CCP). The pass-through estimate comes
from combining the estimates in columns according to equation (1), using default rate as proxy for one minus the
recovery rate, which is the first term in equation (1).




                                                         48
 Table A2. Percentage of Total Filings Covered by PACER Sample

                                 (1)                   (2)            (3)

 Year    Quarter     All Bankruptcy Filings        Chapter 7     Chapter 13

 2004        1                  86.2                  89.6           74.1
             2                  85.5                  89.2           74.2
             3                  86.1                  90.6           74.5
             4                  86.0                  90.6           74.1

 2005        1                  86.1                  89.8           74.4
             2                  86.2                  89.3           74.4
             3                  87.2                  90.1           75.1
             4                  88.1                  90.0           75.4

 2006        1                  82.8                  87.6           74.8
             2                  83.1                  87.5           75.0
             3                  83.6                  89.0           74.9
             4                  84.5                  91.0           74.8

 2007        1                  85.5                  91.2           75.3
             2                  86.4                  92.1           75.7
             3                  86.3                  92.8           75.4
             4                  86.6                  93.1           75.5
Notes: The table presents the percent of the total administrative counts of
bankruptcies which are included in the PACER sample in each year and quar-
ter of the data. Administrative counts are provided by the Administrative Office
of the United States Courts.




                                       49
  Table A3. Net Change in Filings through 2007 (Robustness to Counterfactual Specifications)

                                 (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)

                                                Panel A. Main Sample Period 2004-2007
 Total                       -1,077,679     -1,085,106 -1,549,639 -1,529,728 -1,637,479                 -1,618,761
 Chapter 7                    -946,148       -948,801 -1,444,828 -1,419,240 -1,533,578                  -1,509,383
 Chapter 13                   -160,950       -173,816    -157,714   -158,298    -153,844                 -154,385

                                              Panel B. Extended Sample Period 2002-2007
 Total                       -1,109,094      -859,433 -1,057,545 -1,215,139 -1,244,948                  -1,105,452
 Chapter 7                    -873,627       -687,479    -996,780  -900,218 -1,029,042                   -949,787
 Chapter 13                   -231,271       -173,914    -218,421  -164,546     -215,956                 -162,645

 Date Used                     Senate         Senate          House         House          Signed         Signed
 Unemployment Rate
Notes: This table presents robustness to results presented in Table 2. In each column, we estimate the total deviation
from the predicted number of bankruptcy filings through the end of 2007. We estimate equation 2 from the beginning
of the sample until BAPCPA until the date indicated in the "Date Used" row. The Senate passage date is March 10,
2005, the House passage date is April 14, 2005, and the date signed is April 20, 2005. We additionally include the
national unemployment rate in estimating equation 2 where indicated. The overall numbers are inflated to reflect
the nation as a whole, based on our PACER sample coverage (see Appendix Table A2).




                                                         50
       Table A4. Summary Statistics for Credit Card Offers

                                    (1)         (2)              (3)

                                  Prime      Subprime      All Borrowers
 APR                               11.5        14.52           11.88
 Adjusted APR                      6.61        10.67            7.12
 Introductory APR                  5.46         8.76            5.87
 Rate Spread                       4.85         7.58            5.19
 Adjusted Rate Spread             -0.04         3.73            0.43

 Pre-Approved                     61.6%       74.1%            63.2%
 Annual Fee                       11.0%       52.5%            16.2%
 Rewards                          59.5%       16.7%            54.1%
 Annual Fee, No Rewards            4.6%       49.8%            10.2%
 Has Introductory APR             56.3%       43.6%            54.7%
 Late Fee                         $36.05      $34.73           $35.88

 Credit Score                      750         566              727
 Mean Offers Per Month             3.33        2.77             3.26
 N (Individual-Months)           105,941      13,982          119,923
 N (Offers)                      352,589      38,690          391,279
Notes: The sample consists of individuals in the Mintel sample at any point
between January 2004 and December 2007, collapsed to the individual-month.
The table presents mean features of credit card offers, weighted by the mail
volume of the campaign.




                                     51
      Table A5. Defining b : Change in Prospective Filing Risk

             (1)               (2)                 (3)             (4)

       Credit Score      Pre-BAPCPA Post-BAPCPA                    b
                                Subprime
             440            0.0554       0.0193                 -0.0361
             450            0.0459       0.0170                 -0.0289
             460            0.0412       0.0154                 -0.0259
             470            0.0393       0.0156                 -0.0236
             480            0.0392       0.0162                 -0.0229
             490            0.0402       0.0179                 -0.0224
             500            0.0425       0.0189                 -0.0235
             510            0.0442       0.0206                 -0.0236
             520            0.0431       0.0212                 -0.0218
             530            0.0418       0.0201                 -0.0217
             540            0.0373       0.0183                 -0.0191
             550            0.0341       0.0167                 -0.0174
             560            0.0294       0.0149                 -0.0145
             570            0.0252       0.0127                 -0.0125
             580            0.0223       0.0115                 -0.0109
             590            0.0186       0.0101                 -0.0086
             600            0.0167       0.0089                 -0.0078
             610            0.0151       0.0081                 -0.0070
             620            0.0132       0.0075                 -0.0057
                                  Prime
             630            0.0123       0.0069                 -0.0055
             640            0.0112       0.0064                 -0.0049
             650            0.0105       0.0058                 -0.0047
             660            0.0091       0.0051                 -0.0040
             670            0.0085       0.0048                 -0.0037
             680            0.0070       0.0038                 -0.0032
             690            0.0060       0.0034                 -0.0026
             700            0.0043       0.0025                 -0.0018
             710            0.0032       0.0018                 -0.0014
             720            0.0025       0.0015                 -0.0010
             730            0.0017       0.0010                 -0.0007
             740            0.0011       0.0007                 -0.0004
             750            0.0010       0.0006                 -0.0004
             760            0.0007       0.0005                 -0.0002
             770            0.0005       0.0003                 -0.0001
             780            0.0003       0.0002                 -0.0001
             790            0.0002       0.0001                 -0.0001
             800            0.0001       0.0001                 <.0001
            810+            <.0001       <.0001                 <.0001
Notes: The sample consists of individuals with a non-missing credit score in the
CFPB CCP from September 2003 through December 2007. Columns 2 and 3
present the average 12-month prospective bankruptcy filing probabilities before
and after bankruptcy reform, respectively. Column 4 presents the difference.

                                       52
         Table A6. Pass-through: Other Outcomes and Robustness

                                  (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)

  Dependent variable:                     Regular Interest Rate (APR)
  Post-BAPCPA ×b              -101.3***    -60.4**    -59.1**   -66.7**        -66.6**
                                (35.7)      (27.2)     (24.6)    (29.3)         (29.0)

  R2                             0.432       0.433       0.524       0.551      0.552

  Dependent variable:                          Adjusted Interest Rate
  Post-BAPCPA ×b                 -36.1        -32.8      -36.1     -36.5         -39.3
                                (29.7)       (24.5)     (25.1)    (25.2)        (31.6)

  R2                             0.358       0.358       0.436       0.442      0.442

  Dependent variable:                                 Late Fee
  Post-BAPCPA ×b                 0.69         0.65       0.69        0.69        0.69
                                (0.62)       (0.53)     (0.51)      (0.51)      (0.51)

  R2                             0.144       0.144       0.155       0.159      0.159

  Dependent variable:               APR (Using Pre-BAPCPA Filing Risk)
  Post-BAPCPA ×pb              -58.9***  -41.6** -40.0*** -44.1** -44.1**
                                (19.7)    (15.8)   (14.4)  (17.0)    (16.9)

  R2                             0.358       0.358       0.436       0.442      0.442

  Lender FEs
  Subprime ×t
  Card Category
  Application Type
  State FE

  N                            391,153      391,153     390,975    390,975     390,975
Notes: The sample consists of credit card offers made to households from January 2004
through December 2007. All columns report effects based on OLS estimates of variations
of equation 4. The outcome variables are the regular interest rate (APR), adjusted
interest rate on credit card offers (adjusted for introductory interest rates), and the
fee for late payment. Standard errors (two-way clustered by credit score segment and
lender) are in parentheses. Offers are weighted by the mail volume of the campaign.
Asterisks indicate significance at the 1 percent (***), 5 percent (**), and 10 percent (*)
level, respectively.




                                           53
             Table A7. Pass-through: Robustness to Controlling for Federal Funds Rate

                               (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)

  Dependent variable:                                         Regular Interest Rate
  Post-BAPCPA ×b           -101.3***     -60.4**    -59.1**     -66.7** -66.6** -66.4**           -70.7**    75.0***
                             (35.7)       (27.2)     (24.6)      (29.3)     (29.0)  (28.9)         (27.3)     (26.9)

  R2                         0.432        0.433      0.524        0.551     0.552       0.552      0.551      0.552

  Lender FEs
  Subprime ×t
  Card Category
  Application Type
  State FE
  Subprime × FFR

  N                         391,153     391,153     390,975      390,975   390,975    390,381     390,381    390,381
Notes: The sample consists of credit card offers made to households from January 2004 through December 2007. All
columns report effects based on OLS estimates of equation 4 and include month-year and credit-score-bin fixed effects
in addition to the additional controls listed. The outcome variable is the interest rate on credit card offers. Standard
errors (two-way clustered by credit-score segment and lender) are in parentheses. Offers are weighted by the mail
volume of the campaign. Asterisks indicate significance at the 1 percent (***), 5 percent (**), and 10 percent (*)
level, respectively.




                                                            54
Table A8. Comparing Difference-in-Difference Results to Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Model

                                                                               (1)                     (2)

    Dependent variable:                                                      Regular Interest Rate
                                                                        Main result,           Benchmark
                                                                     Table 3, column (4)      DiD estimate

    Post-BAPCPA ×b                                                          -60.35**
                                                                             (27.18)
    Post-BAPCPA × (FICO<650)                                                                        -0.825***
                                                                                                     (0.148)
    Implied interaction term
    (to compare to Table 3, column (4))                                                             -51.98***

    Analysis of Average Treatment Effect (ATE) estimate
    # of negative weights in calculation of ATE                                                          0
    Standard deviation of weights in ATE calculation                                                  0.0007
    Ratio of DiD coeffcient to standard deviation of weights                                           1,147

    R2                                                                        0.433                   0.689

    Month-x-Year FE
    Score Bin
    Lender FEs
    Subprime ×t

    N                                                                       391,279                   1,948
  Notes: Column (1) reproduces the main result in Table 3, column (4). See Table 3 for more details on
  specification. Column (2) reports several different results based on a "collapsed" data set that collapses the
  micro data by year-month and credit score "bin," where each of these indicator variables (as well as subprime-
  specific trend) has been residualized by lender fixed effects. The first row in column (2) reports a benchmark
  difference-in-difference (DiD) coefficient estimate using analogous specification to column (1), but replacing the
  continuous treatment intensity (b ) with an indicator variable for whether FICO score is below 650 (which is
  close to median FICO score in the sample). This results in a standard DiD estimate, and the standard errors
  are clustered by credit score bin. By scaling this estimate by the difference in average value of b in sample
  below and above FICO=650, this scaled estimate corresponds to an implied interaction term which can then be
  compared to main result in Table 3, column (4). The next 3 rows report statistics based on the de Chaisemartin
  and D'Haultfoeuille (2019) heterogeneous treatment effects model. The first row reports the number of negative
  weights used in calculation of ATE. If there are negative weights, then this suggests reporting DiD estimates that
  are robust to treatment effect heterogeneity. The lack of negative weights and very small standard deviation
  of weights suggests that the benchmark ATE is likely to be reliable, which is also similar to the main results
  estimated on the full micro data.




                                                         55
                    Table A9. Summary Statistics for Hospitalizations

                                                   (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)

  Insurance Coverage:                               Uninsured                      Insured
  Hospitalization Period:                          Pre     Post                 Pre       Post

  Age                                               44           45               48          49
                                                   (11)         (11)            (10)         (10)
  Asian                                           0.046       0.046            0.066         0.07
                                                  (.21)        (.21)           (.25)        (.25)
  Black                                            0.11         0.11           0.077        0.077
                                                  (.31)        (.31)           (.27)        (.27)
  Hispanic                                         0.24         0.27             .18          .19
                                                  (.43)        (.44)           (.38)        (.39)
  White                                            0.56         0.53             .64          .62
                                                   (.5)         (.5)           (.48)        (.48)
  Male                                             0.62         0.61             .45          .45
                                                  (.49)        (.49)            (.5)         (.5)
  Chronic Diagnosis                                0.78         0.82            0.84         0.87
                                                  (.41)        (.38)           (.36)        (.34)
  Zip Code Median Income                         59,146       58,957          66,652       67,307
                                                (22,013)     (21,866)        (24,307)     (24,505)
  Any Collection in Last 12 Months                 0.34         0.38             .16          .17
                                                  (.47)        (.49)           (.36)        (.38)
  Collection Balance                              2,869        3,994           1,068        1,341
                                                 (9,181)     (11,528)         (5,834)      (6,481)
  Any Bankruptcy in Last 12 Months                0.014       0.012             .014         .011
                                                  (.12)        (.11)           (.12)         (.1)
  Credit Limit                                   13,366       16,368          30,164       43,741
                                                (39,116)     (51,555)        (51,750)     (80,580)
  Credit Score                                     655          655              727          734
                                                  (111)        (109)           (119)        (120)

  N                                              53,611       62,912         164,207      145,502
Notes: The sample consists of individuals aged 25­64 who are hospitalized in California, additionally
split by the timing of the hospitalization (January 2003 through December 2004 for the pre-BAPCPA
sample, October 2005 through December 2007 for the post-BAPCPA sample) and insurance coverage
(uninsured or insured which includes those with private insurance or Medicaid coverage). Age is
defined at admission. Insurance status is defined at the index admission and denotes coverage by
Medicaid or private insurance. The universe of qualifying uninsured hospitalizations are included in
the sample; estimates for the insured are weighted to adjust for individuals' sampling probabilities.
Standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                 56
   Table A10. Implied Effects of Hospitalization on Debt in Collections

                                         (1)         (2)            (3)          (4)

 Insurance Coverage:                      Uninsured                       Insured
 Hospitalization Period:                 Pre     Post              Pre          Post

                                       Panel A.   Number of Debts in Collections
 Implied Effect at 12 Months            0.96       1.14       0.11       0.13
                                       (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.01)     (0.01)
 Implied Effect at 24 Months            1.32       1.52       0.16       0.21
                                       (0.05)     (0.06)     (0.02)     (0.02)
 Pre-Hospitalization Mean               1.05       3.06       0.43       1.28

                                              Panel B. Collection Balance
 Implied Effect at 12 Months            4,559    5,163         103        178
                                       (104.7) (135.1)       (28.0)     (28.6)
 Implied Effect at 24 Months            6,724    6,944         163        316
                                       (169.0) (229.1)       (53.1)     (56.8)
 Pre-Hospitalization Mean               2,869    3,994        1,068     1,341

 N                                     53,611      62,912        164,207      145,502
Notes: The sample consists of individuals aged 25­64 who are hospitalized in California,
additionally split by the timing of the hospitalization (January 2003 through Decem-
ber 2004 for the pre-BAPCPA sample, October 2005 through December 2007 for the
post-BAPCPA sample) and insurance coverage (uninsured or insured which includes
those with private insurance or Medicaid coverage). All columns report effects based
on OLS estimates of equation 6. The outcome variable is whether an individual has
filed for bankruptcy since the beginning of the sample (January 2002). Standard errors
(clustered on the individual) are in parentheses. The universe of qualifying uninsured
hospitalizations are included in the sample; estimates for the insured are weighted to
adjust for individuals' sampling probabilities. All implied effects are significant at the
1-percent level.
a
   The implied effect at 12 months is calculated from equation 6 as 144 × 2 + 1, 728 × 4
b
   The implied effect at 24 months is calculated from equation 6 as 576 × 2 + 13, 824 × 4




                                            57
D   Appendix Figures

      Figure A1. Excess and Missing Mass of Bankruptcy Filings: Extended Pre-Period

                   Weekly Bankruptcy Filings vs. Predicted Weekly Bankruptcy Filings
        400,000



         60,000


                                                                            Excess mass
         40,000                                                                    Predicted filings



         20,000

                                                   Missing mass
                                                                                    Actual filings
              0
                  2002        2003         2004           2005       2006          2007          2008
       Notes: The sample consists of all consumer bankruptcy filings included in the PACER sample
       from January 2002 through December 2007. The total count of filings for each week is plotted
       against the predicted number of filings for the week. The predicted number of filings are the
       result of estimating equation 2 on the total count of filings from January 2004 through the
       day that BAPCPA was passed by the Senate (March 10, 2005). The two data points before
       implementation of BAPCPA are censored in this figure: there were 108,745 filings during
       the week that began on October 3, 2005 and 427,947 filings during the week that began on
       October 10, 2005.




                                                     58
          Figure A2. Time Series for Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 Filings

       Weekly Chapter 7 bankruptcy filings
     400,000



     300,000



     200,000
                        BAPCPA signed on
                        April 20, 2005

     100,000
                                                    BAPCPA implemented on
                                                    October 17, 2005


             0
                 2004             2005            2006             2007              2008

      Weekly Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings
    40,000



    30,000



    20,000              BAPCPA signed on
                        April 20, 2005


    10,000                                          BAPCPA implemented on
                                                    October 17, 2005


         0
             2004                2005           2006              2007              2008
Notes: The sample consists of all consumer bankruptcy filings included in the PACER sample
from January 2004 through December 2007. Each dot in the figure represents the total count
of filings for that week, separately for Chapter 7 filings (top figure) and Chapter 13 filings
(bottom figure).




                                             59
                             Figure A3. Share Chapter 13

       Weekly Share of Bankruptcy Filings that are Chapter 13
 .8



 .6



 .4



 .2

                                                 BAPCPA implemented on
                                                 October 17, 2005
 0
      2004               2005                2006                2007                2008
Notes: The sample consists of all consumer bankruptcy filings included in the PACER sample
from January 2004 through December 2007. Each dot in the figure represents the share of
filings in that week which were Chapter 13. The vertical line indicates the date when BAPCPA
was implemented, October 17, 2005.




                                            60
                                                             Figure A4. Years Since Last Chapter 7 Filing

                                                  Years since Last Bankruptcy Filing
                                            .04
                                                                Pre-BAPCPA
                                                                Post-BAPCPA

                                            .03



                                            .02



                                            .01



                                             0
                                                  2               4                 6              8            10    12
                                                                           Years since Last Bankruptcy Filing
Notes: The sample consists of Chapter 7 consumer bankruptcy filings included in the PACER
sample from January 2004 through December 2007. We match filings for the same individual
over time using name, last four digits of Social Security number, and district. The figure plots
the distribution of "years since last Chapter 7 filing" for bankruptcies filed before and after
BAPCPA was implemented (October 17, 2005).


                                                            Figure A5. Stability of Credit Score Distribution

                                                  Credit Score Distribution by Year
                                            .05                Sep 2003
                                                               Jun 2004
 Share of Individuals with Credit Reports




                                                               Jun 2005
                                            .04
                                                               June 2006
                                                               Jun 2007

                                            .03



                                            .02



                                            .01



                                              0
                                                      450               550                  650                750        850
                                                                                        Credit Score
Notes: The sample consists of individuals with a non-missing credit score in the CFPB CCP
from September 2003 through December 2007. The points represent the share of consumers
with a credit score in the 10-point credit score bin.



                                                                                         61
                  Figure A6. Time Series for APR and Rate Spread
          Mean APR of Credit Card Offer by Prime / Subprime

    15




    10
                                                                              Subprime
                                                                              Prime
                                                                              Difference

     5




     0
         2004               2005                2006                  2007                 2008
          Mean Rate Spread of Credit Card Offer by Prime / Subprime
    10
                                                                             Subprime
                                                                             Prime
     8                                                                       Difference




     6



     4



     2

         2004               2005                2006                  2007                2008
Notes: The sample consists of credit card offers made between January 2004 and December
2007 included in the Mintel data. Figures plot the average interest rate (either APR or rate
spread) offer made to prime and subprime borrowers (defined as a credit score 620 or below).




                                                62
               Figure A7. Lender-Specific Interest Rate Responses to Change in Filing Rates

                                 Interest Rate Response to 1pp Change in Filing Probability by Lender
                           50                            k
                                               Ex itiban                              al
                                             Am  C                                utu
                                                                                 M
                                                                              on
                                                                          ingt
                                                                     sh
                                                                  Wa
                            0                       GE                                                                    y  k               ank ank
                                                                                                                     pan Ban
Event Study Coefficient




                                                                                                                   om plied             n e B ier B
                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                st Ap                 O m
                                                                                                            Tru                   dit Pre
                                                                                                         nd                    CreFirst
                                                                                                        a
                                       ase                                                     B  ank
                                  Ch                                                       bus
                           -50                                                       lum
                                                                                Co

                                                                                           B  C
                                                                                        HS

                          -100


                                                             ne
                                                       ita lO
                          -150                     Cap
                                 0                               .2                      .4                                                  .6
                                                       Share of Firm's Offers Made to Subprime Consumers
               Notes: The sample consists of credit card offers made between January 2004 and December
               2007 included in the Mintel data. The figure plots the coefficient 1 from the estimation of
               equation 4 separately by each lender, which denotes the change in the interest rates on credit
               card offers for a 1-percentage-point change in the probability an individual in a given credit-
               score segment files for bankruptcy. The horizontal axis denotes the share of credit card offers
               by a firm which are made to subprime consumers, while the size of the circle is determined by
               the total number of subprime offers made during the sample period. All offers are weighted
               by the mail volume of the campaign.




                                                                                     63
                            Figure A8. ZIP Code Income

           Average Median Zip Code Income among Bankruptcy Filers by Week
  45,000


  44,000


  43,000


  42,000


  41,000


  40,000
           2004             2005                 2006            2007               2008
Notes: The sample consists of all consumer bankruptcy filings included in the PACER sample
from January 2004 through December 2007, matched with the ZIP Code median household
income measured in the 2000 decennial census. Each dot in the figure represents the average
median ZIP Code household income for filers in that week. The vertical line indicates the
date when BAPCPA was implemented, October 17, 2005.




                                            64
                                        Figure A9. Income Distribution Filers by Chapter

                                       Zip Code Income Percentiles among Ch 7 Bankruptcy Filers by Year
                              80,000
                                                  2004
                                                  2005
                                                  2006
                                                  2007
    Median Zip Code Income




                              60,000




                              40,000




                              20,000
                                       0              20             40                60          80      100
                                                                          Percentile
                                       Zip Code Income Percentiles among Ch 13 Bankruptcy Filers by Year
                              80,000
                                                   2004
                                                   2005
                                                   2006
                                                   2007
     Median Zip Code Income




                              60,000




                              40,000




                              20,000

                                       0              20 60          4080             100
                                              Percentile
Notes: The sample consists of all Chapter 7 and 13 consumer bankruptcy filings included in
the PACER sample in 2004 and 2006, matched with the ZIP Code median household income
measured in the 2000 decennial census. The two distributions plot the percentiles of ZIP Code
median household income among filers in 2004 and 2006.




                                                                       65
                          Figure A10. Effect of Hospitalization on Bankruptcy Filing for Insured

                                  Effect of Insured Hospitalization on Bankruptcy Filing
                            .02
                                        Pre-BAPCPA Hospitalizations
                                        Post-BAPCPA Hospitalizations
                          .015
Event Study Coefficient




                            .01


                          .005


                             0


                          -.005

                                  -24          -12          0           12             24   36   48
                                                            Months since hospitalization
Notes: The sample consists of individuals aged 25­64 who are hospitalized with insurance
in California, additionally split by the timing of the hospitalization (January 2003 through
December 2004 for the pre-BAPCPA sample, October 2005 through December 2007 for the
post-BAPCPA sample). The points represent the estimated effects of event time (i.e., the µr s
from the non-parametric event study in equation 5) and the lines represent the parametric
event study in equation 6 with the pre-trends normalized between the two periods for ease of
visual comparison.




                                                                       66
Figure A11. Effect of Hospitalization on Bankruptcy Filing by Year of Admission

           Implied Increase in Two-Year Bankruptcy Filing Probability by Year of Admission


   .015



     .01



   .005



      0



   -.005
           2003               2004               2005                2006                2007
                                          Year of Admission
 Notes: The sample consists of individuals aged 25­64 who are hospitalized without insurance
 in California, additionally split by the year of admission to the hospital. The points represent
 the estimated 24-month implied effects of the hospitalization on the likelihood an individual
 has filed for bankruptcy. Implied effects are estimated based on the parametric event study
 in equation 6 with year fixed effects jointly estimated and event study coefficients separately
 estimated by year of admission.




                                                67
