                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




PUZZLING EXCHANGE RATE DYNAMICS AND DELAYED PORTFOLIO ADJUSTMENT

                                      Philippe Bacchetta
                                      Eric van Wincoop

                                     Working Paper 26259
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26259


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




We thank Margaret Davenport, Jesper Linde, Greg Smith, Agnes Benassy-Quere and participants
at the SED in Mexico City, the 8th Workshop on Exchange Rates in Paris, the CIREQ Montreal
Macroeconomics Conference, and seminars participants at the Riksbank, the Hong Kong
Monetary Authority, the Dallas Fed, Trinity College Dublin, and St Andrews for comments.
Simon Tieche provided able research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the Swiss National Science Foundation and the Bankard Fund for Political Economy. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Puzzling Exchange Rate Dynamics and Delayed Portfolio Adjustment
Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 26259
September 2019
JEL No. F3,F31,F41,G11,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

The objective of this paper is to show that the proposal by Froot and Thaler (1990) of delayed
portfolio adjustment can account for a broad set of puzzles about the relationship between interest
rates and exchange rates. The puzzles include: i) the delayed overshooting puzzle; ii) the forward
discount puzzle (or Fama puzzle); iii) the predictability reversal puzzle; iv) the Engel puzzle
(high interest rate currencies are stronger than implied by UIP); v) the forward guidance
exchange rate puzzle; vi) the absence of a forward discount puzzle with long-term bonds. These
results are derived analytically in a simple two-country model with portfolio adjustment costs.
Quantitatively, this approach can match all targeted moments related to these puzzles.


Philippe Bacchetta
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Lausanne
Intranef 523
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
philippe.bacchetta@unil.ch

Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26259
1     Introduction
Richard Thaler won the 2017 Nobel Prize in Economics. Thaler has focused his re-
search on behavior that he refers to as a deviation from "rational efficient markets."
One example of this is the foreign exchange market. Focusing on the forward dis-
count puzzle, the fact that high interest rate currencies tend to appreciate, Froot
and Thaler (1990) argue that "a rational efficient markets paradigm provides no
satisfactory explanation for the observed results". They suggest that gradual port-
folio adjustment could solve this puzzle. Their hypothesis is that "...at least some
investors are slow in responding to changes in the interest differential," arguing
that "It may be that these investors need some time to think about trades before
executing them, or that they simply cannot respond quickly to recent informa-
tion." In Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010) we took this proposal seriously and
showed that it can indeed account for the forward discount puzzle.
    The objective of this paper is to explore the role of gradual portfolio adjustment
for a broader set of features in the interaction between exchange rates and interest
rates. We find that gradual portfolio adjustment can account for as many as six
puzzles that have been identified in the literature. The puzzles that we address
are:

    1. Delayed overshooting puzzle: a monetary contraction that raises the interest
       rate leads to a period of appreciation, followed by gradual depreciation.

    2. Forward discount puzzle (or Fama puzzle): high interest rate currencies have
       higher expected returns over the near future.

    3. Predictability reversal puzzle: high interest rate currencies have lower ex-
       pected returns after some period of time.

    4. Engel puzzle: high interest rate currencies are stronger than implied by un-
       covered interest parity.

    5. Forward guidance exchange rate puzzle: the exchange rate is more strongly
       affected by expected interest rates in the near future than the distant future.

    6. LSV puzzle: current interest differentials do not predict long-term bond re-
       turn differentials.


                                          1
    The delayed overshooting puzzle was first documented by Eichenbaum and
Evans (1995) for the US and Grilli and Roubini (1996) for other countries. It should
be pointed out that the subsequent studies have shown that the evidence depends
on identification strategies.1 The second puzzle, the forward discount puzzle, is the
best known on this list and continues to be a well established empirical fact.2 The
predictability reversal puzzle, first documented by Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2010), is related to the forward discount puzzle. They show that while the excess
return over the next quarters is positive for higher interest rate currencies (forward
discount puzzle), after about 8 quarters the quarterly excess return is negative for
currencies whose current interest rate is relatively high. In other words, there is a
reversal in the sign of expected excess returns. Engel (2016) confirms that this is
a robust puzzle.
    The fourth puzzle is documented in Engel (2016). The Engel puzzle says that
high interest rate currencies tend to have a stronger exchange rate than under UIP
(uncovered interest rate parity). This is because the sum of all expected future
excess returns is negative for high interest rate currencies. In other words, the
predictability reversal will ultimately dominate and investors demand a lower sum
of all future excess returns on currencies whose interest rate is currently high. Such
currencies are therefore strong relative to what they would be under UIP.
    The forward guidance exchange rate puzzle is developed by Gal´       i (2019). Un-
der UIP the exchange rate is equal to the unweighted sum of all future expected
interest rate differentials. This implies that changes in expected interest rates in
the near future have the same effect on the exchange rate today as changes in the
expected interest differential in the more distant future. However, in the data Gal´  i
(2019) finds that expectations of interest differentials in the distant future have
a much smaller effect on the current exchange rate than expectations of interest
differentials in the near future.
    The LSV puzzle stands for the puzzle developed by Lustig, Stathopoulos and
Verdelhan (2018) (henceforth LSV). It says that the forward discount puzzle has
no analogy in long-term bonds. While the international excess return on short-
term bonds tends to be positive for currencies with a relatively high interest rate
   1
     See for example Cushman and Zha (1997), Faust and Rogers (2003), Scholl and Uhlig (2008)
or Bjørnland (2009).
   2
     Notice, however, that the puzzle does not seem to hold when we include post-2008 data. See
Bussi`ere et al. (2018).


                                              2
(forward discount puzzle), LSV find that this is not the case for long-term bonds.
They show that the local excess return of long-term bonds over short-term bonds
tends to be lower for high interest rate currencies and that this offsets the positive
expected excess return for short-term bonds.3 LSV find that no-arbitrage models
in international finance cannot account for this.
    Our objective is to show that a single friction, associated with portfolio adjust-
ment costs, is able to account for each of these puzzles. An additional objective is
to do so in an analytically tractable way, which significantly facilitates the analysis
and makes the results more transparent. With the exception of the LSV puzzle, the
key results are summarized through a set of propositions that follow directly from
the closed form analytical solution of the model. We obtain analytic tractability
by assuming that agents can adjust their portfolio each period, but face a simple
quadratic portfolio adjustment cost.4 This also allows us to abstract from investor
heterogeneity. By contrast, the existing literature on gradual portfolio adjustment
has mostly assumed overlapping generations that make new portfolio decisions
every T periods,5 an assumption that has the disadvantage of both requiring a
numerical solution and leading to a wobbly impulse response of asset prices to
shocks.6
    The role of a portfolio adjustment friction in accounting for these puzzles has
received limited attention in the literature so far. An exception is Bacchetta and
   3
     The international excess return of long-term bonds can be written as the sum of the interna-
tional excess return for short-term bonds plus the difference in local excess returns of long-term
over short-term bonds.
   4
     Vayanos and Woolley (2012) also introduce a cost of changing portfolios to model portfolio
inertia. They do so in a continuous time, closed economy model. There is also a finance literature
analyzing optimal portfolio allocation in partial equilibrium models with quadratic adjustment
costs, e.g., G^
              arleanu and Pedersen (2013). In a different context, Sutherland (1996) assumes
quadratic adjustment costs between domestic and foreign bonds.
   5
     For examples, see Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010), Bogousslavky (2016), Duffie (2010),
Henderschott et al. (2013) and Greenwood et al. (2015).
   6
     The wobbly impulse response results from the fact that investors anticipate that agents who
changed their portfolio at the time of a shock will change their portfolio again T periods later.
Apart from a portfolio adjustment cost as we assume here, the impulse response can also be
smoothed by assuming that agents change their portfolio with a given probability each period, as
recently proposed in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2017). But this approach, which is analogous
to Calvo price setting, is even less analytically tractable and requires a non-trivial numerical
solution technique.



                                                3
van Wincoop (2010), who address the first three puzzles in a model where agents
make a new portfolio decision every T periods. As Engel (2016) points out, the
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010) model "is complex and requires numerical
solution." Our approach here differs in that it is analytically tractable, considers
a broader set of puzzles and leads to smooth impulse responses to interest rate
shocks.
    While there is a vast literature on the forward discount puzzle, which we will
not review here, the other puzzles have received much less attention. A few papers
focus on delayed overshooting, e.g., Gourinchas and Tornell (2004) and Kim (2005).
Recently, several papers analyze the predictability reversal puzzle. Engel (2016),
Itshkoki and Mukhin (2017), and Vlachev (2017) propose explanations based on
liquidity shocks. Chernov and Creal (2018) and Dahlquist and Penasse (2017)
focus on the role of long-term real exchange rate adjustment. The forward guidance
exchange rate puzzle and LSV puzzle have only been recently documented and no
solution has been proposed yet.
    Engel (2016) conjectures that a model with gradual portfolio adjustment cannot
account for the predictability reversal puzzle and the Engel puzzle. We show that
this is due to a misunderstanding about the response of the exchange rate relative
to the UIP exchange rate. Engel (2016) conjectures that a positive interest rate
shock leads the exchange rate initially to be weaker than the UIP exchange rate,
with the difference then gradually declining according to an AR(1) process. We
show that the first conjecture is correct, but the second is not. It is true that
immediately following a positive interest rate shock the currency is weaker than
under UIP as a result of the weak initial portfolio response, which may seem
inconsistent with the Engel puzzle. But we show that soon after the shock the
high interest rate currency is stronger than under UIP. It continues to appreciate
after a positive interest rate shock due to the gradual portfolio adjustment. The
Engel puzzle is about an unconditional moment, not about an immediate response
to an interest rate shock.
    It should finally be pointed out that a gradual portfolio adjustment friction is
well motivated by evidence of delayed adjustment in investors' portfolios. Ameriks
and Zeldes (2004) document that investors make changes to their TIAA-CREF
allocations very infrequently. Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynam-
ics (PSID) and the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), Bilias et al. (2010) find
widespread inertia of portfolios in response to stock market fluctuations. Brunner-

                                         4
meier and Nagel (2008) use PSID data to conclude that "...one of the major drivers
of household portfolio allocation seems to be inertia: households rebalance only
very slowly following inflows and outflows or capital gains and losses." Mitchell
et al. (2006) find that 401(k) plan participants are characterized by "profound
inertia". Giglio et al. (2019) use data from wealthy Vanguard clients that com-
bines survey expectations of stock and bond returns by individual investors with
administrative data on their investment holdings and transactions at Vanguard.
They find that the equity portfolio share is not very sensitive to changes in ex-
pected returns and present evidence suggesting that this is the result of infrequent
trading, which they relate to infrequent attention. Duffie (2010) reviews a broad
range of evidence motivating models of gradual portfolio adjustment.
    Evidence of gradual portfolio adjustment based on international portfolios is
limited. Bohn and Tesar (1996) and Froot et al. (2001) find that international
portfolio flows are highly persistent and strongly related to lagged returns. Bohn
and Tesar (1996) conclude: "we suspect that investors may adjust their portfolios
to new information gradually over time, resulting in both autocorrelated net pur-
chases and a positive linkage with lagged returns." In the Online Appendix of the
paper we document evidence on US international equity portfolio shares that is
consistent with our theory and calibration.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss a
two-country model with short-term bonds and gradual portfolio adjustment. In
Section 3 we provide formal propositions related to the first five puzzles as well
as a numerical illustration. Section 4 extends the model to incorporate long-term
bonds to address the last puzzle. Section 5 concludes.


2    Model with Gradual Portfolio Adjustment and
     Short-Term Bonds
The six puzzles can be written both in terms of real interest rates and exchange
rates and in terms of nominal interest rates and exchange rates. As Engel (2016)
points out, the forward discount rate puzzle applies equally when using real vari-
ables. Gal´i (2019) also uses real interest rates and exchange rates to develop the
forward guidance exchange rate puzzle. An advantage of stating the puzzles in
terms of real variables is that the real exchange rate is stationary, while the nom-


                                         5
inal exchange rate is generally not stationary. We therefore use real variables,
although we should stress that the equations can easily be written in nominal
terms as well. In this section we first describe the model and then the solution for
the equilibrium real exchange rate and corresponding excess return predictability
coefficients. We also discuss a calibration of the model that is used to numerically
illustrate the puzzles in the next two sections.
    There are two countries, Home and Foreign, with agents who invest in one-
period bonds of both countries. We adopt a simplifying overlapping generations
framework as in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2007, 2010). But the model differs
in that we adopt a cost of changing the portfolio share instead of a fixed interval of
changing portfolios. Moreover, we focus on real variables and we consider investors
from both countries rather than just the Home country.
    We treat interest rate shocks as exogenous to the model and consider the im-
pact on the exchange rate. In order to derive all the results we do not explicitly
model other shocks.7 Other shocks only matter for our results to the extent that
they affect exchange rate volatility, which affects the portfolio response to ex-
pected returns. In numerical illustrations we simply use the observed exchange
rate volatility.8


2.1     Model Description
There are overlapping generations of agents who live two periods and are born with
a unit wealth in real terms. Agents in the Home country born at time t maximize
                                        -
                                     Ct1+1
                                Et         - 0.5 (zt - zt-1 )2                                (1)
                                     1-
where the second term is a portfolio adjustment cost. It captures a utility cost
of choosing a different portfolio share zt invested in Foreign bonds than that of
"parents" one period ago. This reduced-form adjustment is more ad hoc than the
alternative ways to generate gradual portfolio adjustment, but this comes at a
   7
     Itskhoki and Muhkin (2017) argue that financial shocks, in the form of portfolio shocks, are
the main drivers of exchange rates and can account for the exchange rate disconnect puzzle.
   8
     We implicitly assume that other shocks that are important drivers of the exchange rate do
not affect interest rates themselves. In other words, shocks affect exchange rates (mostly) either
through interest rates or other channels (e.g. portfolio shift independent of interest rates).




                                                6
significant gain of analytical tractability that delivers key insights.9
    Consumption is equal to the portfolio return:

                       p             St+1 i                     Pt
               Ct+1 = Rt+1 = zt          e t e- + (1 - zt )eit      + Tt+1                  (2)
                                      St                       Pt+1

it and it are the nominal interest rate on Home and Foreign bonds. St is the level
of the nominal exchange rate, measured in terms of the Home currency per unit of
the Foreign currency. Pt is the price level. We will assume that inflation over the
next period is known, so that Pt+1 is known. This captures the fact that there is
much more uncertainty about exchange rates than inflation over the near future.
We also allow for a cost  of investing in Foreign bonds, which is an international
financial friction. The aggregate of this cost across agents is reimbursed through
         p
Tt+1 . Rt  +1 is therefore the same in equilibrium as it would be when  = 0, but
agents take Tt+1 as given, not under their control through portfolio choice.10
                                                                            
    Define the gross real interest rates as Rt = eit Pt /Pt+1 and Rt    = eit Pt /Pt+1
           
where Pt is the Foreign price level. The real exchange rate is defined as Qt =
St Pt /Pt . The first-order condition for optimal portfolio choice is then
                       p                           p
               Et e-rt+1 +qt+1 -qt +rt - - Et e-rt+1 +rt -  (zt - zt-1 ) = 0                (3)

where lower case letters denote logs (except for the portfolio shares).
                                                                  p
  The first-order approximation of the log portfolio return is rt  +1 = zt ert+1 + rt ,
where the excess return is

                                                     
                                ert+1 = qt+1 - qt + rt - rt                                 (4)

Substituting the first-order approximation of the log portfolio return into the first-
order condition, assuming log-normality, and using the approximation ex = 1 + x,
   9
     One can also draw a comparison to the price stickiness literature. Our specification (1) is
analogous to the Rotemberg (1982) cost of changing prices. The specification most frequently
adopted in the gradual portfolio adjustment literature is one where the portfolio is adjusted
every T periods, which is analogous to Taylor price setting. Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2017)
consider a model where agents change their portfolio with a given probability p each period,
which is analogous to Calvo price setting. Applying the Rotemberg (1982) cost of price changes
to portfolio changes significantly simplifies the solution of the model and allows us to better
understand the mechanisms at work.
  10
     See Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2017) and Davis and van Wincoop (2017) for the same
approach.


                                               7
we have

             Et ert+1 -  + 0.5var(ert+1 ) - zt var(ert+1 ) -  (zt - zt-1 ) = 0   (5)

Define the steady state fraction invested in Foreign bonds as
                                         0.5      
                                    z
                                    ¯=       -                                   (6)
                                               var(ert+1 )

We take z¯, which is related to  , as a parameter that is given. The frictionless
optimal portfolio in the absence of adjustment costs is

                                        f           Et ert+1
                                       zt =z
                                           ¯+
                                                      2

where  2 = var(ert+1 ). The optimal portfolio with adjustment costs can then be
written as
                                                2      f
                         zt =       2
                                      zt-1 +        2
                                                      zt                    (7)
                               +              + 
Expression (7) shows that the portfolio share zt is a weighted average of the previ-
ous period's portfolio share and the frictionless optimal portfolio share. The port-
folio share therefore gradually adjusts to the frictionless optimal portfolio share.
                           f
However, in equilibrium zt   is not a fixed target as the expected excess return is
endogenous and changes over time.
                                      f
    Substituting the expression for zt   into (7), we obtain some results regarding
the key parameters  and  that will help interpret the results in the next section.
We get
                                                      1
                   zt - z
                        ¯=         2
                                     (zt-1 - z¯) +         Et ert+1              (8)
                             +                      +  2
The parameters  and  play two roles. First, a larger  and lower  increase the
weight on the lagged portfolio. This increases the persistence of the response to a
shock. A larger  and lower  lead to a more gradual portfolio response. Second,
as can be seen from the last term, a larger  and  both lead to a weaker portfolio
response to changes in the expected excess return. We will refer to these two
effects as portfolio persistence and return sensitivity. A higher  leads to both less
portfolio persistence and weaker return sensitivity, while a higher  raises portfolio
persistence, but weakens return sensitivity.11
 11
      See effects are similar to G^
                                  arleanu and Pederson (2013).



                                                8
    There is an analogous solution for the Foreign country giving the optimal frac-
                                                        
tion invested in Foreign bonds by Foreign investors zt   . By symmetry, the steady
                                                                  ¯ = 1 - z
state fraction invested in Foreign bonds for Foreign investors is z        ¯. We will
                                                                    A             
focus on the average portfolio share invested in Foreign bonds zt     = 0.5(zt + zt ).
    The real supply of bonds is assumed fixed at 1 in terms of the purchasing power
of the respective countries. As a result of Walras' Law it is sufficient to focus on
the Foreign bond market equilibrium. Taking the perspective of the Home country,
the Foreign bond market equilibrium condition in real terms is
                                            
                                      zt + zt Qt = Qt                                     (9)

It is useful to introduce a home bias parameter h. Home bias is usually defined as
one minus the ratio of the share invested abroad and the share of the foreign asset
in the world asset supply. The home bias parameter in steady state in our model
is therefore h = 1 - 2¯z . Using this, and linearizing the market clearing condition
around the log of the real exchange rate q = 0, and portfolio shares z      ¯ , gives
                                                                      ¯ and z
                                       A
                                      zt = 0.5 + bqt                                     (10)

where b = (1 - h)/4 is a parameter between 0 and 0.25. Substituting this into the
average of equation (7) and its foreign counterpart and using expression (4) for
the excess return, we have
                                                     D
                             Et qt+1 - qt + bqt-1 + rt =0                                (11)
        D     
where rt  = rt - rt is the Foreign minus Home real interest rate differential and
 = 1 + b +  2 b, with  > 1.
   Equation (11) is a second-order difference equation in qt . The presence of qt-1
comes from the adjustment cost and vanishes when  = 0. Notice that we can
rewrite equation (11) as:

                            Et ert+1 =  2 bqt + b(qt - qt-1 )                            (12)

The expected excess return depends on two terms. The first is a standard risk
premium  2 bqt and will play a marginal role in the analysis. It is the second
term, b(qt - qt-1 ), generated by the adjustment cost, that is playing the key
role.12
  12
     Chernov and Creal (2018) and Dahlquist and Penasse (2017) argue that there is a missing
risk premium that should be related to the real exchange rate. Their proposed specification is
however different from ours in equation (12).


                                              9
    For the sake of brevity and analytic simplicity, we have adopted some shortcuts
in deriving equation (11). These are addressed in the Online Appendix. We have
not explicitly modeled the goods market and associated price setting (assuming
that inflation over the next period is known). We have introduced bonds with
a constant supply in real terms, without specifying who issues these bonds and
how the supply can be constant. We have also ignored drivers of the exchange
rate other than interest rate shocks. In the Online Appendix we develop a full
general equilibrium model, where the goods market and price setting are explicitly
modeled and there is a goverment that issues the bonds. The real supply of the
bonds is held constant through tax policy. We show that it leads to the same
second-order difference equation (11) for the real exchange rate.13 We also show
that in an extension that allows for exogenous portfolio shifts, there will be an
additional exogenous term on the right hand side of (11) associated with financial
shocks. Itskhoki and Muhkin (2017) argue that such financial shocks are the main
driver of exchange rates. As long as they are uncorrelated with interest rate shocks,
it does not affect the analysis that follows.


2.2     Solution Real Exchange Rate
Using equation (11) we can solve for the equilibrium qt as a function of the lagged
real exchange rate and expected future interest rate differentials. Using standard
solution techniques for second-order stochastic difference equations, we have
                                                   
                                                          1 D
                               qt = qt-1 + Et                r                            (13)
                                                   i=0
                                                         Di+1 t+i

where  and D are the roots of the characteristic equation of (11):

                                           -        2 - 4b
                                     =                                                    (14)
                                                    2
                                            +       2 - 4b
                                     D=                                                   (15)
                                                    2
It is easily verified that 0   < 1 and D > 1. The equilibrium real exchange rate
therefore depends on the lagged real exchange rate and a present discounted value
of expected future real interest rate differentials. Since D > 1, it is immediate that
  13
    Relative inflation is proportional to qt , with the proportionality factor dependent on the
speed of price adjustment.


                                              10
expected real interest rates in the more distant future have a smaller effect on the
equilibrium real exchange rate than expected real interest rates in the near future.
This addresses the forward guidance exchange rate puzzle. We will explore this
more, and develop the intuition behind it, in the next section.
   A couple of comments about the parameters  and D are in order as they are
key to the solution. Appendix B derives the following Lemma:

Lemma 1. The following properties describe the relationship between , D and
the portfolio adjustment cost parameter  :

   · As  rises from 0 to ,  rises monotonically from 0 to 1.

   · As  rises from 0 to , D rises monotonically from 1 +  2 b to .

    Higher portfolio adjustment costs imply that the real exchange rate depends to
a greater extent on the value of the real exchange rate during the last period and
future expected real interest rates are discounted more heavily in the equilibrium
real exchange rate.
    We will focus on the case where the real interest differential follows a simple
AR(1) process:
                                   D       D
                                  rt  = rt - 1 + t                             (16)
In that case (13) gives us
                                               1
                                qt = qt-1 +      rD                            (17)
                                              D- t
We can also write this as a function of current and past real interest rate shocks:
                                              
                                      1
                                qt =                i t-i                      (18)
                                     D-       i=0

where                             i+1     i+1
                                  - 
                                 
                                                     if  = 
                             i =    -                                          (19)
                                 (i + 1)i
                                 
                                                     if  = 




                                        11
2.3     Excess Return Predictability Coefficients
Consider the following regression:
                                              D
                                ert+k =  + k rt + er
                                                  t+k                                  (20)

Several of the puzzles are related to the excess return predictability coefficients
k . The coefficient k tells us the effect of the current real interest differential
on the expected excess return k periods from now. The forward discount puzzle
focuses on k = 1, with one period usually being a month or a quarter. For the
predictability reversal puzzle and the Engel puzzle we are also interested in k for
k > 1, which relates to the effect of the current interest differential on the excess
return further into the future.
   In the model, the value of k is equal to
                                                       D
                                         cov (ert+k , rt )
                                   k =            D
                                                                                       (21)
                                            var(rt )
Using the solution for the real exchange rate under the assumed AR(1) process for
the real interest differential, Appendix C shows that this can be written as14
                    
                           k-1
                    1 
                               + 2 k-1                        if  = 
              k =        k - 1
                                      1                                        (22)
                                D-        - (1 - )(k - 1)     if  = 
                       D-
                    
                                    1+
where
                                    1     -1
                              1 =      D-                                              (23)
                                  D-      -
                                  -1          1
                              2 =         +                                            (24)
                                  D -   -  1 - 
Lemma 2 in Appendix F characterizes the signs of 1 and 2 . Both are positive
for low values of  , but turn negative as  increases.


2.4     Numerical Illustrations
We provide numerical illustrations for each of the puzzles. We calibrate the pa-
rameters as follows. Parameters other than  and  are calibrated to interest rates
  14
    k is a continuous function of  (and therefore of  ), but 1 and 2 are not defined at  = ,
which is why the expression for k at  =  is reported separately.


                                            12
and exchange rates of the remaining G-7 countries relative to the United States
(as in Engel, 2016). The real interest rate is computed as the monthly nominal
interest rate minus the expected monthly inflation rate (estimated from annual
inflation). We find  = 0.9415.15 The standard deviation  of the monthly excess
return is computed as the average standard deviation of the monthly change in the
real exchange rate, which is 0.0271. We set the home bias parameter h equal to
0.66, which is the average for the countries during Q2, 2017.16 Details regarding
the data for this calibration can be found in Appendix A.
    Regarding  and  , we set them at respectively 15 and 50 in the benchmark and
will vary them over a large range to consider sensitivity.17 These benchmark values
are consistent with evidence regarding both the second-order difference equation
(11) for the exchange rate and the portfolio expression (8). Regarding (11), Adolf-
son et al. (2008) estimate a second-order exchange rate equation similar to (11).
Our parameters imply coefficients on qt and qt-1 of respectively -2.28 and 1.28.
The point estimates in Adolfson et al. (2008) imply that these are respectively
-2.57 and 1.57, with a 90 percent confidence interval of respectively [-3.50,-2.03]
and [1.03,2.51]. The values under the benchmark parameterization are close to
the point estimates in Adolfson et al. (2008) and consistent with the 90 percent
confidence interval based on their reported standard error.
    The portfolio expression (8) relates the portfolio share at time t to the portfolio
share at t - 1 and the expected excess return, with coefficients of respectively
0.998 and 0.066 under the benchmark paramaterization. In the Online Appendix
we provide results when estimating (8). Unfortunately it is impossible to do so
for short term bonds as monthly data on the currency composition of short term
external US bond holdings is limited and so are data on carry trade activity (e.g.
Curcuru et al. (2010)).18 In Online Appendix C we estimate (8) for US external
  15
      The average standard deviation of the relative real interest rate innovation is 0.000342. This
is only used in the impulse response of the real exchange rate to a one standard deviation interest
rate shock in Figure 1. It does not affect any of the other results.
   16
      We combine BIS data on debt securities outstanding with external assets and liabilities for
debt securities from the IMF International Investment Position Statistics.
   17
      A rate of risk aversion of 50 may seem very large, but analogous to the equity premium,
which requires a very high rate of risk aversion to explain, currency premia are very small for
low rates of risk aversion. One could alternatively introduce other features to introduce large
premia, such as disaster risk, but that would distract from the topic of the paper and the analytic
transparency.
   18
      The Treasury publishes the market value of U.S. holdings of foreign debt securities by cur-


                                                13
equity portfolios in 44 countries, using monthly data from 1994 to 2017. To avoid
problems with a trend in external portfolio shares, we use US external equity
holdings in a foreign country as a share of US external equity holdings as the
portfolio share. The excess return is then the equity return in the country minus
the weighted average of the equity return in other foreign countries. We find a
point estimate on the lagged portfolio share that varies from 0.9871 to 0.9999,
dependent on specification (month/country fixed effects, month/country standard
error clustering) and a standard error of at most 0.0042. The point estimate on the
expected excess return varies from 0.058 to 0.065, with a standard error of about
0.01. These results are closely in line with the coefficients under our benchmark
parameterization. If instead we set  = 0 (no gradual portfolio adjustment),
the theory would imply a coefficient of zero on the lagged portfolio share and a
coefficient of 27.2 on the expected excess return.19


3     Explaining Five Puzzles
We now use the simple model introduced above to address the first five puzzles.
We do so by discussing a series of propositions and provide numerical illustra-
tions. When describing the intuition behind the results, we will always consider
                                                            D
an increase in the relative Foreign interest rate (rise in rt ), which leads to an ap-
preciation of the Foreign currency (rise in qt ). We will always refer to the Foreign
currency, so a depreciation refers to a Foreign depreciation or drop in qt .


3.1     Delayed Overshooting Puzzle
First define                
                             ln(1 - ) - ln(1 - )
                                                              if  = 
                            
                                 ln() - ln()
                            
                         ¯=
                         t                                                                   (25)
                               
                                                              if  = 
                            
                             1-
                            

rency of denomination in the publication "US Portfolio Holdings of Foreign Securities," but these
data are annual and mix both short and long-term debt.
  19
     It should also be pointed out that the welfare cost associated with gradual portfolio adjust-
ment under the benchmark parameterization is very small. When raising the interest differential
by two standard deviations, the welfare loss from the portfolio cost with  = 15 is 0.005 percent
of consumption during the month of the shock (and less during subsequent months).



                                               14
Using equation (18), Appendix D proves the following proposition:

Proposition 1. Consider the impulse response of the real exchange rate to a pos-
                                                   D
itive shock to the relative Foreign interest rate rt .

   · if  < 1 -  : the real exchange rate appreciates at the time of the shock and
     subsequently gradually depreciates back to the steady state.

   · if  > 1 -  : there is delayed overshooting. The real exchange rate appreciates
                                                                    ¯ > 1. Then it
     at the time of the shock and keeps appreciating until time t > t
     gradually depreciates back to the steady state.

    Since Lemma 1 tells us that  rises from 0 to 1 as we raise the gradual portfolio
adjustment parameter  , Proposition 1 implies that for sufficiently large  , and
assuming  > 0, there is delayed overshooting of the type reported by Eichenbaum
and Evans (1995) and others. They show that after a monetary policy tightening,
the currency continues to appreciate for another 25-39 months before it starts to
depreciate. With less gradual adjustment, such that  < 1 - , there is no delayed
overshooting.
    To understand the intuition, consider an increase in the Foreign interest rate.
There will be an immediate appreciation of the Foreign currency as investors shift
to Foreign bonds. Subsequent to the shock, there are two opposing forces at work.
On the one hand, the Foreign interest rate gradually declines again, which leads to
a shift away from Foreign bonds and a gradual depreciation. On the other hand, to
the extent that portfolios are slow to adjust, there will be a continued flow towards
Foreign bonds, which leads to a continued appreciation. When  is sufficiently
large, the second force dominates and there will be delayed overshooting.
    Expression (25) indicates how long the real appreciation will last in the case
of delayed overshooting. Appendix D shows that the derivative of t     ¯ with respect
to  is positive. A larger gradual portfolio adjustment parameter  , which raises
 (Lemma 1), will then lead to a longer duration of the delayed overshooting. In
the extreme case where  approaches 1, t    ¯ approaches infinity.
    Figure 1 provides a numerical illustration. The chart on the left shows the
impulse response of the real exchange rate under the benchmark parameterization.
The chart on the right shows the time to maximum overshooting for  varying from
0 to 20 and  taking on the values 10, 50 and 100.


                                         15
       1 Impulse
FigureFigure        Response
             1: Impulse        qt qand
                        Response        Delayed Overshooting
                                   t and Delayed Overshooting



     A Impulse Response qt in Percent                       B Overshooting: Time to Maximum
  1.5  (=15,=50)                                              Impact
                                                   70


  1.2                                              60                                  =10

                                                   50
  0.9                                                                                 =50
                                                   40

                                                   30
  0.6
                                                                                      =100
                                                   20
  0.3
                                                   10


   0                                                0
        0   24   48   72   96   120   144   168         0         5      10      15          20
                      months                                                  


    Chart A of Figure 1 shows that the real exchange rate overshoots, reaching
a maximum after 35 months. This is consistent with the results in Eichenbaum
and Evans (1995). Chart B shows that except for very small values of  , the
model implies delayed overshooting. Consistent with Proposition 1, the time to
maximum impact rises significantly with  . It is also larger the lower the rate of
risk-aversion. Both of these effects are associated with the portfolio persistence.
A higher  and lower  raise the persistence of the portfolio response. The more
gradual portfolio response leads to a more gradual appreciation, which increases
the time t¯ to maximum overshooting.


3.2         Forward Discount Puzzle
While UIP implies that the Fama coefficient 1 is zero, empirical evidence typically
finds a positive number. Proposition 2 characterizes the sign of 1 in the model:

Proposition 2. The Fama predictability coefficient 1 is positive, and larger when
there is gradual portfolio adjustment ( > 0).

   The proof is given in Appendix E. Since 1 > 0, a positive excess return is
expected on the high interest rate currency, consistent with the forward discount

                                                  16
puzzle. Moreover, Proposition 2 says that 1 is larger when we introduce a cost of
adjusting portfolios ( > 0). Even without this cost, there is some excess return
predictability in the model through a risk premium channel.20
    Proposition 1 on delayed overshooting is a useful starting point to understand
the role of gradual portfolio adjustment in accounting for the forward discount
puzzle. When  > 1 - , so that there is delayed overshooting, the Foreign currency
is expected to appreciate for at least one more period after the initial appreciation.
The Foreign currency will then have a positive expected excess return both due
to the higher interest rate and the expected appreciation. Therefore the portfolio
adjustment parameter  , which causes a gradual portfolio shift to the Foreign
currency that leads to continued appreciation, increases the Fama predictability
coefficient 1 .21
    Under the benchmark parameterization the excess return predictability coeffi-
cient 1 is equal to 3.26. Figure 2 shows how 1 varies with  and  . It rises until
 is about 12 and then gradually declines. When  is low, portfolio persistence
is weak, leading to less delayed overshooting and less excess return predictability.
On the other hand, when  is very high, return sensitivity is weak. Agents then
respond very little to changes in expected returns, so that the real exchange rate
does not change much. This also weakens excess return predictability because
the strength of the appreciation after the initial shock is weak. Therefore the
predictability coefficient 1 is largest for an intermediate value of  .
    Figure 2 also shows that the excess return predictability coefficient 1 is larger
when risk aversion  is smaller. A smaller  increases both portfolio persistence
and return sensitivity, both of which lead to a larger appreciation subsequent to
the initial shock that enhances predictability.
  20
      Specifically, a higher Foreign real interest rate leads to a real appreciation of the Foreign
currency, which increases the relative value of the Foreign bond supply. To invest a larger
portfolio share in Foreign bonds, investors demand a positive expected excess return on the
Foreign bond.
   21
      Even when  < 1 - , so that there is no delayed overshooting, gradual portfolio adjustment
leads to a higher Fama coefficient 1 because the rate of depreciation subsequent to the shock
is smaller due to gradual portfolio adjustment. The weaker subsequent depreciation implies a
higher expected excess return on the Foreign currency and therefore a larger Fama coefficient 1 .




                                                17
Figure 2 Forward Discount Puzzle: Predictability Coefficient 1
 Figure 2: Forward Discount Puzzle: Predictability Coefficient 1


             8                            =10


             6

                                               =50

             4


                                               =100
             2



             0
                 0           5            10             15           20
                                           
3.3    Predictability Reversal Puzzle
Define  ¯ =  2 /(1 - ). Excess return predictability at longer horizons, measured
by k , is described in the following proposition:

Proposition 3. The following holds for k :

   · if   ¯: k is positive for all k and drops monotonically to zero as k  

   · if  >  ¯: there is a k
                          ¯ > 1 such that k is positive for k < k
                                                                ¯ and negative for
     kk  ¯. It converges to zero as k  .

    The proof is given in Appendix F. Proposition 3 implies that when the gradual
adjustment parameter is low, the Foreign currency continues to have positive ex-
pected excess returns in all future periods, although the predictability k vanishes
to zero over time. But when the gradual adjustment parameter is sufficiently high
( >    ¯), there will be a predictability reversal. While initially, after the increase
in the Foreign interest rate, the Foreign currency is expected to have a positive ex-
pected excess return, after a certain period of time it is expected to have a negative
expected excess return. Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010) first documented this
reversal in the sign of predictability for nominal interest rates and exchange rates.
They find that a high interest rate currency has a positive expected excess return
for about 5-10 quarters, after which it has a negative expected excess return. Engel
(2016) reports similar findings for real interest rates and exchange rates.

                                          18
    The excess return on the Foreign currency is driven both by the higher Foreign
interest rate and the change in the value of the Foreign currency. Under delayed
overshooting the Foreign currency will at first appreciate and therefore have a
positive excess return. But after time t ¯ it will start to depreciate, which contributes
                                ¯ is large, by the time the Foreign currency starts to
to a negative excess return. If t
depreciate, the interest differential will be small. The excess return is then mainly
driven by the Foreign currency depreciation and is therefore negative.22
    Engel (2016) claims that models with gradual portfolio adjustment cannot ac-
count for the predictability reversal. To understand this, we first need to introduce
the concept of the UIP exchange rate. Taking the expectation of (4), integrating
forward and assuming long-run PPP (lims Et qt+s = 0), we get an expression
analogous to that in Engel (2016)23 :
                                                    
                                           IP
                                   qt =   qt    -         Et ert+i                         (26)
                                                    i=1

where                                           
                                       IP                 D
                                      qt  =           Et rt+i                              (27)
                                                i=0

is the UIP exchange rate. It is the real exchange rate when expected future excess
returns are zero. When the sum of future expected excess returns is positive,
investors demand positive risk premia on the Foreign currency and we see that
       IP
qt < qt   . In other words, the Foreign currency is weak.
    Engel conjectures that
                                   IP            IP
                             qt - qt  =  qt-1 - qt-1 + µt                                  (28)

with  between 0 and 1, µ negative and t the interest rate shock. There are
                                                                           IP
two aspects to this conjectured AR(1) process. The first is that qt < qt      at the
time of the shock as µ < 0. This conjecture in indeed correct. Abstracting from
shocks prior to time t, the immediate response to a positive shock t at time t is
                                   IP
qt = t /(D - ) < t /(1 - ) = qt       . The real exchange rate is less than the UIP
exchange rate because the gradual portfolio adjustment implies an initial weak
portfolio response to the interest rate shock.
  22
     Delayed overshooting is not a necessary condition for predictability reversal. Dependent on
parameters, predictability reversal can also happen when  +  < 1.
  23
     See also Dahlquist and Penasse (2017).


                                                19
                                                                                     IP
    The problem with the conjecture (28) is the assumed AR(1) process for qt - qt       .
It may seem logical at first. It implies that after the real exchange rate is initially
weaker than the UIP exchange rate, it gradually catches up to the UIP exchange
rate due to the gradual portfolio adjustment. If it were true, it would always remain
                     IP
the case that qt < qt   , although the gap would decline over time. (26) then implies
that the sum of expected excess future returns on the Foreign currency will remain
positive indefinitely (although declining). This is inconsistent with predictability
reversal, where expected excess returns on the Foreign currency will turn negative
beyond a certain horizon.
                                                                                      IP
    One way to see that (28) is not correct is to inspect the response of qt and qt
to a positive relative interest rate shock under the benchmark parameterization.
                                                     IP
This is shown in Figure 3A. While initially qt < qt      as a result of the weak initial
                                                    IP
portfolio adjustment, not long after that qt > qt      . After two years the gap has
grown very significantly with the real exchange rate much stronger than the UIP
real exchange rate. The UIP exchange rate gradually declines over time due to
the declining interest rate differential, while the actual real exchange rate keeps
                                                                  IP
appreciating as a result of delayed overshooting. Once qt > qt        in Figure 3A, the
sum of expected excess returns on the Foreign currency is negative. As can be seen,
this will remain the case from thereon, which is consistent with the predictability
reversal.24
                                               IP
    We can also see algebraically that qt - qt    does not follow an AR(1) process.
From (11) the real exchange rate is driven by an AR(2) process. The same is the
               IP
case for qt - qt  , which is described by the process

            IP           IP             IP                       1- D     b D
 Et qt+1 - qt+1 -  qt - qt  + b qt-1 - qt-1 +                       rt +     r = 0 (29)
                                                                 1-      1 -  t-1
    Figure 3B reports k for k from 1 to 180 for the benchmark case. The reversal
of the predictability coefficient from positive to negative occurs after 30 months.
This is not too far from the reversal after 5-10 quarters reported in Bacchetta and
  24                                                                         D
     It would be of interest to check empirically if a positive shock to rt     initially leads to qt <
  IP                          IP
qt and eventually qt > qt . The results will generally depend on the VAR specification and
identification and will be subject to imprecise parameter estimates. A casual inspection of Figure
1 in Eichenbaum and Evans (1995) suggests that it consistent with their findings. For most
currencies the initial real appreciation is very small. After about a year the interest differential
                                                 IP
is insignificantly different from zero, so that qt  is zero, but the real exchange rate has continued
                                IP
to appreciate, so that qt > qt .


                                                  20
          van Wincoop (2010). It is also consistent with results reported in Engel (2016).25
             Figure 3C considers the impact of  and  on the time k where k reverses sign
          from positive to negative. This rises with a higher  and lower  . Both enhance
                                                                 ¯ of maximum overshooting.
          the portfolio persistence, which leads to a later date t
          A longer period of appreciation after the shock delays the predictability reversal.

                         Figure 3: Sign Reversal of Predictability Coefficient k

                              
      A Impulse Response  and                                  B Coefficients k (=15, =50)                              C Time to Sign Reversal of k
        (percent, =15,=50)
1.5                                                                                                            70

                                                        3.5                                                60                                =10
1.2
                                                                                                               50
                              
0.9                                                     2.5
                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                               =50

                                                                                                           30
0.6
                                                         1.5
                                                                                                           20                                =100
0.3       
                                                                                                               10
                                                        0.5

                                                                                                           k   0
 0
                                                               0    24   48   72    96   120   144   168            0         5       10      15       20
      0   24        48   72      96   120   144   168
                                                        -0.5                                                                           
                         months




          3.4            Engel Puzzle
          The Engel puzzle says that high interest rate currencies tend to be strong relative
          to the UIP exchange rate. More formally:
                                                                              IP    D
                                                                   cov (qt - qt  , rt )>0                                                  (30)

          Engel (2016) provides evidence that this condition holds in the data for 6 curren-
          cies. We will refer to it as the Engel condition. Using (26), we can also write it
               25
              Engel (2016) reports results of regressions of both the ex-post and ex-ante excess return on
          the interest differential. The ex-ante excess return relies on a VAR to compute expected returns
          and delivers a somewhat shorter time to reversal of about 12 months on average.


                                                                               21
as                                     
                                             k < 0                                  (31)
                                       k=1

which is an equivalence used by Engel (2016) as well. Predictability reversal is
a necessary condition for this to hold, so that  >      ¯ is a necessary, but not a
sufficient condition. Negative expected excess returns on the Foreign currency for
kk    ¯ must more than offset the positive expected excess returns when k < k     ¯.
              E   E                                 E   E                   IP    D
     Define (1  , 2 ) as positive values of  , with 1 < 2 , where cov (qt -qt  , rt  )=
0. Appendix G describes these values and proves the following proposition:

Proposition 4. Necessary and sufficient conditions for the Engel condition to hold
are
        E      E
     1. 1 <  < 2 .
                 1-              2
     2.  2 b <    
                      1-      1- .

    Proposition 4 imposes several restrictions on parameters for the Engel condition
to be satisfied. While the conditions may seem restrictive, we will see that they
will hold under a broad range of realistic parameters.
    Before discussing the intuition for these parameter constraints, it is useful to
first explain why the Engel condition generally holds at all as Engel (2016) argues
that it cannot hold under gradual portfolio adjustment. This is related to the
                                                                                     IP
discussion in the previous subsection. Initially, at the time of the shock, qt < qt     .
So the high interest rate currency is weak relative to the UIP exchange rate. At
                                              IP    D
first this seems inconsistent with cov (qt - qt  , rt ) > 0, which says that the high
interest rate currency tends to be strong relative to the UIP exchange rate. But
the Engel condition refers to an unconditional moment, not to the strength of the
currency immediately after a positive interest rate shock. We can see from Figure
                                          IP               D
3A that not long after the shock, qt - qt    > 0, while rt    remains positive as well.
This contributes to a positive unconditional correlation that can offset the initial
                        IP       D
opposite signs of qt - qt  and rt  right after the shock. Engel (2016) conjectured
            IP                                                            IP
that qt - qt follows the AR(1) process in (28), in which case qt - qt        would have
remained negative in all periods after the shock, which would be inconsistent with
                                                   D            IP
the positive unconditional covariance between rt      and qt - qt  . But this conjecture
was not correct and the Engel condition is satisfied for a broad range of parameters
in our model.

                                             22
    Proposition 4 tells us that the Engel condition is satisfied for intermediate
values of  , for risk aversion  that is not too large and for interest rate persistence
 that is not too close to 0 or 1. The role of  and  can again be related to portfolio
persistence and return sensitivity. A very low value of  implies weak portfolio
persistence. The lack of appreciation after the initial shock (or weak appreciation)
                      IP
implies that qt - qt     will remain negative or not become very positive. On the
other hand, a very high  implies that return sensitivity is weak. The portfolio
                                                                     IP
will respond very little to the higher interest rate, so that qt - qt    again remains
negative. For intermediate values of  we see a significant appreciation after the
                                                 IP
shock, leading to a sustained positive qt - qt      for high interest rate currencies.
When  is very large, portfolio persistence and return sensitivity are both weak,
                IP
so that qt - qt     either remains negative or not be very positive and the Engel
condition does not hold.
    Finally consider the persistence  of the real interest rate. If the interest differ-
ential is very persistent, the Foreign currency continues to experience high interest
rates for a very long time, which by itself causes positive excess returns for a long
time. This is inconsistent with the Engel condition. On the other hand, when  is
very small, the real exchange rate does not respond very much. We do not see a
                                                              IP
sustained appreciation that leads to a large positive qt - qt    after the shock.
    Figure 4 shows that the Engel result holds quite generally in the model as long
as  is not too close to zero. Consistent with Proposition 4, the Engel result is
stronger the lower the rate of risk-aversion  and peaks for an intermediate value
of  . For the benchmark parameterization the Engel coefficient          k=1 k is equal
to -25. This is similar to the estimate in Engel (2016), who finds a -31 coefficient
for the G6 average exchange rate against the dollar and an average of -21 for the
individual G6 currencies against the dollar.26


3.5     Forward Guidance Exchange Rate Puzzle
The following proposition addresses the forward guidance puzzle posed by Gal´
                                                                            i
(2019):

  26                                                                                     D
    Engel (2016) also reports a regression of the level of the real exchange rate qt on rt . The
model implies a coefficient of 42 for the benchmark parameterization, which represents the fact
that a high interest rate currency tends to be strong. Engel (2016) reports a coefficient of 43.7
when using the G6 average exchange rate against the dollar.


                                               23
                                                             
                        Figure 4: Engel Puzzle               k=1   k

                                                                            
            -10 0          5           10               15             20


           -30                           =100

            -50


            -70                             =50


           -90


           -110
                                                  =10


           -130



Proposition 5. The current real exchange rate qt discounts expected interest dif-
ferentials in the distant future more than in the near future. The higher the gradual
portfolio adjustment parameter  , the more future expected interest differentials are
discounted.

    Proposition 5 follows directly from equation (13) and Lemma 1. Future ex-
pected interest differentials are discounted at the rate D, which is larger than 1
and rises with  .
    Under UIP the real exchange rate is given by (27), where there is no discounting.
Even when  = 0, the discount rate is larger than 1 when we allow for exchange
rate risk, which leads to a deviation from UIP. Specifically, we have D = 1 +  2 b.
But as we shall see, the discount rate D is very close to 1 when  = 0.
    To see the role of  , assume that we are currently at time t and consider
an expected one-period increase in the interest rate differential at t + k . The
only reason the real exchange rate appreciates prior to t + k is an expectation of
subsequent appreciation. The response of qt+k-1 to a given higher qt+k is reduced
as a result of a positive  as portfolios are less sensitive to expected returns. For
the same reason the response of qt+k-2 to a given expected higher qt+k-1 is reduced
as a result of the positive  . When going back all the way to time t, the response
of qt can be very small when k is large. There are multiple rounds of discounting
as each period the real exchange rate response to an expected higher real exchange


                                         24
rate next period is reduced by the positive portfolio adjustment parameter  .27
    The monthly discount rate D under our benchmark parameterization is 1.29.
Future expected interest rates are therefore heavily discounted. This is consistent
with results reported by Gal´i (2019), which imply that expected interest rates more
than two years into the future have an effect on the current real exchange rate that
is very small compared to the impact of expected interest rates over the next two
years.28 For comparison, when  = 0 (holding all other parameters the same), the
discount rate is D = 1.0031. In that case the expected interest rate two years into
the future has an effect on the current exchange rate that is only 7 percent less
than the effect of the current interest rate.


4      Lack of Predictability with Long Term Bonds
LSV show that excess return predictability vanishes when considering monthly
returns of long-term bonds. In order to address this last puzzle we extend the
model by introducing long-term bonds. In that case we need to solve not only
for the equilibrium real exchange rate, but also long-term bond prices in both
countries. In this extension an analytical solution is no longer feasible. We describe
the extended model, leaving all algebraic details to a separate Online Appendix.


4.1     Model description
There are now four assets: one-period bonds and long-term bonds in both coun-
tries. Agents in the Home country maximize
                                                 4
                                C 1-  1
                              Et t+1 -                (zit - zi,t-1 )2                        (32)
                                1- 4            i=1

  27
     While this broadly captures the intuition, the actual response of the real exchange rate is
somewhat complicated by the fact that the real exchange rate not only responds to the expected
real exchange rate next period, but also to the lagged real exchange rate.
  28                                 23      D                  D
     Gal´
        i (2019) regresses qt on i=0 Et rt    +i and   i=24 Et rt+i . We cannot do so in our model
                                D
as both are proportional to rt    and therefore collinear. They would no longer be collinear if we
adopted an AR(2) process. More generally, the precise coefficients that we would obtain for a
Gali type regression depend on what we assume about the information about future expected
interest differentials, which is auxiliary to the gradual portfolio adjustment aspect of the model.




                                                25
z1t is the fraction of wealth invested in Foreign short term bonds. z2t is the fraction
invested in Foreign long term bonds and z3t is the fraction invested in Home long
term bonds. The remaining fraction z4t = 1 - z1t - z2t - z3t is invested in Home
short term bonds. The adjustment cost term in (32) is the same as in (1) when
we set the long term bond portfolio shares equal to 0. In that case z1t = zt and
z4t = 1 - zt .
            L
    Let Rt   +1 be the real return on Home long-term bonds from the perspective
                          L,
of Home agents and Rt      +1 the real return on Foreign long-term bonds from the
perspective of Foreign agents. The gross real interest rates on one-period bonds
                                            
will continue to be denoted as Rt and Rt     . Consumption of Home agents is equal
to the portfolio return:
                           Qt+1  -                      Qt+1 L, -L
         Ct+1 = Rt + z1t        R e - Rt + z2t              R e    - Rt       +
                            Qt t                         Qt t+1
                L
         z3t   Rt+1 - Rt + Tt+1                                                   (33)

As before, we introduce costs of investing abroad: it is  for short-term bonds and
L for long-term bonds. The aggregate of these costs is reimbursed through Tt+1 .
   Long-term bonds in both countries earn real coupons of , (1 -  ), (1 -  )2 ,
and so on. A smaller  implies a longer maturity of debt. The real returns on
Home and Foreign long-term bonds, from the perspective of respectively Home
and Foreign agents, are then

                                  L       (1 -  )PtL
                                                   +1 + 
                                 Rt+1 =           L
                                                                                  (34)
                                                Pt
                                                     
                                  L,      (1 -  )PtL,
                                                   +1 + 
                                 Rt+1 =                                           (35)
                                               PtL,

Here PtL and PtL, are the prices of newly issued bonds at time t, measured in real
terms from the perspective of Home and Foreign agents.
    As before, denote logs with lower case letters. Log excess returns are defined as
log real asset returns from the perspective of Home agents minus the real interest
rate rt of the Home country. The vector of excess returns on the first three assets,
not including the cost of investing abroad, is
                                                                   
                                                           
                             er1,t+1          qt+1 - qt + rt - rt
                                                          L,
                  ert+1 =  er2,t+1  =  qt+1 - qt + rt      +1 - rt               (36)
                                                                   
                                                    L
                             er3,t+1               rt+1 - rt

                                          26
   Define  as the variance of ert+1 . Using log normality of consumption and
returns, the Online Appendix shows that the first-order conditions of Home agents
can be written as
                            
                         
                                                         
             Et ert+1 -  L  + 0.5diag () -  zt =            zt - z
                                                           (^    ^t-1 )      (37)
                            
                                                        2R
                         0

                                  ^t subtracts z4t from each element of zt . R is the
where zt = (z1t , z2t , z3t ) and z
steady state gross real interest rate. The analogous first-order conditions for For-
eign agents are
                          
                   
                                                                   
  Et ert+1 +               - (1 -  )1 + 0.5diag () -  zt =           z -z
                                                                    (^    ^ t-1 ) (38)
                          
                                                                 2R t
                 - L

where z                  
                                                                                      ^
       t = (z1t , z2t , z3t ) is the vector of portfolio shares of Foreign agents and z t
                                           
subtracts z4 t from  each    element  of z t .  1 is the first column of .
   The asset market equilibrium conditions can be written
                                                         S
                                     z1t + Qt z1t = Qt b                               (39)
                                               
                                     z2t + Qt z2t =   Qt PtL, bt                       (40)
                                                       L
                                     z3t + Qt z3t = P t bt                             (41)
                                                      S
                                     z4t + Qt z4t = b                                  (42)

Here bS is the real supply of short-term bonds in terms of the purchasing power
of each country and bt is the quantity of long-term bonds. Define bL = P¯ L¯
                                                                           b as the
steady state real value (in local purchasing power) of long-term bonds. We assume
that bS + bL = 1 and in deviation from steady state

                                         bt = -pL,A
                                                t                                      (43)
                        L,
where pL,A
        t   = 0.5(pL
                   t + pt ) is the average log long-term bond price. This assures
that when we add up all (log-linearized) market clearing conditions we get an
identity, which must be the case due to Walras' Law (the last market clearing
condition is redundant). Equation (43) is not important in what follows as excess
returns depend on relative log bond prices, not average log bond prices.29
  29
       The reason we assume (43) is a bit technical. One can think of the bonds as issued by


                                              27
    Assuming (43), linearizing the first three market clearing conditions, we have
                                                                       
                 bS              bS                                 0
      zA                                       z qt + 0.25bL pL,D
                L             L 
       t = 0.5  b  + 0.5  b  qt - 0.5¯                             -1          (44)
                                                                       
                                                              t
                   L
                 b                0                                 1
                                                                         L,D         L,
where zA                                ¯ is the steady state of z
        t is the average of zt and zt , z                         t and pt   = pL
                                                                                t - pt
is the relative log long term bond price.
                                                                                       
    By symmetry z   ¯1 +z
                        ¯4 = bS and z ¯2  +z¯3 = bL . We can choose  and L to set z   ¯4
      
and z¯3 at any value. We will assume that these values are such that they generate
the same home bias h for short and long-term bonds. This happens when
                                          
                                        z
                                        ¯4 = 0.5(1 - h)bS                                  (45)
                                          
                                        z
                                        ¯3 = 0.5(1 - h)bL                                  (46)
                                              
We then also have z ¯2 = 0.5(1 + h)bL and z  ¯1 = 0.5(1 + h)bS .
    After substituting the market clearing conditions (44) into the average of the
Home and Foreign first-order conditions (37)-(38), we obtain a dynamic system of
three equations in qt , pL,D
                         t   and pL,A
                                   t    in deviation from steady states. We assume
                                                         
that both Home and Foreign interest rates rt and rt        follow an AR(1) processes
with AR coefficients . This is therefore also the case for the average interest rate
 A                                                D     
rt = 0.5(rt + rt ) and the interest differential rt = rt  - rt . The Online Appendix
shows that one of the three equations of the dynamic system can be used to solve
for the average long term bond price:
                                                    1
                                     pL,A
                                      t   =-          rA                                   (47)
                                                 1 -  t
with  = (1 -  )/R. A higher average world real interest rate reduces the average
long term bond price.
   The two remaining equations of the dynamic system can be written as

                      qt+1                qt                qt-1          D
             A1 Et             + A2                  + A3           + A4 rt =0             (48)
                      pL,D
                       t+1
                                          L,D
                                         pt                 pL,D
                                                             t-1

Home and Foreign governments. Since there is no investment in the model, it must be the case
that world saving (private plus government) is zero in equilibrium. Since there is no endogenous
mechanism in the model to equate world saving to zero, we assume that world government saving
adjusts to make world saving equal to zero. This happens when equation (43) is satisfied, which
implies that the average world real bond supply remains constant.


                                                28
The matrices A1 through A4 are described in the Online Appendix. They have
coefficients that depend on model parameters as well as the variance  of excess
returns. This dynamic system can be used to solve for (qt , pL,D
                                                             t   ):
                                                 
                                     qt                k     D
                                            =         M1 M2 rt-k                            (49)
                                   pL,D
                                    t           k=0

                                             0
where M1 and M2 are two-by-two matrices and M1 is the identity matrix.


4.2     Numerical Illustration
For numerical analysis, we need to make assumptions about the parameters h,  ,  ,
,  , R and the variance  of excess returns. As in the benchmark parameterization
of Section 3, we set h = 0.66,  = 0.9415,  = 50 and  = 15. We set R = 1.0033
for monthly data, corresponding to a 4 percent anual interest rate. LSV consider
the returns on 10-year coupon bonds. A 10-year bond with face value of 1 and
coupons of R - 1 = 0.0033 has a Macauley duration of 99.3 months or 8.3 years.
We set  = 0.0071, which yields a Macauley duration of 99.3 months. We use data
on real exchange rates and long term bond returns to compute  (see Appendix
A for data details).30 Using the symmetry of the model we can write
                                                           
                                 2         2
                                1         1  - 13      13
                           2            2    2
                       =  1     - 13 1    + 3  - 213 23                     (50)
                                                           
                                                         2
                               13            23         3
         2
where i    = var(eri,t+1 ) and ij = cov (eri,t+1 , erj,t+1 ). We therefore compute four
                                                          2
moments: the variance of the real exchange rate 1           , the covariance between the
real exchange rate and Home real long-term bond return 13 , the variance of real
                            2
long-term bond returns 3      and the covariance between the Home and Foreign real
long-term bond returns 23 . We use the same standard deviation 0.0271 of the real
exchange rate as in the benchmark parameterization of Section 3. For the other
three moments we find 3 = 0.0206, 13 = 0.0000538 and 23 = 0.000267.
    Using this parameterization, we can regress excess returns on the interest dif-
           
ferential rt - rt as in LSV. Table 1 compares the results of three regressions from
  30
    As mentioned at the start of Section 2, while we focus on interest rate shocks, asset returns
are also driven by other shocks that we do not explicitly model. These other shocks only affect
the response to interest rate shocks to the extent that they affect .


                                                29
LSV based on the data to the theoretical regression coefficients from our model.
The first column shows the predictability coefficient for the one-month excess FX
                              
return er1,t+1 = qt+1 - qt + rt - rt . The coefficient of 1.97 in the model is very close
to that in LSV based on the data. The second column shows the regression of the
one-month excess return on the Foreign long-term bond minus the Home long-term
                                          L,      L
bond er2,t+1 - er3,t+1 = qt+1 - qt + rt   +1 - rt . The coefficient of 0.34 is slightly
lower than LSV. But their coefficient of 0.65 is statistically insignificant. The last
column of Table 1 considers the regression coefficient for the monthly excess return
of long-term bonds over short-term bonds in the Foreign country minus that in
                       L,              L
the Home country, (rt   +1 - rt ) - (rt+1 - rt ). The coefficient is -1.64, again similar
in magnitude to LSV.31 The model with gradual portfolio adjustment therefore
delivers results consistent with the puzzle uncovered by LSV.

                  Table 1: Predictability with Long Term Bonds
                                                         D
                                         Regressions on rt

                         Currency                   Bond                  Bond local currency
                       excess return            excess return                  return diff.
                                                         L,     L         L,             L
                    qt+1 - qt + rt - rt     qt+1 - qt + rt+1 - rt       (rt+1 - rt ) - (rt+1 - rt )
Benchmark
model                       1.97                        0.34                        -1.64
LSV panel
estimate                    1.98                        0.65                        -1.34
Note : The table shows the slope coefficient of a regression of the dependent variable on the
interest differential rD . The benchmark model is described in the text and the LSV panel
estimates are from Lustig, Stathopoulos and Verdelhan (2018), Table 1.


    Figures 5 and 6 show some impulse response functions that help shed light on
                                                                                  D
these results. They show the response to a one standard deviation increase in rt    .
We observe the same delayed overshooting for the real exchange rate that we saw
in Section 3. What is new is the response of the relative long-term bond price,
shown in chart B of Figure 5. The relative Home bond price pL,Dt  rises in response
to the shock and then continues to rise for 32 months before it starts to fall. This
delayed overshooting for the relative bond price is critical to understanding the
  31                                                                                        L,      L
       These three coefficients are consistent with each other as we can write qt+1 - qt + rt +1 - rt =
                           L,             L
(qt+1 - qt + rt - rt ) + [rt+1 - rt ] - [rt+1 - rt ]



                                                   30
  results reported above. The higher Foreign interest rates causes especially Foreign
  investors to reallocate their portfolio from Foreign long-term bonds to Foreign
  short-term bonds. This lowers the price of Foreign long-term bonds, explaining the
  increase in the relative price pL,D
                                  t   of Home long-term bonds in Figure 5B. However,
  the process of reallocating from Foreign long-term bonds to Foreign short-term
  bonds continues over time as a result of gradual portfolio adjustment, leading to a
  continued decline in the relative price of Foreign bonds. This generates a positive
  Home minus Foreign excess return of long-term bonds over short-term bonds, as
  can be seen also in Figure 6B. Even though the Foreign currency is appreciating
  over time, this is offset by the negative Foreign local excess return of long-term
  bonds over short-term bonds. The latter dominates from month 5 to 50, as can be
  seen from Figure 6A.

   Figure 5: Impulse Response Real Exchange Rate and Relative Bond
Figure 5 Impulse Response Real Exchange Rate and Relative Bond Price
  Price

     A Impulse Response Real Exchange
  1.5  Rate qt (Percent)
                                          0.5


  1.2
                                          0.4


  0.9
                                          0.3


  0.6                                     0.2



  0.3                                     0.1



   0                                       0
        0   24   48       72   96   120         0   24   48       72   96   120
                 months                                       months


      A couple of other aspects of this result are worth emphasizing. First, the
  real exchange rate overshoots earlier than in the benchmark model of Section 3.
  This is because the continued negative long-term Foreign bond return weakens the
  shift towards Foreign assets that is caused by the higher Foreign short-term rate.
  This also explains the somewhat lower one-month FX excess return predictability


                                           31
               Figure 6 Impulse Response Excess Returns
                          Figure 6: Impulse Response Excess Returns
     A Foreign minus Home                          B Foreign minus Home
       Bond Excess Return (Percent)                  Local Excess Return (Percent)
                    ,                                      ,
          +1 - +1 + +1 - +1                                +1      
                                                              -  - +1 - 
4                                                0.2


                                                  0
3
                                                       0     24   48    72    96     120

                                                -0.2                           months
2

                                                -0.4

1
                                                -0.6

0
     0        24     48     72     96     120   -0.8


-1                 months                         -1


         coefficient in the model with long-term bonds (1.98 versus 3.26). Second, the Engel
         coefficient in this parameterization is -34, which again closely matches the results
         reported in Engel (2016).


         5    Conclusion
         We have explored the implications of delayed portfolio adjustment for exchange
         rate dynamics. We have shown that when adjustment is sufficiently gradual it can
         solve the forward premium puzzle, as suggested by Froot and Thaler (1990). More-
         over, it can explain five other puzzles related to the relationship between exchange
         rates and interest rates. Not surprisingly, gradual adjustment is consistent with
         delayed overshooting. More strikingly, and contrary to the claim of Engel (2016),
         it can explain excess return predictability reversal and the fact that high interest
         rate currencies are stronger than implied by UIP. Gradual portfolio adjustment can
         also explain why there is no forward premium puzzle for long-term bond returns,
         as documented by Lustig et al. (2018). Finally, it implies that interest rates in the
         far future have a smaller impact on the current exchange rate than interest rates
         in a near future, thereby giving an explanation to the forward guidance exchange
         rate puzzle raised by Gal´ i (2019).

                                                  32
    The model is stylized in order to derive basic insights and analytical results.
Gradual adjustment has been modeled with an adjustment cost. Our conjecture
is that using more complex alternative modeling approaches, such as a constant
probability of portfolio adjustment, would yield similar results. The analysis has
focused on short-term excess returns. An interesting extension would be to con-
sider returns over longer horizons. This would allow an analysis of longer term
relationships (Chinn and Meredith, 2004), as well as the link between the yield
curve and exchange rates.




                                        33
Appendix


A     Data Description
To calibrate the model, we use monthly data for G7 countries over the interval
December 1992 to December 2017 (the interval for which all data is available
for all countries). Nominal exchange rates are end-of-period from FRED. Prices
come from OECD CPI series. Nominal interest rates are end-of-period one-month
Eurorates from Datastream. Long-term bond returns come from Benchmark 10Y
Datastream Government Total Return Index. The monthly return is computed as
ln(T RIti /T RIti-1 ) where T RIti is the total return index for country i.
    To compute real returns, we compute monthly inflation expectations using a
regression of monthly inflation rate on lagged annual inflation. We compute short-
term and long-term real return differentials and log real exchange rates for the six
countries with respect to the US. We compute the moments of interest for each
country pair and take the simple average of these moments.


B     Proof of Lemma 1
It is immediate from the definitions of  and D that they are respectively equal
to 0 and 1 +  2 b when  = 0. To show that they both monotonically rise with
 , we take their derivatives:
                                0.5b
                        =                     2 - 4b - ( - 2)                 (B.1)
                               2  - 4b
                      D          0.5b
                        =                     2 - 4b + ( - 2)                 (B.2)
                                2 - 4b
It is easy to see that 2 - 4b is larger than both  - 2 and 2 - . This is
automatic when these are negative. When they are positive, it follows because
2 - 4b > ( - 2)2 . The latter can be written as -b > - + 1, which holds when
substituting  = 1 + b +  2 b.
    Next consider the limit of   . We can write
                                                        4b
                                              1-   1-    2
                          lim  = 0.5 lim                                      (B.3)
                                                   1/

                                         34
Since both the numerator and denominator approach 0 when   , we can use
L Hopital s rule:
                                                4b -0.5
                                0.5(1/2 )(1 -    2
                                                   ) (-4b       + 8b2 /)
         lim  = -0.5 lim                                                   =1   (B.4)
                                                 -b/2
It is immediate that D   as    and D/  1 when   .


C      Excess Return Predictability Coefficients
We will now derive the excess return predictability coefficients
                                                        D
                                          cov (ert+k , rt )
                                   k =             D
                                                                                (C.1)
                                             var(rt )
                       1
From qt = qt-1 +         rD ,
                      D - t
                                we have

                                 1
                        qt =       rD + rt
                                         D     2 D
                                          -1 +  rt-2 + ...                      (C.2)
                                D- t
Therefore
                                 D
        ert+k = qt+k - qt+k-1 + rt +k-1 =                                   (C.3)
           1            1
              rD +          ( - 1) rt  D        D       2 D              D
                                        +k-1 + rt+k-2 +  rt+k-2 + ... + rt+k-1
        D -  t+k D - 
Then
                                    1
                               D
         cov (qt+k - qt+k-1 + rt        D
                                         k var(rt
                                +k-1 , rt ) =
                                                D
                                                  ) + k-1 var(rt
                                                               D
                                                                 )+
                                  D-
           1                                            k -1
                        D
             ( - 1)var(rt ) k-1 + k-2 + ... + k-2  +                (C.4)
          D-                                          1 - 
    It follows that
                         1
                 k =       k + k-1 +
                        D-
                  1                                   k -1
                    ( - 1) k-1 + k-2 + ... + k-2  +                             (C.5)
                 D-                                 1 - 
Consider the last term, but not including the ratio at the end of the large bracketed
term. We can rewrite this as
                           - 1 k-1              k-1             
                                                      + ... +                   (C.6)
                          D-                                    

                                              35
When  = , we can write it as
                                                  k
                                - 1 k -1  -      
                                                                               (C.7)
                               D-        1-      

which can be written as
                        -1          -1 1
                             k -1 -      k                                     (C.8)
                        D--         D--
Adding to this the remaining terms of (C.5), we obtain the expression (22) for k
in the text when  = . When  = , (C.6) is equal to
                                 -1
                                    (k - 1)k-1                                 (C.9)
                                 D-
Adding to this the remaining terms of (C.5), we obtain the expression (22) for k
when  = .


D     Proof of Proposition 1
Equation (18) shows the impulse response to an interest rate shock. First assume
 = . If the interest rate shock starts at time t = 0, and we normalize the shock
to D -  > 0 without loss of generality, it implies that in response to this shock
                                        (1 - )t - (1 - )t
                          qt - qt-1 =                                          (D.1)
                                              -
This implies that q1 - q0 =  +  - 1. More generally, qt < qt-1 when

                             ¯=    ln(1 - ) - ln(1 - )
                           t>t                                                 (D.2)
                                       ln() - ln()
while qt > qt-1 when t < t  ¯. Below we show that  t   ¯/ > 0. Since t   ¯ = 1 when
 = 1 - , it follows that t  ¯ < 1 when  +  < 1. The condition (D.2) is therefore
satisfied for all t  1, so that qt < qt-1 for all t  1. This proves the first part of
Proposition 1. When  +  > 1,  t     ¯/ > 0 implies that t  ¯ > 1. Therefore the real
exchange rate continues to appreciate for at least one additional period after the
shock (t = 1), and will start to depreciate once t > t  ¯ > 1. Finally, when  = ,
we have qt - qt-1 = t-1 ( - (1 - )t) and the same results as those above apply
with t ¯ = /(1 - ). In this case  +  < 1 corresponds to  < 0.5, where t        ¯ < 1,
and  +  > 1 implies  > 0.5, so that t    ¯ > 1.

                                          36
                             ¯/ > 0 when  = . We have
    It remains to show that  t
        ¯
        t      1   (ln - ln) + (1 - )(ln(1 - ) - ln(1 - ))
          =                                                             (D.3)
            (1 - )                [ln(/)]2

The sign is determined by the numerator in the large fraction. Note that it is
positive for  = 0 and  = 1. The derivative of the numerator with respect to 
is ln(/) - ln(1 - )/(1 - ), which is positive when  > , zero when  =  and
negative when  < . The numerator of the large expression in (D.3) is therefore
smallest when  = , where it is zero. It is therefore positive for all  = .


E     Proof of Proposition 2
We have
                   1           1-           1     1
 1 = 1 + 2 =             D-          =              (D - D - 1 + ) (E.1)
                  D-          1 -         D -  1 - 

Using that D = b and  + D = , we have
          1     1                1     1
  1 =             ( - 1 - b) =           (1 - ) +  2 b > 0 (E.2)
        D -  1 -               D -  1 - 
  Next consider the second part of Proposition 2. When  = 0, we have  = 0,
 = 1 +  2 b and D = . The second part of Proposition 2 then holds when
                   1     1                   1
                            2 + (1 - ) >              2                  (E.3)
                 D -  1 -                1 +  2 b - 
This implies

                (D - )(1 - ) 2 < ( 2 + (1 - ) )(1 +  2 b - )             (E.4)

Collecting terms multiplying  2 and using D = b, we have

               (D - b + 2 - 1 -  2 b - (1 - )b) 2 < (1 - )2              (E.5)

Using D =  -  = 1 + b +  2 b - , this becomes

                          -(1 - 2 ) 2 < (1 - )2                          (E.6)

which clearly holds.

                                     37
F     Proof of Proposition 3
It first useful to characterize the signs of 1 and 2 . The value of  where 1 = 0
is ¯ defined in the text. Moreover, the value of  where  = , is     ¯ + /b. We can
write the following Lemma:

Lemma 2. There are three regions that determine the sign of 1 and 2 :

    · 0<<¯:                  1 > 0 and 2 > 0

    · ¯1 <  < ¯ + /b : 1 < 0 and 2 > 0

    · >¯ + /b :              1 > 0 and 2 < 0

    When  = 0, 1 > 0 and 2 = 0. When  = ¯, 1 = 0 and 2 > 0.

Proof. First consider 1 . Since D -  > 0, the sign is determined by
                                         -1
                                   D-                                        (F.1)
                                         -
¯ is defined such that this term is equal to 0. To see this, setting (F.1) equal to

zero and substituting the expressions (14) and (15) for  and D, we have

                     +       2 - 4b    - 2 - 4b - 2
                                    =                                        (F.2)
                             2         - 2 - 4b - 2

Cross multiplying delivers
                                   b =  -                                    (F.3)
Substituting  = 1 + b +  2 b gives  = (/(1 - )) 2 =          ¯.
   Now go back to (F.1). It is immediate that this term is positive when  > , so
that 1 > 0. This happens when  >     ¯ + /b. So we need to consider  <   ¯ + /b,
so that  < . Consider D and ( - 1)/( - ) as functions of  . It follows
from Lemma 1 that both rise monotonically with  . At  = 0, so that  = 0,
D > ( - 1)/( - ). But ( - 1)/( - ) rises to infinity as  approaches 
from below, which happens when  approaches     ¯ + /b from below. Therefore the
schedule for ( - 1)/( - ) must cross that for D between  = 0 and  =       ¯ + /b.
This happens at  =   ¯. It follows that 1 > 0 when  <       ¯, 1 = 0 when  =    ¯
and 1 < 0 when   ¯<<       ¯ + /b.


                                        38
   Next consider 2 . It is immediate from (24) that 2 < 0 when  > , which
happens when  >    ¯ + /b. So consider  <    ¯ + /b, so that  < . (24) then
implies that 2 > 0 when 1/(1 - ) < /( - ). Cross multiplying, this gives
 > 2 . This holds as long as  > 0 or  > 0. When  = 0,  = 0 and
2 = 0.

    The first part of Proposition 3 follows immediately from Lemma 2. When
 = 0, we have k = 1 k-1 , which is positive (1 > 0) and monotonically declines
to zero as k rises. When 0 <  <       ¯, Lemma 2 says that both 1 and 2 are
positive. Since 0 <  < 1, it follows that k = 1 k-1 + 2 k-1 is positive and
monotonically declines to zero with an increase in k . Finally, when  =     ¯, Lemma
2 implies that k = 2 k-1 , with 2 > 0 and 0 <  < 1. It again follows that k
is positive and declines monotonically to zero as k rises.
    Next consider the second part of Proposition 3, where  >      ¯. It is immediate
from (22) that limk k = 0. When  =          ¯ + /b, so that  = , we can write

                                k                k-1
                                    = 1                + 2                     (F.4)
                                k-1           
                                                 k-1
                                k             
                                    = 2                + 1                     (F.5)
                                k-1           

The sign of k corresponds to the sign of either of the two right hand side expres-
sions. Assume first that ¯<  <      ¯ + /b, so that  < , 1 < 0 and 2 > 0
(Lemma 2). Then (F.4) implies that k > 0 when k < k    ¯1 and k < 0 when k > k  ¯1
with
                             ¯1 = 1 + ln(-2 /1 )
                             k                                               (F.6)
                                         ln(/)
We know from Proposition 2 that 1 = 1 + 2 > 0, so that 2 > -1 , which
implies that k¯1 > 1. The k¯ in Proposition 3 is the first whole number larger than
¯1 .
k
     A similar reasoning applies to the case where  >       ¯ + /b, so that  > ,
1 > 0 and 2 < 0 (Lemma 2). Then (F.5) implies that k > 0 when k < k           ¯2 and
k < 0 when k > k   ¯2 with
                                ¯2 = 1 + ln(-1 /2 )
                                k                                               (F.7)
                                           ln(/)
From Proposition 2, 1 > -2 , so that k  ¯2 > 1. Again the k ¯ in Proposition 3 is the
first whole number larger than k ¯2 .


                                         39
   Finally consider the special case of  = ¯ + /b, so that  = . In that case
(22) implies that k > 0 when k < k ¯3 and k < 0 when k > k
                                                         ¯3 with

                            ¯3 = 1 + D - (1/(1 + )) > 1
                            k                                                    (F.8)
                                          1-
          ¯ in Proposition 3 is the first whole number larger than k
Again the k                                                        ¯3 .


G      Proof of Proposition 4
                            
The Engel condition is      k=1 k < 0. We will focus here on  = , which is
sufficient as the k are continuous at  = . Then
              
                            1      1     1        1
                   k = 1      + 2    =     -                                     (G.1)
             k=1
                           1-     1-   1 -  (D - )(1 - )

The Engel condition can therefore be written as (D - )(1 - ) < 1 - . Using
that D = b and D =  - , we can also write it as
                                       b     
                                 >        +                                      (G.2)
                                      1 +  1 - 2
where  =  2 b. Using  = 1 + b +  and the definition of , this becomes
                                                (1 + 2 ) 1 - 
                    (1 + b + )2 - 4b < 1 -              -     b                  (G.3)
                                                  1 - 2   1+
    We can, for convenience, refer to the left and right hand sides of (G.3) as f ( )
and g ( ). f ( ) is a convex function, which is always positive and is symmetric
around the axis  = (1 - )/b, where it reaches a minimum. g ( ) is a line with
a negative slope. Moreover f (0) > g (0). These properties imply that there are
only two possibilities. Either f ( ) remains above g ( ) for all  and therefore
the Engel condition is never satisfied, or f ( ) crosses g ( ) twice and the Engel
condition is satisfied for an intermediate range of  that we will refer to as the
            E   E
interval (1   , 2 ), with the boundaries of the interval equal to the solutions to
f ( ) = g ( ).
    To consider the solutions of f ( ) = g ( ), we square both sides. We need to
be careful doing so. If f 2 ( ) = g 2 ( ) has two solutions, it is either the case that
f ( ) = g ( ) for both solutions or f ( ) = -g ( ) for both solutions. We know that
f ( ) is convex with an axis of symmetry  = (1 - )/b. If it crosses the symmetric

                                          40
f ( ) twice, there will be two solutions that average to less that (1 - )/b since
g ( ) is a negatively sloping line.
   We can write f 2 ( ) = g 2 ( ) as

                               A 2 + B + C = 0                               (G.4)

where

                             A = b2                                          (G.5)
                             B = b( - 1 - )                                  (G.6)
                                    
                             C=          1 - 2 - 2                           (G.7)
                                 (1 - )2

In order for the Engel condition to be satisfied over some intermediate range
  E   E
(1  , 2 ) for  , two conditions need to hold. First, as discussed above, it must be
the case that the average of these solutions is less than (1 - )/b, which implies
 < 1 - . Second, it must the case that two solutions to f 2 ( ) = g 2 ( ) exist,
which requires B 2 - 4AC > 0, which can be written as

                     2 - 2(2 - )(1 - ) + (1 - )2 > 0                         (G.8)

This is a quadratic that is positive when  = 0, then turns negative and then
positive again. When  = 1 - , the quadratic is negative, so that both  < 1 - 
and (G.8) will be satisfied when  is between zero and the smaller of the two
solutions to (G.8) as an equality. The latter is equal to

                            ¯= 1- 1-
                                                     2
                                              1-                             (G.9)
                                

To summarize, the Engel condition is satisfied if and only if  < ¯ and  E <  <
                                                                       1
 E         ¯E       E
2 ), where 1 and 2 are the solutions to the quadratic (G.4).




                                        41
References
 [1] Adolfson, Malin, Stefan Laseen, Jesper Linde, Mattias Villania (2008), "Eval-
     uating an Estimated New Keynesian Small Open Economy Model," Journal
     of Economic Dynamics and Control 32, 2690-2721.

 [2] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2007), "Random Walk Expecta-
     tions and the Forward Discount Puzzle," American Economic Review, Papers
     and Proceedings, 97, 346-350, May.

 [3] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2010), "Infrequent Portfolio De-
     cisions: A Solution to the Forward Discount Puzzle," American Economic
     Review 100, 837-869.

 [4] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2017), "Gradual Portfolio Ad-
     justment: Implications for Global Equity Portfolios and Returns," NBER
     WP 23363.

 [5] Bilias, Yannis, Dimitris Georgarakos and Michael Haliassos (2010), "Port-
     folio Inertia and Stock Market Fluctuations" Journal of Money, Credit and
     Banking 42: 715-742.

 [6] Bjørnland, Hilde C. (2009), "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Overshoot-
     ing: Dornbusch Was Right After All," Journal of International Economics
     79, 64-77.

 [7] Bogousslavsky, Vincent (2016), "Infrequent Rebalancing, Return Autocorre-
     lation, and Seasonality," Journal of Finance LXXI (6), 2967-3006.

 [8] Bohn, Henning and Linda L. Tesar (1996), "U.S. Equity Investment in Foreign
     Markets: Portfolio Rebalancing or Return Chasing?" American Economic
     Review 86, 77-81.

 [9] Brunnermeier, Markus and Stefan Nagel (2008), "Do Wealth Fluctuations
     Generate Time-Varying Risk-Aversion? Micro-Evidence on Individuals' Asset
     Allocation," American Economic Review 98, 713-736.

[10] Bussi`
          ere, Matthieu, Menzie D. Chinn, Laurent Ferrara, and Jonas Heipertz
     (2018), "The New Fama Puzzle," NBER Working Paper No. 24342.

                                       42
[11] Chernov, Mikhail and Drew Creal (2018), "Multihorizon Currency Returns
     and Purchasing Power Parity," NBER Working Paper No. 24563.

[12] Chien, Yili, Harold Cole, and Hanno Lustig (2012), "Is the Volatility of the
     Market Price of Risk Due to Intermittent Portfolio Rebalancing," American
     Economic Review 102, 2859-2896.

[13] Chinn, Menzie D. and Guy Meredith (2004), "Monetary Policy and Long-
     Horizon Uncovered Interest Parity," IMF Staff Papers 51, 409-430.

[14] Cushman, David O. and Tao Zha (1997), "Identifying Monetary Policy in a
     Small Open Economy under Flexible Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary
     Economics 39, 433-448.

[15] Curcuru, Stephanie, Clara Vega and Jasper Hoek (2010), "Measuring Carry
     Trade Activity," working paper, Board of Governors.

[16] Dahlquist, Magnus and Julien Penasse (2017), "The Missing Risk Premium
     in Exchange Rates," mimeo.

[17] Davis, J. Scott and Eric van Wincoop (2017),"Globalization and the Increas-
     ing Correlation between Capital Inflows and Outflows," mimeo.

[18] Duffie, Darrell (2010), "Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital,"
     Journal of Finance LXV, 1237-1267.

[19] Eichenbaum, Martin S. and Charles L. Evans (1995), "Some Empirical Ev-
     idence on the Effects of Shocks to Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4), 975-1009.

[20] Engel, Charles (2016), "Exchange Rates, Interest Rates, and the Risk Pre-
     mium," American Economic Review 106, 436-474.

[21] Fama, Eugene F. (1984), "Forward and Spot Exchange Rates," Journal of
     Monetary Economics 14, 319-338.

[22] Faust, Jon and John H. Rogers (2003), "Monetary Policy's Role in Exchange
     Rate Behavior," Journal of Monetary Economics 50(7), 1403-1424.

[23] Froot, Kenneth A. and Richard H. Thaler (1990) "Anomalies: Foreign Ex-
     change," Journal of Economic Perspectives 4, 179-192.

                                       43
[24] Froot, Kenneth A., Paul G.J. O'Connell and Mark S Seasholes (2001), "The
     Portfolio Flows of International Investors,"Journal of Financial Economics
     59, 151-193.

[25] Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson (2002), "The 6D Bias and the Equity
     Premium Puzzle,"in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds, NBER Macroe-
     conomics Annual, 16, 257-312.

[26] Gal´
        i, Jordi (2019), "Uncovered Interest Parity, Forward Guidance and the
     Exchange Rate,"mimeo.

[27] G^
      arleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Heje Pedersen (2013), "Dynamic Portfolio
     Choice with Frictions," Journal of Finance LXVIII, No. 6, 2309-2340.

[28] Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel and Stephen Utkus
     (2019), "Five Facts about Beliefs and Portfolios," NBER Working Paper
     25744.

[29] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Aaron Tornell (2004), "Exchange Rate Puz-
     zles and Distorted Beliefs," Journal of International Economics 64, 303­33.

[30] Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Gordon Y. Liao (2015), "Price
     Dynamics in Partially Segmented Markets," mimeo.

[31] Grilli, Vittorio and Nouriel Roubini (1996), "Liquidity models in open
     economies: Theory and empirical evidence,"European Economic Review 40,
     847-859.

[32] Hendershott, Terrence, Sunny X. Li, Albert J. Mankfeld, Mark S. Seasholes
     (2013), "Asset Price Dynamics with Limited Attention," mimeo.

[33] Itskhoki, Oleg and Dmitry Mukhin (2017), "Exchange Rate Disconnect in
     General Equilibrium," working paper, Princeton University.

[34] Kim, Soyoung (2005), "Monetary Policy, Foreign Exchange Policy, and De-
     layed Overshooting," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37 (4), 775-782.

[35] Lustig, Hanno, Andreas Stathopoulos, and Adrien Verdelhan (2018), "The
     Term Structure of Currency Carry Trade Risk Premia," working paper.


                                      44
[36] Lynch, Anthony W. (1996), "Decision Frequency and Synchronization Across
     Agents: Implications for Aggregate Consumption and Equity Return," The
     Journal of Finance 51(4), 1479-1497.

[37] Mitchell, Olivia S., Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus and Takeshi Yam-
     aguchi (2006), "The Inattentive Participant: Portfolio Trading Behavior in
     401(k) plans," working paper.

[38] Rotemberg, Julio J. (1982), "Sticky Prices in the United States," Journal of
     Political Economy 90 (6), 1187-1211.

[39] Scholl, Almuth and Harald Uhlig (2008), "New Evidence on the Puzzles: Re-
     sults from Agnostic Identification on Monetary Policy and Exchange Rates,"
     Journal of International Economics 76(1), 1-13.

[40] Sutherland, Alan (1996), "Financial Market Integration and Macroeconomic
     Volatility," Scandinavian Journal of Economics 98 (4), 521-539.

[41] Valchev, Rosen (2017), "Bond Convenience Yields and Exchange Rate Dy-
     namics," working paper, Boston College.

[42] Vayanos, Dimitri and Paul Woolley (2012), "An Institutional Theory of Mo-
     mentum and Reversal," Review of Financial Studies 6, 1087-1145.




                                       45
