                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE CHINA SHOCK AND EMPLOYMENT IN PORTUGUESE FIRMS

                                       Lee G. Branstetter
                                        Brian K. Kovak
                                       Jacqueline Mauro
                                         Ana Venancio

                                      Working Paper 26252
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26252


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




The authors are grateful to the Portuguese Ministry of Employment and Social Security and
Gabinete de Estratégia e Planeamento (GEP) for access to the matched employer-employee data.
We thank Ãlvaro Silva from Statistics Portugal for research assistance and Hylke Vandenbussche
for guidance in using EUROSTAT data. We thank Rui Baptista, Francisco Lima, Nuno Limão,
and Pedro Martins for extensive background on the Portuguese economy. We gratefully
acknowledge funding from the Fundação para Ciência e a Tecnologia through research grant
UID/SOC/04521/2013. We received helpful comments from participants at various conferences
and seminars. Views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of any
branch or agency of the Government of Portugal, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lee G. Branstetter, Brian K. Kovak, Jacqueline Mauro, and Ana Venancio. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The China Shock and Employment in Portuguese Firms
Lee G. Branstetter, Brian K. Kovak, Jacqueline Mauro, and Ana Venancio
NBER Working Paper No. 26252
September 2019
JEL No. F14,F16,F66,J21,J31

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper considers the effects of Chinese import competition on firm-level labor market
outcomes in Portugal. We examine direct competition in the Portuguese market and indirect
competition Portugal's largest export markets in Western Europe. Using rich employer-employee
data matched to firm-level trade transactions, we measure the degree to which different
Portuguese firms faced Chinese import competition, based on firm product mix and distribution
of sales across countries. We find economically and statistically significant employment declines
in firms with more exposure to Chinese competition in European export markets, but minimal
effects of direct competition in Portugal. Our findings also suggest a centrally important role for
Portugal's stringent labor market regulations in limiting firms' ability to adjust to competitive
shocks. In our earlier sample period (1995-2000), firms have limited ability to adjust
employment, hours, or wages, and the primary adjustment margin is firm exit. In the later period
(2000-2007), when more flexible temporary contracts comprise a larger share of employment, we
find employment reductions among more exposed firms. Those employment reductions are
entirely accounted for by changes in temporary employment, with no effect on permanent
employment. We expect these findings to be informative for other peripheral European countries
that had specialized in labor-intensive manufacturing industries operating under inflexible labor
market regimes.

Lee G. Branstetter                               Jacqueline Mauro
Heinz College                                    UC Berkeley iSchool
School of Public Policy and Management           South Hall
Department of Social and Decision Sciences       Berkeley, CA 94704
Carnegie Mellon University                       jacqueline.mauro@berkeley.edu
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and the Peterson Institute for                   Ana Venancio
International Economics                          Management Department
and also NBER                                    ISEG - School of Economics and Management
branstet@andrew.cmu.edu                          Universidade de Lisboa
                                                 R. Miguel Lupi, 20
Brian K. Kovak                                   1200-78 Lisboa Portugal
H. John Heinz III College                        avenancio@iseg.utl.pt
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Avenue, HBH 3012
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
bkovak@cmu.edu
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                               Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                      ancio


1        Introduction
An extensive literature documents the labor market effects of increased competition from Chinese
trade, but the measured effects differ quite substantially across countries.1 For example, in contrast
to the reductions in manufacturing employment Autor et al. (2013) find in the US, a series of
papers by Dauth et al. (2014, 2017, 2018) find more positive effects in the German labor market.
They argue that German imports of intermediate inputs from China primarily displace imports
from other low-wage exporters, such as those in peripheral Europe. To the extent that these
displacement effects are quantitatively important, they could partly explain the poor performance
of labor markets in countries on the European periphery in recent decades.
        In this paper, we focus on the effects of Chinese competition on employment in Portugal, ex-
amining both the effects of direct competition in the Portuguese market and indirect competition
in five of Portugal's largest export markets in Western Europe. In contrast with much of the lit-
erature on Chinese trade competition, our unit of analysis is the firm, rather than the region or
industry. We merge Portugal's matched employer-employee database with firm-level trade transac-
tions, providing measures of each Portuguese firm's sales of detailed products in each country. This
information allows us to measure the extent to which each firm is exposed to Chinese competition,
based on the firm's product mix and distribution of sales across countries.2 The employer-employee
data provide extensive information on each firm's workforce and allow us to follow firms over time,
making it possible to document the relative impact of Chinese competition on firm employment
outcomes and to decompose those responses into various adjustment margins.
        We find that Portuguese firms that are more exposed to indirect competition from China in
Western European export markets exhibit economically and statistically significant declines in
employment. In contrast, the effects of direct competition in Portugal are generally much smaller
and statistically indistinguishable from zero. We separate our analysis into two time periods: 1995-
2000 and 2000-2007 and find quite distinct responses to trade competition in the two periods.
In 1995-2000, more exposed firms respond by exiting the market (the extensive margin) with no
measurable effect on employment growth (the intensive-margin) among surviving firms. During this
time period, most Portuguese firms faced extremely stringent labor regulations making it difficult
to lay off workers or reduce their wages or hours, leaving exit as the only feasible adjustment margin
for many firms.
        During 2000-2007 the margins are reversed; we find minimal effects on survival, but significant
employment declines among surviving firms facing larger increases in Chinese competition in export
markets. Given the stringent regulations on worker dismissals, these intensive margin effects are
    1
     For a thorough review of the literature on the labor market effects of Chinese trade competition, see Autor et al.
(2016).
   2
     As in the prior literature, we construct an instrument for Chinese competition in Portugal or Western Europe
using changes in Chinese trade with a different country, in this case the US.



                                                          2
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                           Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                  ancio


surprising. In order to understand them, we decompose the overall employment responses into those
among permanent workers, who enjoy extensive employment protections, and temporary workers,
who do not. The employment responses were entirely accounted for by changes in temporary
employment, showing that the increase in the share of temporary employees between 1995 and
2007 appears to have substantially increased the flexibility of Portuguese employment, such that
in the latter period exposed firms contracted rather than exiting. These results highlight the
importance of labor regulations in mediating the effects of import competition.
       Portugal provides an informative context in which to evaluate the effects of increasing compe-
tition from China. First, it is a small open economy with a comparative advantage more similar to
China than other developed economies (Cabral and Esteves, 2006). Second, it is a useful case in
which to revisit the direct effects examined by the previous literature but also to illustrate the less
well documented export-displacement effects, given its strong reliance on export markets in West-
ern Europe. Third, Portugal's labor market regime is highly restrictive, particularly in comparison
to other Western European countries. As just mentioned, these labor market restrictions play an
important role in shaping the Portuguese labor market's response to Chinese trade competition.
Finally, the remarkable matched employer-employee data and firm-level trade data available to
researchers studying the Portuguese economy allows us to construct a unique firm-level measure
of exposure to Chinese competition in particular markets and to observe detailed margins of labor
market adjustment across Portuguese firms.
       Our paper contributes to the broad literature on the labor market consequences of import
competition from China. Following the seminal contribution of Autor et al. (2013), the early papers
in this literature focused on the negative impacts on import-competing regions or industries in high-
income countries. More recent work has expanded the scope to consider effects in export markets
(Dauth et al. (2014); Feenstra et al. (2017)) and shifts between manufacturing and service industries
(Bloom et al., 2019) that at least partly offset the losses associated with import competition.
While these papers have focused on the effects of direct Chinese import competition in high-income
economies, our context is different. Portugal is a relatively low-wage exporter of intermediate
goods that are quite similar to those in which China has a comparative advantage. We find that
competition in export markets is more important than direct competition in Portugal, a feature
that is likely to apply to other relatively low-wage countries in peripheral Europe.
       Following the initial work in the literature focusing on the US economy, a large number of papers
examine the effects of Chinese competition in European countries3 The Portuguese context allows
us to document the costly side effects of restrictive labor market policies in driving the margins of
   3
    See Mion and Zhu (2013) on Belgian firms; Ashournia et al. (2014) on skill-wage gaps and Utar (2014) on firms
in Denmark; Hakkala and Huttunen (2016) on workers in Finland; Malgouyres (2017) on local labor markets in
France; Dauth et al. (2014, 2017, 2018) on local labor markets and workers in Germany; Balsvik et al. (2015) on
unemployment in Norway; Pereira (2016) on local labor markets in Portugal; Donoso et al. (2015) on local labor
markets in Spain; and Fl¨
                        uckiger and Ludwig (2015) on employment and unemployment in 22 European countries;
among others.


                                                       3
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                                Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                       ancio


adjustment to trade competition, with firms responding to competition during 1995-2000 primarily
by exiting the market and temporary workers with minimal labor protections bearing the brunt of
employment declines during 2000-2007.
        Our paper is most similar to the contemporaneous work of Cabral et al. (2018), who also examine
the effects of direct Chinese import competition in Portugal and indirect competition in European
export markets. As in our study, they find minimal effects of direct import competition in Portugal
and substantial effects of increased competition in export markets. Yet, the two papers differ in
important and complementary ways. While Cabral et al. focus on worker outcomes using variation
in competition across industries, we examine firm-level outcomes using variation based on each
firm's mix of products and destinations. This approach allows us to examine various firm-level
adjustment margins including firm exit; employment, hours, and hourly wages; and permanent
vs. temporary worker employment. Our firm-level perspective highlights the importance of labor
market restrictions in driving these margins of adjustment to import competition, which likely
appear in other countries with heavily regulated labor markets.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on the
various regulations limiting adjustment in Portugal's labor market and the importance of exports
in the Portuguese economy. Section 3 describes our data sources and empirical approach. Section
4 discusses our empirical findings, and Section 5 concludes.


2        Background
2.1        Portugal's Labor Market
Although it has been closely connected to the core economies of Western Europe by geography,
culture, and trade linkages throughout its existence, Portugal's institutional development diverged
sharply from the rest of Western Europe in the 1930s.4 Founded in the first decade of the 20th
century, the Portuguese republic was politically and economically unstable. A military coup brought
Minister of Finance Ant´
                       onio de Oliveira Salazar to power, and he reconstituted Portugal as an
authoritarian state that he ruled with an iron hand. This dictatorship finally collapsed in 1974,
not long after the death of its founder.
        Given the degree to which workers' political and social rights were repressed during the long
decades of dictatorship, it is perhaps not surprising that the new government sought to enshrine high
levels of worker protections in the democratic constitution and in the labor laws and regulations
subsequently enacted. These laws strongly prioritized employment security over labor market
flexibility. It became nearly impossible for employers of any size to fire workers or reduce their
hours or nominal wages. Employees also benefitted from a favorable legal environment for collective
    4
        For a comprehensive history of Portugal through the 1990s, see Corkhill (2002).




                                                            4
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                               Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                      ancio


bargaining and substantial participation and oversight rights in enterprises (Bover et al., 2000;
Cardoso and Branco, 2017).
       Although these restrictions were relaxed somewhat during the late 1980s and early 1990s, regular
employees in all but the smallest firms continued to enjoy extremely strong labor protections,
making it difficult for them to be dismissed, either for cause or in cases of financial distress. As an
example, for a firm with more than 20 employees to dismiss a worker required a lengthy judicial
process including providing the worker and their union a lengthy and detailed report explaining the
reason for dismissal, interviewing witnesses chosen by the worker, lengthy delays for court rulings,
and significant severance payments (Martins, 2009).5 These requirements substantially increased
the expected cost of labor faced by the firm, above and beyond the worker's nominal wage. Based
on the OECD's official measure, Portugal had the second most restrictive labor market regime
among OECD members (behind only Turkey) throughout our sample period of 1995-2007, with
substantially less flexibility than other Western European countries, as shown in Figure 1.
       Alongside these quite rigid regular employee contracts, Portuguese employment law allows for
more flexible temporary contracts, which have somewhat lower severance requirements and do not
require the extensive administrative and judicial procedures associated with terminating a per-
manent job (Centeno and Novo, 2012). Temporary contracts include fixed-term contracts with
a pre-specified termination date and contracts for workers hired from temporary work agencies
(OECD, 1994). Fixed-term contracts, introduced in Portugal in 1976, are only permitted in par-
ticular situations: replacement of temporarily absent permanent workers, exceptional workload,
seasonal work, temporary projects, business start-ups, the launching of new activities of uncertain
duration, and recruiting long-term unemployed workers and first-time job seekers. They generally
have a minimum duration of six months and a maximum duration of three years, and contracts
may only be renewed twice, potentially imposing tighter overall duration constraints for shorter
contracts (Martins, 2016).6 Work through temporary work agencies is also legally restricted to
seasonal activities and substitution of absent workers. In certain circumstances, these contracts
can be renewed for an additional 12 months. It is possible for temporary workers to transition to
a permanent contract, and employers appear to use temporary contracts to screen workers, while
workers use them as a means of job search (Portugal and Varej~
                                                             ao, 2009; Varej~
                                                                            ao and Portugal,
2004). It is considered fraudulent to hire temporary workers for a permanent job, but doing so has
nonetheless become a common practice even in the public sector Cardoso and Branco (2017). In
   5
     Dismissed employees were entitled to receive a severance payment of one month per year worked, with a minimum
of three months' salary. In 1989/1991, it became easier to lay off a group of workers in a collective dismissal, with
the minimum number of workers dependent upon the firm size. Nonetheless, collective dismissals were relatively
uncommon during our sample period, accounting for less than 15% of total dismissals (Bover et al., 2000).
   6
     The maximum duration is two years for business start-ups and the launching of new activities, and 18 months when
hiring first-time job seekers. In 2003, the duration of fixed-term contracts was extended to six years. After our sample
period, the duration was reduced back to three years in 2009, and during 2012-13 renewal and maximum duration
limits were extended in an effort to maintain employment levels during the Portuguese recession and European Debt
Crisis (Martins, 2016).


                                                           5
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                     Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                            ancio


spite of these various restrictions, temporary employment contracts provide employers with much
more flexibility than those for permanent regular employees.
   As shown in Figure 2, the share of jobs in temporary contracts increased during our sample
period from 10 percent in 1995 to 22 percent in 2007. Figure 3 shows that most of this increase
is driven by fixed-term contracts, which accounted for 16 percent of total employment in 1998 and
21 percent in 2007, well above the average level in the 15 EU member states. A potential driver of
increased reliance on temporary workers late in our sample period is a 2004 reform that reduced
the firm size threshold above which firms face large dismissal costs from 20 to 10 (Centeno and
Novo, 2012). By increasing firing costs for permanent workers in firms with between 10 and 20
workers, this reform made temporary contracts relatively more attractive. This increased reliance
on temporary workers will help explain important differences between the first and second halves
of the sample period in the effects of import competition on workforce adjustment (see Section 4).

2.2   Portuguese Exports and Chinese Trade
Despite these extensive labor market rigidities, early in our sample period Portugal benefited from
its position as a relatively low cost manufacturer with privileged access to the core European mar-
kets. As shown in Figure 4, manufacturing employment represented a large but declining share
of total employment during our sample period: 34 percent in 1995, falling to 23 percent in 2007.
Figure 5 shows that a very large share of Portuguese manufacturing activity was driven by ex-
porting. Manufacturing accounted for nearly all of Portuguese export activity, with manufacturing
exports comprising between 84 percent and 90 percent of total exports. During our sample period,
manufacturing exports also accounted for a large share of gross manufacturing output: 37 percent
in 1995, 43 percent in 2003, and 38 percent in 2007. Hence, developments in Portugal's key export
markets were likely to have a large impact on the manufacturing sector and on the labor market
as a whole.
   As Portugal prepared to join the European currency union during the mid-to-late 1990s, re-
ductions in inflation and currency risk caused domestic interest rates to decline sharply, fueling
a debt-propelled boom in investment and consumption (Blanchard, 2007). Large current account
deficits emerged in this period; at first they were easily financed by a surge of capital inflows (in-
cluding bank lending) from the rest of Western Europe. However, these international liabilities
eventually became unsustainable, particularly after adopting the euro in 1999. This made it im-
possible to depreciate the Portuguese currency relative to its European trading and investment
partners, even as trade competition increased. This loss of Portuguese export competitiveness co-
incided with the beginning of a boom in Chinese exports to Western Europe. The value of China's
nominal exports to the 15 original member states of the EU (excluding Portugal) already exceeded
the value of Portugal's exports by the early 1990s, and China's export growth to the EU sharply ac-



                                                  6
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                          Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                 ancio


celerated in the late 1990s (Figure 6), even as Portugal's export growth stagnated.7 This significant
degree of Chinese competition in Portugal's export markets and the longstanding concentration of
Portugal's exports in commodity categories that were among the first to be dominated by China
(Cabral and Esteves, 2006) meant that Portugal may have felt the impact of Chinese competition
even during our earlier sample period, 1995-2000, before China's accession to the WTO in 2001. We
also consider a later sample period, 2000-2007, which saw even larger increases in Chinese exports
to the EU, but precedes the potentially confounding factors of the European sovereign debt crisis.


3        Data and Empirical Approach
Our empirical objective is to compare the evolution of employment-related outcomes for Portuguese
firms that were differentially exposed to import competition from China. We consider the effects
of Chinese competition in Portugal, the firms' domestic market, and in Portugal's main export
markets in Western Europe. Specifically, we consider France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the UK,
which accounted for approximately 70 percent of total goods exports during our 1995-2007 sample
period.8 We refer to this group collectively as the EU5.9
        In order to implement our empirical analysis, we merge longitudinal firm-level workforce in-
formation from a matched employer-employee database with i) firm-level data on production and
export transactions and ii) national trade data, yielding a dataset covering two time periods: 1995-
2000 and 2000-2007. This section describes our empirical approach and data sources, with details
of data construction in Appendix A.

3.1       Data and Measurement
We begin by measuring changes in Chinese import competition for product j in market c as the
change in China's share of imports to that market:

                                                             Ch
                                                          Mcjt
                                             IScjt                                                         (1)
                                                          Mcjt0

The change in China's import share (IS ) is the change in imports from China (M Ch ) during the
relevant time period t (1995-2000 or 2000-2007) over the initial (t0 = 1995 or 2000) level of imports
from all sources.10 We consider changes in Chinese import competition in the following markets,
indexed by c: Portugal, the EU5, and the US (to generate the instrumental variable described
below). We calculate (1) using trade data from EUROSTAT and UN Comtrade, which provide
    7
     Authors' calculations based on EUROSTAT international trade data.
    8
     Authors' calculations based on EUROSTAT international trade data.
   9
     As of this writing, the UK remains a member of the European Union.
  10
     We use the change in import share as our competition measure rather than using import penetration due to a
lack of consistent and reliable data on product-level output across EU5 countries.


                                                      7
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                              Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                     ancio


bilateral trade flows by product. As described in Appendix A, we aggregate 6-digit HS products
as necessary to ensure consistent product codes across datasets and years, yielding a classification
with 2,512 consistently identifiable products.
       We then use this product-level measure to construct firm-level measures of exposure to Chi-
nese import competition in Portugal and the EU5. Each firm faces a different degree of Chinese
competition because of differences in product mix and differences in the distribution of sales across
countries. We define the increase in Chinese import competition in the Portuguese market facing
an individual firm i during period t as

                              P                                             Yijt0 - Xijt0
                          F CSit           P
                                           ij ISP jt ,        where P
                                                                    ij                                            (2)
                                                                                 Yit0 .
                                       j


This firm-level China shock in the Portuguese market (F CS P ) is a weighted average of changes in
China's share of imports to Portugal across products j . The weights, P
                                                                      ij , reflect the share of initial
firm sales (Yit0 ) accounted for by each product j 's domestic sales in Portugal (where Yijt0 - Xijt0
is initial domestic sales, i.e. total sales of product j minus exports of the product).11 Note that if
a firm exports, the sum of the weights across products will be strictly less than one. This feature
captures the fact that more export-intensive firms are less exposed to competition in the Portuguese
market than are purely domestic firms who do not serve customers in foreign markets. Variation
in (2) therefore derives both from differences in product mix and from differences in exposure to
the Portuguese market.
       Of course, the rise of Chinese exports can impact the Portuguese labor market not only through
intensifying competition in the domestic market, but also in foreign markets where Portuguese firms
compete with China. In the Portuguese context, this third-market effect is particularly relevant
due to the similar level of product specialization between Portuguese and Chinese exports (Cabral
and Esteves, 2006). We define firm i's increase in Chinese import competition in the EU5 market
using a weighted-average paralleling (2), but with weights based on the product mix of firm exports
to the EU5.
                                                                                 E
                                                                                Xijt
                                  E
                              F CSit            E
                                                ij ISEjt ,        with E
                                                                       ij 
                                                                                    0
                                                                                      ,                           (3)
                                                                                Yit0
                                            j

This firm-level China shock in the EU5 market (F CS E ) is a weighted average of changes in China's
share of imports to the EU5, with weights, E
                                           ij , reflecting the share of initial firm sales accounted
for by each product's exports to the EU5. For firms with zero exports to the EU5, this measure will
be zero, since the firm does not directly face competition from China in the EU5 market. Variation
  11
    Because the output measure in the firm production database, Inqu´     erito Anual a
                                                                                      ` Produ¸c~
                                                                                               ao Industrial (IAPI) is
"produced output," it omits sales related to carry-along trade, so a firm can appear to export more than it produces.
To deal with this issue, when Yijt0 < Xijt0 , we behave as if the true value of sales precisely equals exports, so the
weight for that product in (2) will be zero. This approach applies to (3) as well.



                                                          8
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                              Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                     ancio


in (3) across firms comes from differences in the mix of products exported to the EU5 and from
differences in the importance of the EU5 as a market for each firm's total sales.12
       The firm-level China shocks defined in (2) and (3) form the independent variables of interest in
our analysis, allowing us to observe differences in outcomes for firms facing more or less competi-
tion from China in the Portuguese and EU5 markets. Computing these firm-level shocks requires
information on total firm sales by product and on firm exports by product and destination. Firm
sales by product come from the Inqu´
                                   erito Anual `
                                               a Produ¸
                                                      c~ao Industrial (IAPI), which is a manda-
tory survey covering all but the smallest Portuguese firms. Firm-level exports by detailed product
and trading partner come from the Com´
                                     ercio Internacional (CI) database, which reports trade
transactions for all firms with nontrivial imports or exports the current or preceding year.13 This
information allows us to calculate P             E
                                   ij in (2) and ij in (3).
       We examine the effects of these firm-level China shocks on firms' employment outcomes, which
come from the administrative database Quadros de Pessoal (QP). This remarkable matched employer-
employee dataset covers nearly all firms and employees in the Portuguese private sector, as it is
based on a mandatory annual survey collected by the Portuguese Ministry of Employment and So-
cial Security from all firms with at least one employee. For the month of October in each year, the
data report each employee's contract type (full-time, part-time, furlough/paid leave, etc.), hours,
and earnings. We use this information to observe firm survival along with firm-level wagebill, em-
ployment, average hourly wages, and average hours per worker, allowing us to observe the margins
along which surviving firms adjust their wagebill in response to trade competition. The database
also includes a variety of other firm characteristics such as entry year, location, main industry, sales,
and number of employees, which will serve as controls in our empirical analysis. All monetary values
are expressed in 2007 euros, using the Consumer Price Index from Statistics Portugal.
       Our sample includes firms active in 1995 or 2000, located in mainland Portugal (omitting those
in the Azores and Madeira islands), and appearing in both the QP employer-employee data and the
IAPI trade data in either 1995 or 2000. The match rate between QP and IAPI is extremely high.
Of the firms in IAPI, we match 93.5 percent in 1995 and 93.0 percent in 2000 to their corresponding
entries in QP. This process generates a set of 9,261 unique firms: 5,958 in 1995 and 8,021 in 2000,
with many firms appearing in both time periods.
  12
     While our main analysis utilizes all firms, including those with zero exports to the EU5, Appendix B.4 restricts
the analysis to the subsample of firms with strictly positive initial sales in both Portugal and the EU5, finding very
similar results.
  13
     See Appendix A for details on IAPI and CI firm coverage and product classifications.




                                                          9
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                              Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                     ancio


3.2      Empirical Approach
We examine the effects of Chinese import competition on firm-level employment outcomes using
the following specification.

                                                P          E
                             ln yit = 0 + P F CSit + E F CSit +  Xit + it                                        (4)

The dependent variable is the change in log employment outcome for firm i, including wagebill,
employment, average hourly wages, and average hours per worker. We estimate (4) separately for
each time period t (1995-2000 or 2000-2007).14 F CSit
                                                   P and F CS E are the firm-level China shocks
                                                             it
defined in (2) and (3), and we anticipate that Chinese import competition will displace Portuguese
activity such that P , E < 0. Xit is a vector of firm-level controls, including beginning-of-period
firm age and age squared, share of workers with a college education, sales, number of establish-
ments, industry fixed effects (including 10 1-digit industries), and region fixed effects (including 5
NUTS-2 regions). When including these fixed effects, our analysis effectively compares outcome
growth across firms in the same industry and region but with different product mixes or different
distributions of sales across countries. Because the outcomes are expressed as a long-differences,
these controls allow for differential trends across industries, regions, and firm characteristics. it is
the error term.
       Using the change in log outcome addresses the skewed distribution of firm size and admits a
convenient decomposition. Since the wagebill is the product of employment, average hourly wages,
and average hours per worker, the change in log wagebill is the sum of changes in logs of employment,
hourly wages, and hours per worker. The linearity of (4) thus implies that the regression coefficients
for the change in log wagebill will precisely equal the sum of regression coefficients across the other
outcomes, allowing us to decompose the margins along which firms adjust their wagebill when
facing import competition at home and in export markets.
       While the change in log formulation is essential to decomposing firms workforce-related re-
sponses to import competition, it implies that we can only estimate (4) on the subset of firms that
survive to the end of the sample period. Firms that exit will have undefined log wagebill (along
with its components) at the end of the period, so the dependent variable will be undefined. We
therefore supplement the analysis in (4) by running a parallel Probit specification in which the
dependent variable is an indicator for firm survival until the end of the relevant period (either 2000
or 2007).15 This allows us to observe firms' extensive-margin response (survival vs. exit) and their
intensive-margin response (changing wagebill etc. conditional on survival) to import competition.
We also present Tobit regressions in Appendix B.3 addressing the simultaneous determination of
  14
     We exclude years after 2007 to avoid potential confounding effects of the Portuguese economic and sovereign debt
crises spanning 2008-2014.
  15
     Appendix B.2 presents linear probability models for firm survival, finding similar results to the Probit models
discussed in the main text.


                                                         10
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                              Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                     ancio


the intensive and extensive margins effects, with similar results to those in the main analyses.
       During the period of analysis, China experienced productivity gains, transitioned to a market
oriented economy, and had its quotas and other trade barriers eliminated due to its accession to
WTO.16 An important concern is that the change in China's share of Portugal and EU5 imports
may reflect not only these changes in Chinese supply factors but also changes in demand or changes
in Portuguese supply. For example, if EU5 and Portuguese consumers' tastes shift toward products
for which China has a comparative advantage, its import share may increase along with that of
Portuguese firms producing similar products, biasing our results upward.17
       To isolate the effects of productivity growth and falling trade barriers in China as opposed to
EU5 or Portuguese demand shocks, we follow an approach similar to that of Autor et al. (2013).
We instrument for the change in Chinese import share in Portugal or the EU5 using measures based
on increases in China's share of U.S. imports.

                                                 P
                                          IV F CSit            P
                                                               ij ISU jt                                         (5)
                                                           j

                                                 E
                                          IV F CSit            E
                                                               ij ISU jt                                         (6)
                                                           j

where ISU jt is the change in China's share of U.S. imports for product j and period t, calculated
following (1). By restricting attention to variation in Chinese import share that is common across
Portugal, EU5 and the U.S., we reduce the likelihood that the observed relationships are driven
by EU5 and Portugal demand shocks in favor of variation based on changes in Chinese supply.
In the empirical analysis below, we present instrumental-variables versions of all results, with the
corresponding OLS or Probit results presented in Appendix B.1.
       Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the outcomes, shocks, instruments, and controls just
described, separately for 1995-2000 and 2000-2007. Figure 4 shows that manufacturing employment
was relatively stable during the late 1990s but fell substantially during the 2000s. This aggregate
pattern is reflected in our firm samples as well, with high rates of firm survival and modest changes
in workforce outcomes in 1995-2000 and lower rates of firm survival and substantial employment
declines during 2000-2007. The shock measures show that firms faced substantial increases in
China's import share, both in Portugal and in the EU5, and that the shock in European markets
was much larger in the latter period. Note also that the standard deviations are quite large,
reflecting the fact that some firms faced much larger shocks than others. For example, while the
mean of the EU5 shock during 2000-2007 was only 0.078, the firm at the 95th percentile faced a
shock of 0.533.18 We therefore have quite a bit of variation across firms in their exposure to increased
  16
      See Branstetter and Lardy (2008) for a detailed discussion of the factors that drove China's export growth.
  17
      Note that since we use changes in import shares as our product-level shock measure, this endogeneity concern is
less serious than it would be if we used changes in import levels, but we address the concern nonetheless.
   18
      The shocks in Portugal and the EU5 are minimally correlated with each other, making their effects separately


                                                         11
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                                   Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                          ancio


competition from China. We also note that by virtue of including firms that appear in both the
QP and IAPI datasets, our sample represents relatively large firms, primarily in manufacturing.19


4     Results
4.1     Firm Survival and Wagebill Effects
We begin by examining the overall effects of Chinese import competition in Portugal and the EU5
on the Portuguese workforce. In Tables 2 and 3, we examine the change in log firm wagebill and firm
survival by estimating (4). In order to isolate the effects of Chinese supply shocks from potentially
confounding demand shocks in Portugal or the EU5, we utilize the instrumental variables in (5) and
(6), constructed using the change in China's share of US imports (corresponding OLS and Probit
results are available in Appendix B.1). At the outset, note that while the instruments are quite
strong in the 2000-2007 period (first-stage F-statistics ranging from 38.5-48.0), the instruments are
weaker in the earlier 1995-2000 period (first-stage F-statistics ranging from 3.4-4.5). Because we
have two endogenous variables and two instruments, Stock and Yogo (2005) show that a first-stage
F-statistic of 4.58 is large enough to ensure that a 5-percent test is no larger than 15 percent. In
our richest specification in column (6), the first-stage F-statistic of 4.47 is very close to this critical
value, reducing weak-instrument concerns. Nonetheless, we encourage the reader to interpret these
earlier-period results with care.
    Table 2 focuses on the 1995-2000 time period. Columns (1)-(3) examine the extensive-margin
effects of Chinese competition on firm survival using IV-Probit (Appendix B.2 shows linear proba-
bility models with similar results). We sequentially add controls across columns, with column (3)
including the richest set of initial firm characteristics, including industry and region fixed effects.
In that case, we find minimal effect of the direct China shock in the Portuguese market, but a
statistically significant decline in the probability of firm survival for firms facing increased Chinese
competition in EU5 markets. The average marginal effect associated with          ^E = -0.976 in column
(3) is -0.163.20 Evaluating this effect at the mean EU5 shock of 0.029 (Table 1) implies a decline in
survival probability of 0.5 percentage points relative to a firm facing zero shock. This is a modest
but nontrivial effect given the baseline survival rate of 90.5 percent (Table 1). An alternative means
of judging the magnitude of this effect is to calculate the predicted decline in survival probability
for each individual firm based on its marginal effect and the shock it faced, and then multiply by
the firm's initial wagebill. Summing across firms and comparing to the total initial wagebill for
all firms in the sample, we find that the decline in survival probability driven by the EU5 shock
identifiable. In 1995-2000 the correlation coefficient is -0.0091 and in 2000-2007 it is 0.014. The instrument correlations
are similarly small: 0.0066 in 1995-2000 and -0.030 in 2000-2007.
  19
     94 percent of firms in our 1995-2000 sample and 92 percent in the 2000-2007 sample are in manufacturing.
  20
     The marginal effect of the Chinese import shock in country c for firm i is (       ^ Xi ) · ^c , and we then average this
marginal effect across firms in the sample to calculate the average marginal effect.


                                                             12
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                                       Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                              ancio


accounts for an expected decline in the aggregate wagebill of 0.97 percent.21 This difference is
substantial in comparison to the aggregate increase in the wagebill increased of 4.2 percent during
1995-2000.
       Columns (4)-(6) of Table 2 present intensive margin effects, estimating (4) using the change in
log wagebill as the dependent variable and sequentially adding controls. Although the shock effects
are unexpectedly positive, none is significantly distinguishable from zero, and the magnitudes are
very small. For example, ^E = 0.0882 in column (6) implies that the wagebill for a firm facing the
mean EU5 shock of 0.029 would increase by 0.26 percent in comparison to a firm facing zero shock.
The lack of intensive-margin effect during this time period is not surprising, given the extreme
rigidities in the Portuguese labor market, inhibiting firms from adjusting employment, wages, or
hours. The results in Table 2 suggest that firms facing import competition in the EU5 had little
recourse but to shut down, leading to small but statistically identifiable declines in firm survival
rates.
       This situation is reversed in Table 3; we find small and statistically insignificant extensive-
margin effects of EU5 shocks on Portuguese firm survival, but significant negative effects on the
change in log wagebill among surviving firms. These intensive-margin effects are very robust to
changing the set of controls across columns (4)-(6). The estimate ^E = -0.153 in column (6)
implies that the wagebill for a firm facing the mean EU5 shock of 0.078 would decrease by 1.19
percent in comparison to a firm facing zero shock. This is a nontrivial effect, accounting for 9.3
percent of the realized decline in aggregate wagebill during 2000-2007. An alternative means of
evaluating the magnitude of the effect accounts for potential correlation between the shocks and
initial firm wagebill; implied effects may be larger if shocks are more incident upon initially larger
firms. We take the predicted change in wagebill due to the EU5 shock for each firm, sum across
firms, and compare to the total initial wagebill across all firms.22 This procedure implies that
the EU5 shock reduced the aggregate wagebill by 1.31 percent due to wagebill reductions among
surviving firms. Both approaches imply important effects of Chinese import competition in EU5
markets on the wagebilll for Portuguese firms. As in the earlier period, Chinese competition in
Portugal has minimal effects on Portuguese firms employment at the extensive or intensive margin.

4.2       Channels of Adjustment
The results thus far show that while Chinese imports to Portugal seem to have had little effect on
employment outcomes for Portuguese firms, increased import competition in EU5 markets drove
important declines in the wagebill for Portuguese firms, particularly among surviving firms in the
2000-2007 period. Given the stringent regulations in the Portuguese labor force, how were firms
  21
       To be precise, we calculate       (^ Xi ) · ^c · F CSit
                                                            c
                                                               · wagebillit0 /            wagebillit0
                                     i                                                i
  22
       To be precise, we calculate            ^ ·       c
                                                               - 1) · wagebillit0 /
                                     i (exp(c       F CSit )                              i   wagebillit0 .



                                                                  13
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                    Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                           ancio


able to adjust their wagebill? Tables 4 and 5 decompose the intensive-margin wagebill effects into
three channels: employment, average hours per worker, and average hourly wage. Because the
wagebill is the product of these three channels, the change in log employment is the sum of the
change in log of each channel. Therefore, the regression coefficient estimates presented in columns
(2)-(4) in Tables 4 and 5 precisely sum to the corresponding wagebill coefficients in column (1).
   We find minimal adjustment along any of these margins in 1995-2000 (Table 4). This is con-
sistent with the lack of significant overall wagebill effects during this time period. In Table 5,
however, we see that the 2000-2007 wagebill effects of import shocks in the EU5 are driven entirely
                                              E on the change in log wagebill (column (1)) and
by declines in employment. The effects of F CSit
employment (column (2)) are nearly identical. This finding is consistent with the rigidity of hours
and wages in the Portuguese labor market, but raises the question of how firms were able to ad-
just employment in the face of rising trade competition given the significant barriers to laying off
workers in Portugal.
   Recall from Section 2 and Figures 2 and 3 that labor market reforms in the early 2000s led to an
increase in the share of temporary worker, particularly fixed-term contract workers, who lack many
of the employment protections afforded to regular workers. Starting in 2000, the QP data provide
information on contract type, allowing us to further decompose the 2000-2007 employment effect
into components driven by changes in employment for permanent workers and temporary workers.
In order to implement a proper decomposition, we switch from the change in log employment to
the proportional change in employment, allowing us to take advantage of the fact that overall
employment is the sum of permanent and temporary employment.

 employmentit1 - employmentit0   permanentit1 - permanentit0   temporaryit1 - temporaryit0
                               =                             +
        employmentit0                  employmentit0                 employmentit0
                                                                                        (7)
Column (1) of Table 6 shows how the proportional change in employment responded to Chinese
import shocks, with similar results to the change in log employment in column (2) of Table 5.
Columns (2) and (3) of Table 6 decompose this effect into those driven by changes in permanent
and temporary employment, showing that the employment effects of EU5 shocks were driven almost
entirely by declines in temporary employment. The temporary employment coefficient accounts for
93 percent of the overall employment coefficient.
   These findings suggest an important role for labor market policies in driving Portuguese firms'
responses to changing import competition. In the 1995-2000 period, when firms had minimal
ability to adjust any dimension of their workforce, they responded to import competition primarily
by shutting down the firm. After the labor market reforms of the early 2000s gave firms more
flexibility in hiring temporary workers, the survival margin became much less important, and firms
primarily responded by adjusting the employment of temporary workers rather than exiting the
market entirely.


                                                14
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                    Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                           ancio


    The preceding results are all robust to a variety of alternative choices regarding the empirical
specification and firm sample. In Appendix B.2 we present alternative extensive-margin analyses
using linear probability models rather than the Probit models shown in the main text. Appendix
B.3 presents Tobit models jointly estimating the extensive and intensive margin effects of Chinese
import competition. Finally, in Appendix B.4, we consider a restricted sample of firms, keeping
only those with strictly positive initial sales in both Portugal and the EU5. This restriction avoids
comparisons between exporters and non-exporters that appear in the broader sample in our main
analysis. In all cases, the estimates are quantitatively similar and the qualitative conclusions
discussed here are confirmed.


5    Conclusion
Our findings make clear that competition from Chinese trade had a substantial effect on employment-
related outcomes for Portuguese firms. Yet, that competition was most important not in the Por-
tuguese market itself, but in Western European export markets. This conclusion is consistent with
the findings of Cabral et al. (2018) and supports the interpretation proposed by Dauth et al. (2014)
that Chinese competition in Germany primarily displaced other intermediate input suppliers (such
as those in Portugal) rather than competing directly with German firms.
    Our firm-level design also allows us to document the importance of Portugal's stringent labor
market regulations in determining the margins firms had available to adjust to these shocks. In our
earlier sample period (1995-2000), firms primarily responded to competition by exiting the market,
since reducing employment, hours, or wages was extremely costly. Over time, however, Portuguese
firms were able to take advantage of temporary labor contracts to avoid some of these adjustment
costs. In our later sample period (2000-2007), when temporary contracts were more prevalent, firms
responded to competition by reducing temporary employment, rather than by exiting the market.
    In its struggles to contend with the China shock, Portugal likely had much in common with
other nations on the European periphery. We expect the effects that we document here in the Por-
tuguese context are also informative regarding those in nations like Greece, Italy, and Spain, where
clusters of relatively labor-intensive manufacturing industries operating under inflexible labor mar-
ket regimes faced a wave of low-cost competition in their traditional European export markets. As
the China shock hit these economies, it drove unemployment up and exports down. The worsening
budget deficits and current account deficits that emerged in the aftermath of these shocks made
peripheral Europe all the more vulnerable to the crisis of investor confidence that arrived in the
wake of the global financial crisis. While the European sovereign debt crisis certainly cannot be
blamed on China, there is little doubt that the combination of the China shock and inflexible labor
markets were a contributing factor.




                                                 15
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                   Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                          ancio


References
Ashournia, D., Munch, J., and Nguyen, D. (2014). The impact of chinese import penetration on
  danish firms and workers. IZA Discussion Papers, (8166).

Autor, D., Dorn, D., and Hanson, G. (2013). The china syndrome: Local labor market effects of
 import competition in the united states. American Economic Review, 103(6).

Autor, D. H., Dorn, D., and Hanson, G. H. (2016). The china shock: Learning from labor-market
 adjustment to large changes in trade. Annual Review of Economics, 8(1):205­240.

Balsvik, R., Jensen, S., and Salvanes, K. (2015). Made in china, sold in norway: Local labor market
  effects of an import shock. Journal of Public Economics, 127:137­144.

Blanchard, O. (2007). Adjustment within the euro: The difficult case of portugal. Portuguese
  Economic Journal, 6(1):1­21.

Bloom, N., Handley, K., Kurman, A., and Luck, P. (2019). The impact of chinese trade on us
  employment: The good, the bad and the apocryphal. Unpublished.

Bover, O., Garc´
               ia-Perea, P., and Portugal, P. (2000). Labour market outliers: Lessons from portugal
  and spain. Economic Policy, 15(31):380­428.

Branstetter, L. and Lardy, N. R. (2008). China's embrace of globalization. In Brandt, L. and
  Rawski, T. G., editors, China's Great Economic Transformation, pages 633­682. Cambridge
  University Press.

Cabral, S. and Esteves, P. (2006). Portuguese export market shares: An analysis by selected
  geographical and product markets. Economic Bulletin, Summer:1­18.

Cabral, S., Martins, P. S., Pereira dos Santos, J., Tavares, M., et al. (2018). Collateral damage?
  labour market effects of competing with china ­ at home and abroad. IZA Discussion Papers,
  (11790).

Cardoso, D. and Branco, R. (2017). Labour market reforms and the crisis in portugal: No change,
  u-turn or new departure? IPRI-NOVA Working Paper, 56:2017.

Centeno, M. and Novo, A.  ´ A. (2012). Excess worker turnover and fixed-term contracts: Causal
  evidence in a two-tier system. Labour Economics, 19:320­328.

Corkhill, D. (2002). Development of the Portuguese Economy: A Case of Europeanization. Rout-
  ledge.

Dauth, W., Findeisen, S., and Suedekum, J. (2014). The rise of the east and the far east: German
 labor markets and trade integration. Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(6):1643­
 1675.

Dauth, W., Findeisen, S., and Suedekum, J. (2017). Trade and manufacturing jobs in germany.
 American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 107(5):337­342.



                                                16
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                   Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                          ancio


Dauth, W., Findeisen, S., and Suedekum, J. (2018). Adjusting to globalization in germany. Un-
 published.
Donoso, V., Mart´in, V., and Minondo, A. (2015). Do differences in the exposure to chinese imports
 lead to differences in local labour market outcomes? an analysis for spanish provinces. Regional
 Studies, 49(10):1746­1764.
Feenstra, R. C., Ma, H., and Xu, Y. (2017). Us exports and employment. NBER Working Paper,
  (24056).
Fl¨
  uckiger, M. and Ludwig, M. (2015). Chinese export competition, declining exports and ad-
  justments at the industry and regional level in europe. Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue
  canadienne d'´
               economique, 48(3):1120­1151.
Hakkala, K. N. and Huttunen, K. (2016). Worker-level consequences of import shocks. IZA Dis-
 cussion Papers, (10033).
Malgouyres, C. (2017). The impact of chinese import competition on the local structure of employ-
 ment and wages: Evidence from france. Journal of Regional Science, 57(3):411­441.
Martins, P. S. (2009). Dismissals for cause: The difference that just eight paragraphs can make.
 Journal of Labor Economics, 27(2):257­279.
Martins, P. S. (2016). Should the maximum duration of fixed-term contracts increase in recessions?
 evidence from a law reform. IZA Discussion Paper, (10206).
Mion, G. and Zhu, L. (2013). Import competition from and offshoring to china: A curse or blessing
 for firms? Journal of International Economics, 89(1):202­215.
OECD (1994). Implementing the OECD jobs strategy: Lessons from member countries' experience.
OECD (1999). OECD Employment Outlook 1999.
OECD (2004). OECD Employment Outlook 2004.
Pereira, T. (2016). The effect of developing countries' competition on regional labour markets in
  portugal. GEE Papers, (0058).
Portugal, P. and Varej~
                      ao, J. (2009). Why do firms use fixed-term contracts?
Stock, J. H. and Yogo, M. (2005). Testing for weak instruments in linear iv regression. In Andrews,
  D. W. K. and Stock, J. H., editors, Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays
  in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, pages 80­108. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Utar, H. (2014). When the floodgates open: "northern" firms' response to removal of trade quotas
  on chinese goods. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(4):226­250.
Van Beveren, I., Bernard, A. B., and Vandenbussche, H. (2012). Concording eu trade and produc-
  tion data over time. NBER Working Paper, (18604).
Varej~ao, J. and Portugal, P. (2004). Matching Workers to Jobs in the Fast Lane: The operation of
  fixed-term contracts. Banco de Portugal, Economic Research Department.

                                                17
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                            Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                   ancio



                       Figure 1: Strictness of Employment Protection, 1995-2007




Source: OECD index of employment restrictions for individual and collective dismissals (regular contracts) from the
OECD Indicators of Employment Protection Legislation.




                                                        18
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                         Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                ancio



                  Figure 2: Share of Temporary Employment Contracts, 1995-2007




The figure plots temporary employment contracts' share of total dependent contracts for Portugal and the EU28
between 1995 and 2007 using data from the OECD annual Labour Force Statistics program.




                                                     19
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                         Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                ancio



                         Figure 3: Share of Fixed-Term Contracts, 1998-2007




The figure plots the fixed-term contracts share of the total number of employees for Portugal and EU15 between
the second quarter 1998 and 2007 for individuals between 20 and 64 years of age, using EUROSTAT employment
statistics data.




                                                     20
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                            Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                   ancio



                     Figure 4: Portuguese Manufacturing Employment, 1995-2007




Authors' calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal. Manufacturing employment (solid blue line) is measured in
thousands on the left axis, while manufacturing's share of total employment (dashed red line) is on the right axis.
The sample includes mainland Portugal, excluding Azores and Madeira islands. Manufacturing employment includes
employees working in industries 1500 - 3699 (ISIC rev2.1).




                                                        21
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                              Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                     ancio



                        Figure 5: Portuguese Manufacturing Exports, 1995-2007




Authors' calculations based on Com´
                                  ercio Internacional data. Manufacturing exports (solid blue line) are measured
in billions of euros on the left axis, while manufacturing's share of total exports (red dashed line), is measured on
the right axis. Manufacturing exports include products with 2-digit Combined Nomenclature (CN) codes between 29
and 96.




                                                         22
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                         Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                ancio



                               Figure 6: China Import Share,1995-2007




Authors' calculations based on EUROSTAT trade data. The figure plots China share of imports in Portugal and
in EU5 (Spain, France, Italy, Germany, and the United Kingdom). Manufacturing imports include products with
2-digit Combined Nomenclature (CN) codes between 29 and 96.




                                                    23
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                              Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                     ancio



                                        Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                                 1995-2000                 2000-2007
                                                              mean std. dev.            mean std. dev.
                                                               (1)      (2)              (3)      (4)
        Firm Outcomes
          Survival indicator                                   0.905     0.293           0.809      0.393
           ln(wagebill)                                        0.042     0.519          -0.128      0.656
           ln(employment)                                     -0.062     0.493          -0.181      0.629
           ln(hours per worker)                                0.149     0.185           0.037      0.190
           ln(hourly wage)                                    -0.045     0.093          0.016       0.095

        Firm-level China Shocks and Instruments
          Shock in Portugal (F CS P )                         0.142      1.562          0.121       0.597
          Shock in EU5 (F CS E )                              0.029      0.140          0.078       0.265
          Instrument in Portugal (IV F SC P )                 0.251      0.661          0.815       1.160
          Instrument in EU5 (IV F SC E )                      0.029      0.127          0.105       0.356

        Controls (beginning of period)
          Age                                                 27.07     19.32          26.87       19.39
          Age-squared                                         1105.8    1965.9         1098.0      2199.0
          Share College                                       0.017      0.045         0.026       0.060
          Sales / 1M (2007 euros)                              7.72      33.01          7.32       41.65
          Establishments                                      1.581     3.652          1.481       3.472

"Firm Outcomes" and "Firm-level China Shocks and Instruments" refer to changes during 1995-2000 in columns (1)
and (2) and during 2000-2007 in columns (3) and (4). "Controls" refer to levels in the beginning of each period, i.e.
1995 in columns (1) and (2) and 2000 in columns (3) and (4). The 1995-2000 sample has 5,958 firm observations,
except the change in log outcomes, which only cover the 5,391 firms surviving until 2000. The 2000-2007 sample has
8,021 firm observations, except the change in log outcomes, which only cover the 6,487 firms surviving until 2007.




                                                         24
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                               Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                      ancio



                        Table 2: Wagebill Effects 1995-2000, IV-Probit and IV

                                  Extensive Margin (IV-Probit)                    Intensive Margin   (IV)
                                     (1)       (2)        (3)                   (4)          (5)          (6)
    Shock in Portugal             0.444     0.507      0.0358                  0.161       0.108      0.00626
                                  (0.225) (0.163)      (0.381)                (0.132)     (0.127)      (0.103)
    Shock in EU5                   -0.526    -0.434  -0.976                    0.145       0.137        0.0882
                                  (0.427) (0.407)      (0.315)                (0.136)     (0.128)      (0.116)
    Age/1K                                   -1.962     -2.725                          -7.286       -7.137
                                            (2.190)    (2.742)                            (0.754)      (0.708)
    Age-squared/10K                           0.148      0.196                           0.336        0.334
                                            (0.228)    (0.308)                           (0.0717)     (0.0671)
    Share College                           0.00952     -0.363                            0.308          0.255
                                            (0.412)    (0.507)                            (0.164)      (0.157)
    Sales/1B                                3.951     5.521                                -0.157       -0.139
                                            (1.889)    (1.604)                            (0.234)      (0.218)
    Establishments                           0.0171   0.0353                            -0.000757    0.000510
                                           (0.0115) (0.0156)                            (0.00202)    (0.00189)
    Constant                      0.967      0.820    1.595                   0.0136     0.179         -0.0579
                                  (0.442) (0.426)      (0.495)               (0.0227) (0.0272)         (0.128)
    Industry FE (10)                 No        No         Yes                   No           No           Yes
    Region FE (5)                    No        No         Yes                   No           No           Yes
    Observations                    5958      5958       5958                  5391         5391         5391
    Exogeneity Test p-value       0.00421 0.00162      0.0154                  0.343        0.446       0.746
    First-stage F                                                              3.596       3.396         4.469

This table measures the effects of increased Chinese import share in Portugal and the EU5 on the survival of
Portuguese manufacturing firms (columns (1)-(3)) and the change in wagebill for surviving firms (columns (4)-(5))
for the time period 1995-2000. The dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is an indicator for firm survival, while
in columns (4)-(6) it is the change in log wagebill. The Chinese import competition shocks in Portugal and the
EU5 are defined in equations (2) and (3). We instrument for these shocks using measures based on Chinese import
competition in the US, defined in equations (5) and (6). Corresponding Probit and OLS results are available in
                                                                                   
Appendix Table A1. Standard errors in parentheses:      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                         25
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                               Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                      ancio



                        Table 3: Wagebill Effects 2000-2007, IV-Probit and IV

                                  Extensive Margin (IV-Probit)                      Intensive Margin   (IV)
                                    (1)         (2)        (3)                   (4)           (5)          (6)
  Shock in Portugal               -0.341      -0.242     -0.335                -0.0674       -0.124       0.0587
                                  (0.207)    (0.214)    (0.226)                (0.108)      (0.108)       (0.118)
  Shock in EU5                   0.00763    -0.0269     0.0600                -0.154 -0.155             -0.153
                                 (0.0881) (0.0887)    (0.0927)                (0.0462) (0.0459)         (0.0469)
  Age/1K                                       2.102     1.997                            -8.307        -8.465
                                             (1.456)    (1.457)                             (0.767)       (0.756)
  Age-squared/10K                           -0.280     -0.272                              0.338         0.344
                                             (0.115)    (0.115)                            (0.0656)     (0.0646)
  Share College                               0.169    -0.0730                             0.606         0.621
                                             (0.272)    (0.279)                             (0.145)       (0.150)
  Sales/1B                                  5.702     5.854                                  0.179         0.273
                                             (1.309)    (1.320)                             (0.181)       (0.179)
  Establishments                             0.0108     0.0126                             0.00197       0.00171
                                           (0.00755) (0.00766)                            (0.00222)    (0.00220)
  Constant                       0.893 0.818            0.427                 -0.108 0.0652              -0.270
                                 (0.0180) (0.0349)      (0.212)               (0.0156) (0.0207)           (0.117)
  Industry FE (10)                  No          No        Yes                    No            No           Yes
  Region FE (5)                     No          No        Yes                    No            No           Yes
  Observations                     8021        8021       8021                  6487          6487         6487
  Exogeneity Test p-value         0.0201     0.0873     0.0399                  0.211        0.135         0.310
  First-stage F                                                                 48.00        47.69         38.46

This table measures the effects of increased Chinese import share in Portugal and the EU5 on the survival of
Portuguese manufacturing firms (columns (1)-(3)) and the change in wagebill for surviving firms (columns (4)-(5))
for the time period 2000-2007. The dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is an indicator for firm survival, while
in columns (4)-(6) it is the change in log wagebill. The Chinese import competition shocks in Portugal and the
EU5 are defined in equations (2) and (3). We instrument for these shocks using measures based on Chinese import
competition in the US, defined in equations (5) and (6). Corresponding Probit and OLS results are available in
                                                                                   
Appendix Table A2. Standard errors in parentheses:      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                         26
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                                   Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                          ancio



                        Table 4: Intensive Margin Decomposition 1995-2000, IV

                                        Wagebill        Employment          Hours Per Worker   Hourly Wage
                                             (1)              (2)                    (3)             (4)
      Shock in Portugal                  0.00626           0.0590                -0.0420          -0.0107
                                          (0.103)         (0.0996)               (0.0236)        (0.0377)
      Shock in EU5                         0.0882           0.101                 -0.0382         0.0252
                                          (0.116)          (0.112)               (0.0265)        (0.0425)
      Age/1K                            -7.137           -7.248                    0.136          -0.0250
                                          (0.708)          (0.682)                (0.161)         (0.258)
      Age-squared/10K                    0.334            0.345                  -0.00812        -0.00312
                                         (0.0671)         (0.0646)               (0.0153)        (0.0245)
      Share College                         0.255         0.435                  0.116           -0.296
                                          (0.157)          (0.152)               (0.0359)        (0.0574)
      Sales/1B                             -0.139          -0.0945                -0.0615          0.0167
                                          (0.218)          (0.210)               (0.0496)        (0.0795)
      Establishments                    0.000510         0.000690               -0.000387        0.000207
                                        (0.00189)        (0.00182)             (0.000432)       (0.000691)
      Constant                            -0.0579           -0.135                 0.0271         0.0496
                                          (0.128)          (0.124)               (0.0293)        (0.0469)
      Industry FE (10)                       Yes              Yes                    Yes             Yes
      Region FE (5)                          Yes              Yes                    Yes             Yes
      Observations                          5391             5391                   5391            5391
      Exogeneity Test p-value               0.746            0.612                 0.0698           0.955
      First-stage F                         4.469            4.469                  4.469           4.469

This table decomposes the wagebill effects in column (6) of Table 2 into employment, hours, and hourly wage
channels. Column (1) replicates column (6) of Table 2. Corresponding OLS results are available in Appendix Table
                                                                   
A3. Standard errors in parentheses      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                             27
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                                   Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                          ancio



                        Table 5: Intensive Margin Decomposition 2000-2007, IV

                                        Wagebill        Employment          Hours Per Worker   Hourly Wage
                                            (1)               (2)                    (3)            (4)
      Shock in Portugal                   0.0587           0.0589                0.00354         -0.00373
                                          (0.118)          (0.113)               (0.0174)        (0.0348)
      Shock in EU5                      -0.153           -0.156                   0.00470        -0.00131
                                         (0.0469)         (0.0449)              (0.00690)        (0.0138)
      Age/1K                            -8.465           -8.643                   -0.0720          0.250
                                          (0.756)          (0.725)                (0.111)         (0.223)
      Age-squared/10K                    0.344            0.353                  -0.00473        -0.00420
                                         (0.0646)         (0.0619)              (0.00951)        (0.0190)
      Share College                      0.621            0.638                  -0.0365          0.0195
                                          (0.150)          (0.144)               (0.0221)        (0.0442)
      Sales/1B                             0.273           0.0688                 -0.0217        0.226
                                          (0.179)          (0.172)               (0.0263)        (0.0527)
      Establishments                     0.00171          0.00148               -0.000391        0.000624
                                        (0.00220)        (0.00211)             (0.000324)       (0.000647)
      Constant                           -0.270             -0.111              -0.0394          -0.120
                                          (0.117)          (0.113)               (0.0173)        (0.0346)
      Industry FE (10)                      Yes               Yes                   Yes             Yes
      Region FE (5)                         Yes               Yes                   Yes             Yes
      Observations                         6487              6487                   6487           6487
      Exogeneity Test p-value              0.310             0.243                 0.232           0.851
      First-stage F                        38.46             38.46                 38.46           38.46

This table decomposes the wagebill effects in column (6) of Table 3 into employment, hours, and hourly wage
channels. Column (1) replicates column (6) of Table 3. Corresponding OLS results are available in Appendix Table
                                                                   
A4. Standard errors in parentheses      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                             28
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                                      Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                             ancio



                    Table 6: Permanent vs. Temporary Employment 2000-2007, IV


                                  Overall Employment                 Permanent Employment      Temporary Employment
                                           (1)                                 (2)                        (3)
 Shock in Portugal                       0.0607                              0.0433                    0.0175
                                         (0.103)                            (0.0892)                  (0.0566)
 Shock in EU5                          -0.0867                              -0.00601                -0.0807
                                        (0.0409)                            (0.0354)                  (0.0224)
 Age/1K                                -7.488                              -5.554                    -1.934
                                         (0.661)                             (0.571)                   (0.362)
 Age-squared/10K                        0.319                               0.251                     0.0685
                                        (0.0564)                            (0.0487)                  (0.0309)
 Share College                          1.077                               1.035                      0.0416
                                         (0.131)                             (0.113)                  (0.0719)
 Sales/1B                                0.0265                               0.140                     -0.114
                                         (0.156)                             (0.135)                  (0.0856)
 Establishments                        -0.000337                           0.000407                  -0.000744
                                       (0.00192)                           (0.00166)                 (0.00105)
 Constant                                0.0738                              -0.0744                  0.148
                                         (0.103)                            (0.0886)                  (0.0562)
 Industry FE (10)                          Yes                                 Yes                        Yes
 Region FE (5)                             Yes                                 Yes                        Yes
 Observations                             6475                                6475                       6475
 Exogeneity Test p-value                  0.810                               0.526                    0.0541
 First-stage F                            38.27                               38.27                      38.27

This table presents a decomposition of the overall employment effects seen in column (2) of Table 5 into margins
due to permanent employment and temporary employment. The dependent variables in this table are expressed in
proportional changes, rather than changes in logs, in order to admit an additive decomposition of overall employment
into permanent and temporary components.             Corresponding OLS results are available in Appendix Table A5.
                                                                
Standard errors in parentheses:      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,        p < 0.01




                                                                29
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                                            Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                                   ancio


Online Appendices
(Not for publication)

A Data Appendix                                                                                                                                                          31
  A.1 Data Sources . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   31
  A.2 Firm Sample . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   32
  A.3 Firm Age . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   32
  A.4 Worker Sample . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   32
  A.5 Interpolation . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   32
  A.6 Matching Across Datasets      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   32
  A.7 Deflating . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   33

B Supplementary Results                                                                                                                                                  34
  B.1 Probit and OLS Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   34
  B.2 Linear Probability Model Extensive Margin Results . .                                          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   39
  B.3 Tobit Wagebill Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   40
  B.4 Results for Firms With Sales in Portugal and the EU5                                           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   42




                                                                30
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                     Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                            ancio


A     Data Appendix
A.1    Data Sources
The Quadros de Pessoal (QP) are based upon a mandatory survey submitted annually to the
Portuguese Ministry of Employment and Social Security by firms with at least one employee. Firms
disclose their responses to the QP survey to their employees and labor unions, allowing workers to
ensure the accuracy of the data. Firms failing to report worker information must pay a fine between
e200 and e1,500. The full sample includes an average of 227,000 firms and 2 million individuals
each year, covering nearly all firms and employees in the Portuguese private sector. QP data are
available from 1986 until 2012, excluding 1999 and 2001. During our sample period of 1995-2007.
the reference month regarding the employee data is October of each year. In each year, firms
report their entry year, location, main industry, number of employees, number of establishments,
initial capital stock, ownership structure, and sales. At the worker level, the database contains
information on gender, age, education, occupation, type of contract, working hours, and earnings
for the month of October. Individuals and firms each appear with a unique identifier, making it
possible to track firms and workers over time and to track workers across firms.
    The Inqu´ erito Anual `
                          a Produ¸c~
                                   ao Industrial (IAPI) is a mandatory survey, collected by Statistics
Portugal (Instituto Nacional de Estatistica ­ INE). This database collects annual information on
outputs, inputs, and energy sources. The survey targets the largest firms operating in the mining
and quarrying, manufacturing, and electricity, gas, and water industries. These firms account for
approximately 90 percent of the total sales of each 5-digit industry code, using Classifica¸  c~
                                                                                               ao das
Actividade Econ´  omicas (CAE) Revision 2 and Revision 2.1. The survey also includes all firms with
more than 20 employees, as long as the sample of firms is not too large (less than 17,000 firms
per year). If the number of firms that account for 90 percent of the total sales in an industry is
less than 5, this industry is not surveyed, to ensure confidentiality. The product-level information
includes sales and production by good, reported using a 12-digit PRODCOM classification, with
approximately 5,300 different products. The IAPI data are available for the period between 1992
and 2014.
    Com´ ercio Internacional (CI) is a firm-level international trade database, collected by Statistics
Portugal (INE). This database records individual trade transactions on a monthly basis between
1990 and 2014. We collapse these transactions to the firm, trading partner country, product, year
level. In order to appear in the dataset, a firm's intra-EU trade must exceed specified import
and export value thresholds. For example, in 2010, firms were obliged to report their intra-EU
transactions the their volume of exports and imports in the previous year or current year were
higher than e250,000 and e300,000, respectively. Throughout the sample period, the thresholds
were set to ensure that the CI database overall includes at least 97 percent of intra-EU exports and
95 percent of intra-EU imports.
    To compute China's import share in the EU5 (France, Spain, Italy, U.K. and Germany) and
in the U.S., we use EUROSTAT and UN Comtrade databases, respectively. EUROSTAT provides
yearly trade flows for each 8-digit Combined Nomenclature (CN) product for each EU member and
its trading partners. Comtrade provides similar information for the U.S. at the 6-digit Harmonized
System (HS) product level. We use EUROSTAT rather than Comtrade for the EU5 because
EUROSTAT total imports and exports matched those provided by each EU5 country's Statistics
Office.


                                                  31
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                     Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                            ancio


A.2    Firm Sample
We examine two samples of firms - one focused on firms active in 1995 and the other focused on
firms active in 2000. We include firms located in mainland Portugal (omitting those in the Azores
and Madeira islands) that appear both in QP and IAPI in either 1995 or 2000. Of course, many
firms appear in both time periods, so there is quite a bit of overlap between the two samples.
    Some firms merge or acquire other firms, while others spin off a portion of their activities. We
identify a firm as merged, acquired, or involved in a spin-off if more than 25 employees and more
than 40 percent of its workforce moves to another firm. When this happens, we merge the firms
and treat them as if they were a single firm throughout the relevant period. This procedure leads
us to construct 263 merged firms during our sample period.

A.3    Firm Age
The QP data record the year of firm entry, which we use to calculate the firm age. In cases where
the firm employs workers whose firm accession year is prior to the recorded firm entry year, we use
the earlier year for our measure of firm entry.

A.4    Worker Sample
The QP data include all employees working in the private sector, excluding self-employed workers.
We include all workers with the exception of a small number of fisherman who report positive
earnings but zero hours.

A.5    Interpolation
In spite of the fines described above, firms occasionally fail to report worker information. This
occurs in 14.4 percent (1995), 8.8 percent (2000), and 1.7 percent (2007) of firm observations. In
these cases, we linearly interpolate the firm's employment and wagebill between the adjacent years.
    When calculating firm wagebill, our main analysis interpolates wages and hours for a small
number of employees reporting zero earnings and zero hours. If these workers are furloughed, we
interpolate their annual earnings, subtracting two months' pay under the assumption that firms
delay furloughed workers' wages by the maximum legal limit of two months. If workers are on
leave, we assume that their full salary is paid by the government, and interpolate their full wages.
In interpolating these wages, we use similar workers in the same firm when available, otherwise we
interpolate using similar workers in the same industry.

A.6    Matching Across Datasets
We merge firm-level workforce information from QP with firm product-level information from IAPI
and trade information from CI using a concordance between the firm identifiers in each dataset
provided by INE. Of the firms in IAPI, in 1995 or 2000 (our sample restriction) we match 93.5
percent (1995) and 93.0 percent (2000) to information in QP. This process generates a set of 9,261
unique firms: 5,958 in 1995 and 8,021 in 2000, with many firms appearing in both time periods.
    We also match product codes across PRODCOM, CI, EUROSTAT and UN Comtrade. We do so
using concordance tables from the EUROSTAT RAMON Metadata Server and aggregate products
as necessary to ensure consistent definitions across years and datasets, following a procedure similar

                                                 32
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                   Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                          ancio


to that in Van Beveren et al. (2012). This process yields a classification with 2,512 uniquely and
consistently identified products across datasets. This classification and related concordances are
available upon request.

A.7    Deflating
All monetary values in the paper are quoted in year 2007 Euros, deflated using the Consumer Price
Index from INE.




                                               33
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                             Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                    ancio


B     Supplementary Results
B.1     Probit and OLS Results
The following tables present Probit and OLS results corresponding to the instrumental variables
results shown in the main text. Note that the qualitative conclusions are quite similar to those
presented in the main text.

                              Table A1: Wagebill Effects 1995-2000, Probit and OLS

                                       Extensive Margin    (Probit)         Intensive Margin (OLS)
                                        (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)
      Shock in Portugal              0.0611       0.0680     0.0418     0.00254      0.00227   0.00187
                                    (0.0493) (0.0500)       (0.0488)   (0.00432) (0.00426) (0.00422)
      Shock in EU5                    -0.200      -0.208      -0.203     0.0269      0.00587    0.0105
                                     (0.142)     (0.142)     (0.145)    (0.0521)    (0.0513)   (0.0512)
      Age/1K                                      -2.406      -2.564                -7.288 -7.154
                                                 (2.688)     (2.777)                 (0.713)    (0.708)
      Age-squared/10K                              0.180      0.200                  0.332     0.334
                                                 (0.298)     (0.313)                (0.0677)   (0.0672)
      Share College                              -0.0599      -0.375                  0.292      0.256
                                                 (0.514)     (0.498)                 (0.155)    (0.155)
      Sales/1B                                  5.252       5.398                     -0.214     -0.138
                                                 (1.577)     (1.584)                 (0.211)    (0.209)
      Establishments                            0.0236      0.0364                  -0.00123 0.000456
                                                (0.0140)    (0.0158)               (0.00186) (0.00187)
      Constant                      1.309       1.291       1.575      0.0404        0.200      -0.0552
                                    (0.0235) (0.0533)        (0.497)   (0.00726) (0.0152)       (0.129)
      Industry FE (10)                  No          No         Yes         No           No        Yes
      Region FE (5)                     No          No         Yes         No           No        Yes
      (Pseudo) R-squared            0.00108 0.00688          0.0216    0.000113       0.0316    0.0531
      Observations                     5958        5958        5958       5391         5391       5391

                                                                                                               
Probit and OLS results corresponding to IV-Probit and IV results in Table 2. Standard errors in parentheses:
                           
p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                           34
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                          Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                 ancio



                              Table A2: Wagebill Effects 2000-2007, Probit and OLS

                                      Extensive Margin (Probit)           Intensive Margin (OLS)
                                      (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)
    Shock in Portugal               0.0223      0.0253    0.0171      0.0138       0.0176     0.0165
                                  (0.0296) (0.0300)      (0.0299)    (0.0130)     (0.0128)   (0.0128)
    Shock in EU5                  -0.149 -0.158          -0.0992    -0.106 -0.114 -0.0996
                                  (0.0572) (0.0573)      (0.0589)    (0.0314)     (0.0310)   (0.0313)
    Age/1K                                       1.710     1.621                 -8.474     -8.413
                                                (1.442)   (1.459)                  (0.748)    (0.748)
    Age-squared/10K                            -0.262    -0.258                   0.349      0.342
                                                (0.115)   (0.116)                 (0.0645)   (0.0643)
    Share College                                0.182   -0.00910                 0.625      0.600
                                                (0.274)   (0.280)                  (0.143)    (0.146)
    Sales/1B                                   6.019     6.269                      0.195      0.264
                                                (1.320)   (1.334)                  (0.179)    (0.178)
    Establishments                              0.0116    0.0134                  0.00252    0.00169
                                              (0.00757) (0.00773)                (0.00218) (0.00218)
    Constant                       0.883       0.813      0.445     -0.122 0.0465            -0.273
                                  (0.0172) (0.0342)       (0.213)   (0.00861) (0.0172)        (0.118)
    Industry FE (10)                  No          No        Yes         No           No         Yes
    Region FE (5)                     No          No        Yes         No           No         Yes
    (Pseudo) R-squared            0.000907     0.00654    0.0137     0.00191       0.0290     0.0443
    Observations                     8021        8021      8021        6487         6487       6487

                                                                                                               
Probit and OLS results corresponding to IV-Probit and IV results in Table 3. Standard errors in parentheses:
                           
p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                      35
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                           Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                  ancio



                      Table A3: Intensive Margin Decomposition 1995-2000, OLS

                                  Wagebill     Employment       Hours Per Worker           Hourly Wage
                                       (1)           (2)                 (3)                      (4)
           Shock in Portugal       0.00187       0.00137             0.000963                -0.000467
                                  (0.00422)     (0.00399)          (0.000764)                (0.00153)
           Shock in EU5              0.0105      0.00892            -0.0219                    0.0234
                                   (0.0512)      (0.0484)           (0.00927)                 (0.0186)
           Age/1K                 -7.154        -7.286                 0.154                   -0.0218
                                    (0.708)       (0.669)             (0.128)                  (0.257)
           Age-squared/10K         0.334         0.345               -0.00813                 -0.00312
                                   (0.0672)      (0.0635)            (0.0121)                 (0.0244)
           Share College             0.256       0.421               0.128                   -0.293
                                    (0.155)       (0.146)            (0.0280)                 (0.0563)
           Sales/1B                  -0.138        -0.125             -0.0364                  0.0230
                                    (0.209)       (0.198)            (0.0379)                 (0.0761)
           Establishments         0.000456      0.000468            -0.000249                0.000237
                                  (0.00187)     (0.00177)          (0.000338)               (0.000679)
           Constant                 -0.0552        -0.131              0.0259                   0.0495
                                    (0.129)       (0.122)            (0.0233)                 (0.0467)
           Industry FE (10)           Yes           Yes                 Yes                      Yes
           Region FE (5)              Yes           Yes                 Yes                      Yes
           (Pseudo) R-squared        0.0531       0.0592              0.0299                    0.0102
           Observations               5391          5391                5391                     5391

                                                                                                                    
OLS results corresponding to IV results in Table 4. Standard errors in parentheses:      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,
p < 0.01




                                                      36
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                           Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                  ancio



                      Table A4: Intensive Margin Decomposition 2000-2007, OLS

                                  Wagebill     Employment        Hours Per Worker          Hourly Wage
                                      (1)            (2)                 (3)                      (4)
           Shock in Portugal        0.0165        0.0164              0.000778               -0.000696
                                  (0.0128)       (0.0123)            (0.00189)               (0.00377)
           Shock in EU5          -0.0996        -0.100                -0.00353                 0.00403
                                  (0.0313)       (0.0300)            (0.00461)               (0.00922)
           Age/1K                 -8.413        -8.590                 -0.0709                  0.248
                                    (0.748)       (0.717)              (0.110)                 (0.220)
           Age-squared/10K         0.342         0.351                -0.00488                -0.00403
                                  (0.0643)       (0.0616)            (0.00947)                (0.0189)
           Share College           0.600         0.617                -0.0357                  0.0193
                                    (0.146)       (0.140)             (0.0216)                (0.0432)
           Sales/1B                  0.264        0.0603               -0.0215                0.226
                                    (0.178)       (0.171)             (0.0263)                (0.0525)
           Establishments          0.00169       0.00147             -0.000409               0.000638
                                 (0.00218)      (0.00209)           (0.000322)              (0.000644)
           Constant                -0.273          -0.113            -0.0390                 -0.120
                                    (0.118)       (0.113)             (0.0173)                (0.0346)
           Industry FE (10)           Yes           Yes                  Yes                     Yes
           Region FE (5)              Yes           Yes                  Yes                     Yes
           (Pseudo) R-squared       0.0443        0.0458              0.00928                  0.0141
           Observations              6487           6487                6487                     6487

                                                                                                                    
OLS results corresponding to IV results in Table 5. Standard errors in parentheses:      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,
p < 0.01




                                                      37
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                           Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                  ancio



                 Table A5: Permanent vs. Temporary Employment 2000-2007, OLS

                         Overall Employment        Permanent Employment           Temporary Employment
                                  (1)                         (2)                            (3)
 Shock in Portugal             0.00660                     0.0115                        -0.00489
                               (0.0112)                  (0.00966)                      (0.00612)
 Shock in EU5                -0.0714                       -0.0309                     -0.0406
                               (0.0273)                   (0.0236)                       (0.0150)
 Age/1K                       -7.431                     -5.527                         -1.905
                                (0.653)                    (0.564)                        (0.358)
 Age-squared/10K               0.316                      0.249                          0.0673
                               (0.0561)                   (0.0485)                       (0.0307)
 Share College                 1.060                      1.031                           0.0285
                                (0.128)                    (0.111)                       (0.0701)
 Sales/1B                       0.0186                      0.137                          -0.119
                                (0.156)                    (0.135)                       (0.0853)
 Establishments               -0.000433                  0.000303                       -0.000735
                              (0.00191)                  (0.00165)                      (0.00104)
 Constant                       0.0730                     -0.0733                       0.146
                                (0.103)                   (0.0887)                       (0.0562)
 Industry FE (10)                 Yes                        Yes                            Yes
 Region FE (5)                    Yes                        Yes                            Yes
 R-squared                      0.0529                      0.0433                        0.0174
 Observations                    6475                        6475                           6475

                                                                                                                    
OLS results corresponding to IV results in Table 6. Standard errors in parentheses:      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,
p < 0.01




                                                      38
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                   Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                          ancio


B.2     Linear Probability Model Extensive Margin Results
The following table shows extensive margin firm-survival analysis using linear probability models
rather than IV-Probit. Note that the qualitative results are very similar to those in the IV-Probit
analyses in Tables 2 and 3.

                Table A6: Extensie Margin Effects - IV Linear Probability Model
                                     1995-2000                          2000-2007
                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)
  Shock in Portugal         0.0658     0.0790     -0.00533     -0.0986     -0.0814       -0.112
                           (0.0676) (0.0709)      (0.0577)    (0.0616)    (0.0614)      (0.0669)
  Shock in EU5             -0.165     -0.159      -0.203      -0.00387    -0.00598       0.0172
                           (0.0677) (0.0697)      (0.0626)    (0.0238)    (0.0237)      (0.0247)
  Age/1K                                -0.315      -0.277                 0.842          0.831
                                       (0.428)     (0.394)                 (0.424)       (0.426)
  Age-squared/10K                      0.0270       0.0231               -0.0811       -0.0786
                                      (0.0416)    (0.0383)                (0.0367)      (0.0368)
  Share College                        0.0268      -0.0286                  0.0983       0.0260
                                      (0.0927)    (0.0878)                (0.0752)      (0.0778)
  Sales/1B                            0.355        0.322                  0.300         0.300
                                       (0.134)     (0.123)                 (0.109)       (0.110)
  Establishments                      0.00191 0.00261                      0.00201     0.00224
                                     (0.00118) (0.00109)                 (0.00131)     (0.00132)
  Constant                 0.900 0.898             0.950      0.821       0.798         0.683
                           (0.0113) (0.0147)      (0.0720) (0.00870) (0.0113)           (0.0625)
  Industry FE (10)            No          No         Yes          No          No           Yes
  Region FE (5)               No          No         Yes          No          No           Yes
  Observations               5958        5958        5958        8021        8021          8021
  Exogeneity Test p-value 0.0114      0.00980      0.00944      0.0240      0.0475       0.0227
  First-stage F              4.323       4.107      5.272       59.38       59.28         50.47
  Standard errors in parentheses
                                
     p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                39
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                              Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                     ancio


B.3      Tobit Wagebill Analysis
The following tables present analyses of the effects of Chinese import competition that simulta-
neously address firm survival and changes among surviving firms. We estimate IV-Tobit models
in Table A7 and standard Tobit models in Table A8. The dependent variable is the wagebill at
the end of the period divided by the wagebill at the beginning of the period. Because all firms
in the relevant sample are active at the beginning of the period, this measure is defined for all
observations. Firms that shut down have a value of zero for this ratio, so we estimate a Tobit
corner-solution model with a truncation point at zero. As shown in the main text, the intensive
and extensive margin effects generally differ, with strong extensive margin effects in 1995-2000 and
strong intensive margin effects in 2000-2007. Because the Tobit model admits a single parameter
for both of these margins, we prefer the more flexible approach taken in the main text.

                        Table A7: Wagebill Effects 1995-2000 and 2000-2007, IV-Tobit

                                                  1995-2000                             2000-2007
                                           (1)         (2)      (3)           (4)           (5)        (6)
    Shock in Portugal                     0.109     0.0740    -0.141        -0.261        -0.275     -0.153
                                        (0.187)     (0.188)  (0.169)        (0.141)       (0.141)   (0.150)
    Shock in EU5                         -0.291      -0.287  -0.341        -0.0920       -0.0976    -0.0515
                                        (0.190)     (0.187)  (0.186)       (0.0546)      (0.0543)  (0.0552)
    Age/1K                                        -10.05 -10.11                         -5.793 -5.986
                                                    (1.133)  (1.158)                      (0.972)   (0.952)
    Age-squared/10K                                0.505     0.506                        0.181     0.192
                                                    (0.110)  (0.112)                     (0.0839)  (0.0822)
    Share College                                  0.856     0.592                       0.925     0.752
                                                    (0.246)  (0.258)                      (0.172)   (0.174)
    Sales/1B                                         0.458    0.352                       0.630    0.699
                                                    (0.353)  (0.360)                      (0.245)   (0.241)
    Establishments                                 0.00118   0.00274                     0.00378   0.00328
                                                  (0.00311) (0.00318)                   (0.00296) (0.00291)
    Constant                           1.015       1.217     1.126         0.789         0.893     0.546
                                       (0.0312)    (0.0390)  (0.211)       (0.0200)      (0.0258)   (0.141)
    Industry FE (10)                      No           No       yes           No            No         yes
    Region FE (5)                         No           No       yes           No            No         yes
    Observations                         5958         5958     5958          8021          8021       8021
    Exogeneity Test p-value              0.227       0.381    0.235         0.0658        0.0500     0.208

This table presents IV-Tobit models in which the dependent variable is the end-of-period wagebill over the
beginning-of-period wagebill. When a firm exits, this ratio is zero, so we estimate models with a truncation point at
0. Corresponding Tobit results (without instrumental variables) appear in Table A8. Standard errors in parentheses:
                              
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                         40
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                            Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                   ancio



                      Table A8: Wagebill Effects 1995-2000 and 2000-2007, Tobit

                                       1995-2000                                2000-2007
                                 (1)         (2)              (3)         (4)        (5)                (6)
     Shock in Portugal        0.00353    0.00360          0.00209       0.0132     0.0173             0.0140
                             (0.00695)  (0.00687)        (0.00685)     (0.0167)  (0.0165)            (0.0165)
     Shock in EU5              -0.0849     -0.112          -0.0809     -0.151    -0.155             -0.115
                              (0.0786)   (0.0777)         (0.0778)     (0.0381)  (0.0378)            (0.0381)
     Age/1K                             -9.963           -10.02                  -6.207             -6.174
                                          (1.120)          (1.116)                (0.935)             (0.933)
     Age-squared/10K                     0.500            0.507                   0.206               0.203
                                          (0.108)          (0.108)               (0.0815)            (0.0811)
     Share College                       0.849            0.630                   0.946              0.786
                                          (0.242)          (0.244)                (0.169)             (0.171)
     Sales/1B                               0.410           0.416                0.679               0.730
                                          (0.336)          (0.335)                (0.240)             (0.238)
     Establishments                      0.00108          0.00333                 0.00459            0.00356
                                        (0.00299)        (0.00302)              (0.00287)           (0.00287)
     Constant                 1.024      1.221            1.118        0.761      0.869              0.549
                              (0.0112)   (0.0236)          (0.204)     (0.0107) (0.0213)              (0.141)
     Industry FE (10)            No          No              Yes          No         No                 Yes
     Region FE (5)               No          No              Yes          No         No                 Yes
     Pseudo R-squared        0.0000976 0.00825              0.0139     0.000815   0.00583             0.0119
     Observations               5958        5958             5958        8021       8021               8021

This table presents Tobit models in which the dependent variable is the end-of-period wagebill over the beginning-
of-period wagebill. When a firm exits, this ratio is zero, so we estimate models with a truncation point at 0.
                                                                                                                   
Corresponding IV-Tobit results appear in Table A7. Standard errors in parentheses:      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,
p < 0.01




                                                       41
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                    Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                           ancio


B.4    Results for Firms With Sales in Portugal and the EU5
A potential concern with the empirical analysis presented in the main text is that we include
firms with no initial exports to the EU5. For these firms, the value of F CSit  E in (3) is zero by

definition, since they are not exposed to the EU5 market. If non-exporters had systematically
different performance than exporters during our sample period, the inclusion of these firms without
exports to the EU5 might confound our results. In order to rule out this possibility, Tables A9
- A13, repeat all of the results in the main text on a restricted set of firms with strictly positive
initial sales in Portugal and the EU5. When comparing outcomes among these firms, all of which
initially sold products in both Portugal and the EU5, we find very similar results to those using
the larger sample in the main text.




                                                 42
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                                      Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                             ancio



                         Table A9: Wagebill Effects 1995-2000, IV-Probit and IV

                                      Extensive Margin (IV-Probit)                      Intensive Margin   (IV)
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)                   (4)           (5)          (6)
   Shock in Portugal                  0.936      1.028        0.708                0.298        0.244          0.165
                                      (0.429)    (0.395)    (0.550)                (0.148)      (0.147)      (0.139)
   Shock in EU5                       -0.980      -0.738   -1.266                  0.366          0.232        0.136
                                      (0.548)    (0.572)    (0.578)                (0.184)      (0.190)      (0.181)
   Age/1K                                         -0.925     -1.207                           -9.005       -8.501
                                                 (3.923)    (4.458)                             (1.376)      (1.364)
   Age-squared/10K                                0.0478    0.0171                             0.420        0.385
                                                 (0.341)    (0.387)                             (0.103)      (0.101)
   Share College                                   0.933     0.662                              0.849        0.803
                                                 (1.012)    (1.209)                             (0.347)      (0.367)
   Sales/1B                                       2.611     2.848                                -0.201       -0.167
                                                 (1.442)    (1.588)                             (0.270)      (0.263)
   Establishments                                 0.0859   0.123                               -0.00480     -0.00287
                                                (0.0558) (0.0623)                             (0.00808)    (0.00784)
   Constant                           1.093      0.880        4.419                -0.0485     0.187         -0.0537
                                      (0.283)    (0.313)    (347.9)               (0.0314) (0.0542)          (0.390)
   Industry FE (10)                      No         No         Yes                   No            No           Yes
   Region FE (5)                         No         No         Yes                   No            No           Yes
   Observations                         1675       1675       1675                  1525          1525         1525
   Exogeneity Test p-value           0.0000887 0.000223 0.000231                   0.0840        0.215         0.520
   First-stage F                                                                    21.89         20.47       22.56

This table measures the effects of increased Chinese import share in Portugal and the EU5 on the survival of
Portuguese manufacturing firms (columns (1)-(3)) and the change in wagebill for surviving firms (columns (4)-(6)),
using the subsample of firms with strictly positive initial sales in both Portugal and the EU5. The dependent variable
in columns (1)-(3) is an indicator for firm survival, while in columns (4)-(6) it is the change in log wagebill. The
Chinese import competition shocks in Portugal and the EU5 are defined in equations (2) and (3). We instrument
for these shocks using measures based on Chinese import competition in the US, defined in equations (5) and (6).
                                                                
Standard errors in parentheses:      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,        p < 0.01




                                                                43
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                                      Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                             ancio



                        Table A10: Wagebill Effects 2000-2007, IV-Probit and IV

                                      Extensive     Margin (IV-Probit)                Intensive Margin   (IV)
                                         (1)            (2)      (3)                (4)          (5)          (6)
   Shock in Portugal                  0.648         0.748      0.537              0.0830       0.0142     -0.00672
                                      (0.248)        (0.233)  (0.283)             (0.140)      (0.138)      (0.141)
   Shock in EU5                        -0.135         -0.114  -0.0703            -0.282 -0.343            -0.327
                                      (0.124)        (0.126)  (0.137)            (0.0709)     (0.0713)     (0.0723)
   Age/1K                                              0.497   -0.111                        -9.718       -9.606
                                                     (2.360)  (2.496)                          (1.305)      (1.304)
   Age-squared/10K                                    -0.115   -0.120                         0.372        0.354
                                                     (0.146)  (0.156)                         (0.0840)     (0.0845)
   Share College                                      0.310   -0.0223                         1.189        1.169
                                                     (0.463)  (0.493)                          (0.281)      (0.296)
   Sales/1B                                         5.219     5.655                             0.126        0.149
                                                     (1.432)  (1.539)                          (0.202)      (0.203)
   Establishments                                    -0.0274  -0.0291                        -0.0245      -0.0278
                                                    (0.0185) (0.0195)                         (0.0113)     (0.0115)
   Constant                           0.752         0.664       0.608           -0.0831 0.185                0.192
                                      (0.105)        (0.132)  (0.647)            (0.0295)     (0.0508)      (0.338)
   Industry FE (10)                      No             No       Yes                No           No           Yes
   Region FE (5)                         No             No       Yes                No           No           Yes
   Observations                         2127           2127     2127               1727         1727         1727
   Exogeneity Test p-value             0.0370         0.0174   0.181               0.133       0.0706       0.0555
   First-stage F                                                                   27.27        26.48        25.34

This table measures the effects of increased Chinese import share in Portugal and the EU5 on the survival of
Portuguese manufacturing firms (columns (1)-(3)) and the change in wagebill for surviving firms (columns (4)-(6)),
using the subsample of firms with strictly positive initial sales in both Portugal and the EU5. The dependent variable
in columns (1)-(3) is an indicator for firm survival, while in columns (4)-(6) it is the change in log wagebill. The
Chinese import competition shocks in Portugal and the EU5 are defined in equations (2) and (3). We instrument
for these shocks using measures based on Chinese import competition in the US, defined in equations (5) and (6).
                                                                
Standard errors in parentheses:      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,        p < 0.01




                                                                44
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                               Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                      ancio



                       Table A11: Intensive Margin Decomposition 1995-2000, IV

                                     Wagebill      Employment           Hours Per Worker             Hourly Wage
                                          (1)            (2)                    (3)                        (4)
      Shock in Portugal                  0.165         0.206                 0.00487                    -0.0465
                                       (0.139)        (0.136)               (0.0188)                   (0.0433)
      Shock in EU5                       0.136         0.212                 -0.0167                    -0.0594
                                       (0.181)        (0.177)               (0.0244)                   (0.0562)
      Age/1K                         -8.501         -8.074                     0.237                     -0.664
                                       (1.364)        (1.332)                (0.184)                    (0.424)
      Age-squared/10K                 0.385          0.372                  -0.00439                     0.0177
                                       (0.101)       (0.0990)               (0.0137)                   (0.0315)
      Share College                    0.803         1.167                    0.0687                  -0.433
                                       (0.367)        (0.358)               (0.0495)                    (0.114)
      Sales/1B                          -0.167        -0.0959               -0.127                       0.0562
                                       (0.263)        (0.257)               (0.0356)                   (0.0818)
      Establishments                  -0.00287       -0.00486               0.000608                   0.00138
                                     (0.00784)      (0.00766)              (0.00106)                  (0.00243)
      Constant                         -0.0537         -0.217                -0.0184                      0.182
                                       (0.390)        (0.381)               (0.0526)                    (0.121)
      Industry FE (10)                    Yes            Yes                    Yes                        Yes
      Region FE (5)                       Yes            Yes                    Yes                        Yes
      Observations                       1525           1525                   1525                       1525
      Exogeneity Test p-value            0.520          0.293                  0.999                      0.460
      First-stage F                      22.56          22.56                  22.56                      22.56

This table decomposes the wagebill effects in column (6) of Table A9 into employment, hours, and hourly wage
channels, using the subsample of firms with strictly positive initial sales in both Portugal and the EU5. Column (2)
                                                                                                  
replicates column (6) of Table A9. Standard errors in parentheses      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                        45
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                             Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                    ancio



                       Table A12: Intensive Margin Decomposition 2000-2007, IV

                                     Wagebill      Employment           Hours Per Worker           Hourly Wage
                                         (1)             (2)                    (3)                      (4)
      Shock in Portugal              -0.00672         -0.0103               -0.00764                  0.0112
                                       (0.141)        (0.141)               (0.0164)                 (0.0398)
      Shock in EU5                   -0.327         -0.289                  -0.00206                 -0.0357
                                      (0.0723)       (0.0724)              (0.00844)                 (0.0205)
      Age/1K                         -9.606         -9.337                    0.0191                   -0.288
                                       (1.304)        (1.305)                (0.152)                  (0.369)
      Age-squared/10K                 0.354          0.347                  -0.00993                   0.0168
                                      (0.0845)       (0.0845)              (0.00986)                 (0.0239)
      Share College                   1.169          1.264                   -0.0263                  -0.0689
                                       (0.296)        (0.296)               (0.0345)                 (0.0837)
      Sales/1B                          0.149        0.00140                 -0.0187                 0.167
                                       (0.203)        (0.203)               (0.0237)                 (0.0573)
      Establishments                 -0.0278        -0.0289                 -0.00171                 0.00281
                                      (0.0115)       (0.0115)              (0.00134)                (0.00324)
      Constant                          0.192          0.130                  0.0195                  0.0426
                                       (0.338)        (0.339)               (0.0395)                 (0.0957)
      Industry FE (10)                   Yes             Yes                    Yes                      Yes
      Region FE (5)                      Yes             Yes                    Yes                      Yes
      Observations                      1727            1727                   1727                     1727
      Exogeneity Test p-value          0.0555          0.0860                  0.601                    0.576
      First-stage F                     25.34           25.34                  25.34                    25.34

This table decomposes the wagebill effects in column (6) of Table A10 into employment, hours, and hourly wage
channels, using the subsample of firms with strictly positive initial sales in both Portugal and the EU5. Column (2)
                                                                                                   
replicates column (6) of Table A10. Standard errors in parentheses      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                        46
China Shock and Portuguese Employment                             Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Ven^
                                                                                                    ancio



                  Table A13: Permanent vs. Temporary Employment 2000-2007, IV


                                Overall Employment           Permanent Employment               Temporary Employment
                                         (1)                           (2)                                 (3)
 Shock in Portugal                    -0.0627                        0.0771                             -0.140
                                      (0.149)                        (0.131)                           (0.0725)
 Shock in EU5                         -0.144                         -0.0504                          -0.0935
                                     (0.0766)                       (0.0673)                           (0.0373)
 Age/1K                              -7.162                        -4.899                             -2.263
                                      (1.380)                        (1.214)                            (0.672)
 Age-squared/10K                      0.254                          0.193                              0.0610
                                     (0.0894)                       (0.0786)                           (0.0435)
 Share College                        2.521                         2.225                                0.296
                                      (0.313)                        (0.276)                            (0.152)
 Sales/1B                              -0.136                        -0.0590                            -0.0766
                                      (0.215)                        (0.189)                            (0.104)
 Establishments                     -0.0358                        -0.0223                            -0.0135
                                     (0.0121)                       (0.0107)                          (0.00591)
 Constant                               0.108                         0.199                             -0.0905
                                      (0.358)                        (0.315)                            (0.174)
 Industry FE (10)                        Yes                           Yes                                Yes
 Region FE (5)                           Yes                           Yes                                Yes
 Observations                           1727                          1727                                1727
 Exogeneity Test p-value                0.822                         0.796                              0.0406
 First-stage F                          25.34                         25.34                              25.34

This table presents a decomposition of the overall employment effects seen in column (2) of Table A12 into margins
due to permanent employment and temporary employment, using the subsample of firms with strictly positive initial
sales in both Portugal and the EU5. The dependent variables in this table are expressed in proportional changes,
rather than changes in logs, in order to admit an additive decomposition of overall employment into permanent and
                                                                                      
temporary components. Standard errors in parentheses:      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                        47
