                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DID THE WAR ON TERROR IGNITE AN OPIOID EPIDEMIC?

                                         Resul Cesur
                                       Joseph J. Sabia
                                      W. David Bradford

                                      Working Paper 26264
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26264


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019


Dr. Cesur gratefully acknowledges the research support from the University of Connecticut
School of Business. Dr. Sabia acknowledges research funding from the Charles Koch Foundation,
the Troesh Family Foundation, and the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies (CHEPS)
to support this research. The authors thank Sara Stith, Rosalie Pacula, Melinda Pitts, Claudia
Persico and conference participants at the 10th Workshop on Economics of Risky Behaviors
(2019), the 2019 meeting of the Society of Economics of the Household, the 2018 meeting of the
American Society of Health Economists, the 2018 meeting of the European Health Economics
Association, and the 2017 meeting of Southern Economic Association for useful comments and
suggestions on an earlier draft of this manuscript. Thanks are also owed to seminar participants
at the University of Alabama, Deakin University, the University of Connecticut, Bogazici
University, and Ibn Haldun University. Finally, the authors thank Andrew Dickinson, Toshio
Ferrazares, Alex Vornsand, and Samuel Safford for excellent research assistance. Dr. Sabia
acknowledges research support from the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies (CHEPS)
at San Diego State University, which includes grants received from the Charles Koch Foundation
and the Troesh Family Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Resul Cesur, Joseph J. Sabia, and W. David Bradford. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Did the War on Terror Ignite an Opioid Epidemic?
Resul Cesur, Joseph J. Sabia, and W. David Bradford
NBER Working Paper No. 26264
September 2019
JEL No. H56,I1,I12

                                         ABSTRACT

Grim national statistics about the U.S. opioid crisis are increasingly well known to the American
public. Far less well known is that U.S. war veterans are at ground zero of the epidemic, facing
an overdose rate twice that of civilians. Post-9/11 deployments to Afghanistan and Iraq have
exposed servicemembers to injury-related chronic pain, psychological trauma, and cheap opium
supplies, each of which may fuel opioid addiction. This study is the first to estimate the causal
impact of combat deployments in the Global War on Terrorism on opioid abuse. We exploit a
natural experiment in overseas deployment assignments and find that combat service substantially
increased the risk of prescription painkiller abuse and illicit heroin use among active duty
servicemen. War-related physical injuries, death-related battlefield trauma, and Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder emerge as primary mechanisms. The magnitudes of our estimates imply lower-
bound combat exposure-induced health care costs of $1.04 billion per year for prescription
painkiller abuse and $470 million per year for heroin use.

Resul Cesur                                        W. David Bradford
University of Connecticut                          201C Baldwin Hall
School of Business                                 Department of Public Administration & Policy
2100 Hillside Road                                 University of Georgia
Storrs, CT 06269                                   Athens, GA 30602
and IZA                                            bradfowd@uga.edu
and also NBER
cesur@uconn.edu

Joseph J. Sabia
San Diego State University
Department of Economics
Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182
and IZA & ESSPRI
jsabia@sdsu.edu
                                                1. Introduction

    "U.S. military veterans, many of whom suffer from chronic pain as a result of their service,
    account for a disproportionately high number of opioid-related deaths. Veterans are twice as
    likely as the general population to die from an opioid overdose."
                                                                   ­ Council on Foreign Relations (2018)


        The U.S. opiate epidemic has intensified rapidly over the last two decades. Between 1999
and 2016, opioid-related mortality rose over 500 percent (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention 2017), with the total number of deaths attributable to opioids quintupling the number
of U.S. servicemembers killed in the Vietnam War and all subsequent U.S. conflicts combined
(Congressional Research Service 2018). While fentanyl- and heroin-involved mortality now
comprise the largest share of opioid-related deaths, 40 percent of overdoses are due to
prescription drugs (Seth et al. 2018; Hedegaard et al. 2017). Nearly 2.6 million Americans suffer
from opioid use disorder (SAMSHA 2016).
        While grim national statistics about the "worst drug overdose epidemic in history"
(Ahmed 2016) are increasingly well known to the American public (National Opinion Research
Center 2018), far less well known is that combat veterans constitute a population at ground zero
of this crisis. Mortality rates for opioid-related poisonings are 1.3 to 2.0 times higher for veterans
as compared to civilians (Bohnert et al. 2011; Axelrod 2013), and this overdose crisis is
deepening.1 Opioid-related mortality among veterans rose from 14.47 persons per 100,000 in
2000 to 21.08 persons per 100,000 in 2016 (Lin et al. 2019). In addition, the opioid abuse
prevalence rate among veterans was over seven times higher than for civilians (Baser et al.
2014).2 Following major combat operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, there was a 55 percent
increase in the rate of opioid use disorders among veterans (VA Opioid Prescription Policy,
2015). In Fiscal Year 2016, approximately 68,000 veterans were treated for opioid addiction (VA
Opioid Prescription Policy, 2015), a condition that contributes to a substantial increase in public
health care costs ($31,022 per veteran in 2018$) (Baser et al. 2014).



1
 These comparisons reflect age- and gender-adjusted mortality.
2
 Baser et al. (2014) compare those participating in the Veterans Health Administration public health plan to non-
veterans in commercial health care plans.


                                                         1
           The extent of the veteran opioid epidemic is almost surely understated. Military
personnel often eschew treatment due to significant social stigma in their ranks (Teeters et al.
2017). Moreover, veterans often live in medically underserved areas with limited access to
psychotherapy (Teeters et al. 2017),3 leaving many undertreated and at risk for progression to
severe addiction and overdose (Miller et al. 2015).
           Next to nothing is known about how post-September 11 U.S. war policies -- which
resulted in 5.4 million deployments of nearly 2.8 million servicemembers to Iraq and Afghanistan
(Wenger et al. 2018) -- contributed to the veteran opioid epidemic. War injury-induced chronic
pain, lax monitoring of opioid prescriptions by Veterans Health Administration (VHA) providers,
combat-related psychological trauma, and exposure to cheap opium supplies during war
deployments have placed post-9/11 combat veterans at substantial risk for opioid abuse and
mortality.
           Approximately 45 percent of veterans suffer from chronic pain (Clancy 2014; Sandbrink
2017), a rate three to five times higher than civilians (Toblin et al. 2014; Johannes et al. 2010).
Up to 70 percent of war injuries to post-9/11 combat veterans are due to improvised explosive
devices (Schoenfeld et al. 2013), a common tactic employed by US enemies in Iraq and
Afghanistan. As a result of war injury-induced pain, the rate of opioid prescription receipt is 15
percentage-points higher among military personnel than among civilians (Toblin et al. 2014).
Nearly half of all veterans diagnosed with non-cancer-related pain were prescribed an opioid
(Edlund et al. 2014), and many of these prescriptions were for long-term use, with 57 percent
receiving an opioid prescription for more than 90 days (Edlund et al. 2014).4 Among post-9/11
Army veterans, approximately 34 percent were prescribed opioids to treat pain, with long-term
opioid treatment most commonly prescribed for pain related to the back and neck as well as
peripheral/central nervous system problems (Adams et al. 2018).
           While legitimate opioid prescriptions generated significant health benefits, military health
professionals worry that the massive increase in opioid prescriptions following combat
deployments contributed to opioid addiction and mortality among post-9/11 combat veterans
(U.S. Department of Defense 2017; National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health




3
    Teeters et al. (2017) also argue that dual diagnoses of PTSD and opioid addiction are quite difficult.
4
    A case study of one infantry brigade estimated post-deployment opioid use of 15 percent (Toblin et al. 2014).

                                                            2
2015; Becker et al. 2009).5 These health risks were especially acute for those prescribed daily
opioid dosages of over 50 mg to treat long-term chronic pain (Bohnert et al. 2011). Indeed, among
the estimated 6,485 veterans treated by the VHA who died of opioid-related causes between 2010
and 2016, rates of opioid prescribing by the VHA were extremely high (Lin et al. 2019). Risks
may have been further amplified by the lack of VA regulations requiring providers to access state
electronic Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs before prescribing a controlled substance to
patients (General Accounting Office 2018; Gellad et al. 2018; Radomski et al. 2018),6 earning the
ire of high-profile policymakers (McCain 2017).
         In addition to chronic pain and lax regulatory practices, the psychological consequences
of traumatic war experiences may have also contributed to veteran opioid abuse. Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder, a condition with which nearly one-fifth of active-duty servicemembers have been
diagnosed (Tanielian and Jaycox 2008; Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019), is associated with
increased risk of opioid addiction (Seal et al. 2016; Shiner et al. 2017; Meier et al. 2014).7 Abuse
of prescription painkillers and illicit use of natural (heroin) and semi-synthetic (fentanyl) opioids
may serve as a coping mechanism for veterans' psychological pain.
         Finally, access to cheap opium sources during war deployments may have exposed
deployed servicemembers to increased risk of opiate addiction (Robins and Slobodyan 2003).
Reports from top military commanders suggest that post-9/11 deployments to Afghanistan, and
occasionally Iraq, increased the ease with which combat veterans could access heroin (Robert
Weiner Associates 2009).8
         Given these risk factors, the Department of Defense has speculated that the Global War
on Terror (GWOT) may have contributed to opioid addiction among post-9/11 veterans.



5
  This sentiment is reflected in Senator John McCain's (R-AZ) introduction of the Veterans Overmedication
Prevention Act (VOPA). VOPA would require the VA to document and report VA-prescribed medications for
servicemembers who died via completed suicide or accidental poisoning.
6
  The highest rate of overdose occurred for veterans who were prescribed a daily opioid dose of 50 mg or more.
Estimates from a CBS news special investigation of VHA data in the five most populous veteran states found that
veterans were 33 percent more likely to die from narcotics poisoning than their comparable non-veteran
counterparts. This report is available here: https://www.cbsnews.com/news/veterans-dying-from-overmedication/
7
  There is also evidence that combat service-induced psychological harm may increase risk of subsequent binge
drinking (McFall et al. 1992; Price et al. 2004) and cigarette use (Cesur et al. 2016), perhaps as a coping mechanism.
8
  Peer effects among combat units could be an additional pathway through which opioid abuse may occur. There is
evidence of unit-level peer effects in the use of VDC and educational benefits (Murphy 2018). The illicit sharing of
prescription medications among close-knit comrades could result in increases in opioid abuse.


                                                          3
         "[Opioid abuse] may relate to deployment effects, such as injuries, combat exposure, and
        mental health conditions." (U.S. Department of Defense 2017)


        Despite this assertion, no study has examined whether post-9/11 combat deployments
causally ignited an opioid epidemic among U.S. veterans. To our knowledge, this study is the
first to do so. We exploit a natural experiment in the assignment of active-duty male members of
the armed forces on overseas deployment duties to identify the causal impact of combat service
on opioid abuse. Our results provide consistent evidence that combat assignment substantially
increases the risks of prescription painkiller abuse and illicit heroin use. The magnitudes of our
estimates imply lower-bound combat exposure-induced health care costs to the Department of
Veterans Affairs of $1.04 billion per year to treat prescription opioid abuse and $470 million per
year to treat heroin use.9 These costs exclude non-health costs as well as the costs of increased
opioid-related mortality.
         Descriptive evidence suggests that combat-related physical injuries, which may have
resulted in initially legitimate opioid prescriptions, as well as war-related psychological trauma,
are primary mechanisms at work.


                                                 2. Background

2.1. Opioids and Chronic Pain

        Opioids -- which include opium, its derivatives such as heroin or methadone, and
synthetic and semi-synthetic opioids10 -- act on receptors in the brain and spinal cord to reduce


9
  These estimates were obtained using data from Wenger et al. (2018) on the number of active duty deployed
servicemembers to Iraq and Afghanistan (2.1 million). According to our estimates from the DOD data, 51.5 percent
of all deployed servicemembers were exposed to enemy firefight fight (Table 1B). Taken together with the per-
veteran public health care cost of treating opioid addiction from Baser et al. (2014) ($31,022 in 2018 dollars), and
the marginal effects reported in columns (2) and (3) of Table 4A, our back-of-the-envelope cost calculation is (2.1
million)*($31,022)*(.031)*(.486) for prescription painkiller abuse and (2.1 million)*($31,022)*(.014)*(.486) for
heroin use. We assume that those who abuse opioids seek (VA paid-for) treatment in steady-state. As noted, these
figures correspond to conservative lower bound estimates of the effect of engaging the enemy in the firefight on the
potential treatment costs of prescription painkiller misuse in the Department of Defense Health Related Behaviors
survey. Estimates obtained from the Add Health suggest much higher costs. Our estimates in column (2) of Table 3
suggest that combat zone deployments (rather than simply exposure to firefight in combat zones) lead to
approximately 170,000 active-duty members of the armed forces abusing opioids annually with the ninety-five
percent confidence interval of the associated health care costs ranging from $930 million to $9.6 billion.
10
   Among the most commonly used synthetic and semi-synthetic opioids include Demerol, Fentanyl, Methadone,
Oxycodone (OxyContin, Percocet), and Hydrocodone (Vicodin).

                                                         4
the intensity of pain. Among the side effects of opioid consumption include slowed breathing,
which can increase the risk of overdose if the dosage is sufficiently high, and an addictive high
caused by censors in the brain that induce euphoria.
         The pain-relieving properties of opioids have been known for centuries, including among
military personnel. During the Civil War, the Union Army treated war injury-induced pain with
79,000 kilograms of opium powder and nearly 500,000 opium pills (Schiff 2002), earning the
nickname "God's own medicine" (Booth 1996).11 The addictive nature of opium, particularly in
the form of morphine, was also well known.12
         While the use of opioids to treat pain in hospital settings has been historically quite
common (Jones et al. 2018), opioid-based treatment for chronic pain in outpatient settings is a
relatively new phenomenon (Johannes et al. 2010), representing both a clinical and public health
challenge (National Research Council 2011). Opioid prescriptions rose substantially from the
1990s to early 2010s (Compton and Volkow 2006; Rosenblum et al. 2008), before falling to
around 169 million by 2015 (NASEM 2017). Veterans Affairs providers followed a similar
pattern, with opioid prescriptions rising by 77 percent between 2004 and 2012 (Mosher et al.
2015) before falling substantially thereafter (U.S. Department of Defense 2017).
         The rapid increase in opioid prescribing during the 1990s and 2000s has been attributed,
in part, to (i) a failure of medical science to accurately assess the addictive properties of synthetic
and semi-synthetic opioids13, (ii) advocacy by the American Pain Society and government health
agencies, including the Veterans Health Administration, to treat pain as the "fifth vital sign,"14

11
   In addition, opium use was commonly used to treat menstrual pain during the 19th century (Aurin 2000).
12
   Morphine addiction among Union and Confederate servicemen was sufficiently common to be called "soldier's
disease" (Schiff 2002).
13
   Uncertainty over the addictive properties of synthetic and semi-synthetic opioids began in the early 1980s. The
infamous correspondence note in the New England Journal of Medicine by Porter and Jick (1980) is widely
considered to be the signal event which served to normalize the use of self-administered opioids in the community.
The note, which concluded "despite widespread use of narcotic drugs in hospitals, the development of addiction is
rare in medical patients with no history of addiction," was actually focused on the very short-term treatment of
patients in a single inpatient setting. However, this correspondence was cited aggressively by those advocating
opioid treatment for chronic pain, including in outpatient settings (Leung et al. 2017).

        "In conclusion, we found that a...letter published in the Journal in 1980 was heavily and uncritically cited
        as evidence that addiction was rare with long-term opioid therapy. We believe that this citation pattern
        contributed to the North American opioid crisis by helping to shape a narrative that allayed prescribers'
        concerns about the risk of addiction associated with long-term opioid therapy."
14
  The call for physicians to act more aggressively to treat chronic pain began in earnest in the mid-1990s when the
American Pain Society advocated that physicians emphasize pain assessment during patient evaluations, claiming
that pain be considered the "fifth vital sign" (Merboth and Barnason 2000; Mularski et al. 2006; Tompkins et al.

                                                         5
(iii) increased demand by consumers for effective outpatient pain management, and (iv) lax
regulatory practices that permitted patients to doctor shop for opioid medication and
pharmaceutical companies to supply pills to communities at rates far exceeding plausible
medical demand.15 These explanations are reflected in policymakers' attempts to combat the
opioid epidemic, which have (with the exception of naloxone access laws) largely focused on
imposing restrictions on prescription opioid access.


2.2 The Department of Veterans Affairs and Prescription Drug Monitoring

        Mandatory-access Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs (PDMPs), which require that
physicians and pharmacists access the prescription history of each patient via an electronic
database prior to writing a prescription, have been one of the most effective policy tools to curb
prescription drug abuse and opioid-related mortality (Dowell et al. 2016) and addiction (Birk and
Waddel 2017; Grecu et al. 2019; Buchmueller and Carey 2018). However, VA providers have
been exempted from required participation in mandatory-access PDMPs throughout the near
entirety of the opioid epidemic.
        In deference to protecting veterans' privacy rights, the VA was historically reluctant to
share patients' prescription drug histories with state PDMPs. In March 2010, the VA Office of
General Counsel issued an opinion prohibiting the VA from participating in state PDMPs unless
such entities qualified as "law enforcement entities" (Silverman et al. 2014). Because the vast
majority of state PDMPs are not classified as such, this rule amounted to a near-ban on VA
participation.16 During this period, the VA created the Sole Provider Program (SPP) to curb
doctor shopping (U.S. Department of Defense 2017). However, prescription monitoring was
generally limited to veterans identified by providers as high risk for prescription drug abuse and
failed to cover prescriptions received from non-VA providers. In addition, the SPP did not
require VA providers to access a patient's complete prescription history prior to writing a


2017). The Veterans Health Administration supported this assessment, adding treatment of the fifth vital sign to its
national pain management strategy in 2000, and the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care
Organizations quickly followed. In 2016, the American Medical Association recommended that pain be removed as
a fifth vital sign.
15
   For example, in Mingo County, West Virginia, a single pharmacy in the city of Williamson, population 2,924,
received 258,000 hydrocodone pills in one month from a single pharmaceutical company, Miami-Luken. This
represented more than ten times the typical delivery to a West Virginia pharmacy.
16
   As of October 2018, all 50 states and the District of Columbia have some form of PDMP. Only five state PDMPs
are administered by law enforcement agencies.

                                                         6
prescription for a controlled substance.
         In February 2013, the VA lifted its ban on provider participation in state PDMPs not
administered by law enforcement agencies. In its regulatory change, the VA acknowledged:


         "PDMPs will allow the VA patient population to benefit from the reduction in negative
         health outcomes." (U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs 2013).


While this reform permitted VA provider participation in state PDMPs, it did not require
participation, nor did it require providers to access the electronic database. The American
Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) concluded that "this voluntary PDMP disclosure has
failed to result in VA PDMP reporting necessary information to prevent misuse and diversion of
prescription drugs" (AAFP 2016).
         In December 2017, nearly 20 years after the onset of the U.S. opioid epidemic, the VA
Prescription Data Accountability Act was enacted, mandating that VA providers participate in
state PDMPs.17 While this law represented a critical policy shift by the VA, loopholes have
prevented the full sharing of information that may prevent medication shopping (U.S.
Government Accountability Office 2018). An investigation by a bipartisan coalition of members
of Congress, led by Representatives Michael Turner (R-Ohio) and Seth Moulton (D-
Massachusetts) found that health care providers at non-military treatment facilities (MTFs) are
often unable to access TRICARE beneficiaries' prescription histories at MTFs:


         "The Department of Defense (DoD) internal prescription drug monitoring mechanisms
         are ineffective at mitigating controlled substance abuse at civilian facilities, where nearly
         half of all TRICARE beneficiary healthcare treatment occurs. DoD should build a
         mechanism that allows seamless information sharing with the state databases."
         (Representatives Michael Turner and Seth Moulton, December 2017).18


17
   As part of the rollout of this new initiative, the VA published geographic-specific aggregate data on opioid
prescriptions from 2012 to 2017 (Department of Veterans Affairs 2018).
18
   Upon introducing legislation to close this loophole, Rep. Mike Turner stated:

         "We have identified a gap that does not require [Department of Defense] to report controlled substance
         prescriptions to prescription drug monitoring programs. This DoD reporting gap makes our nation's active-
         duty service members, reservists, their families, veterans, and retirees vulnerable to this epidemic of

                                                          7
Thus, important barriers in information sharing remain that might undermine attempts to identify
prescription drug abuse among veterans.
         While establishing an effective prescription drug monitoring program eluded the DoD
throughout much of the opioid crisis, the DoD began taking other steps to curb opioid abuse. In
2013, the Opioid Safety Initiative (OSI) was established to provide a more holistic, less opioid-
centered pain management strategy to veterans (U.S. Department of Defense 2017). The OSI
Toolkit was designed to provide information to (i) VA clinicians with regard to best practices in
prescribing opioids, identifying signs of misuse, and the range of medical and non-medical
options for treating pain, and (ii) patients on safe use of prescription opioids, alternative pain
management strategies, and help for addiction.
         Perhaps in part as a response to the OSI, opioid prescriptions issued by VA providers fell
by over 40 percent from 2012 to 2017. While the VA has often cited this decline as evidence of
a more responsible chronic pain management strategy (Department of Veterans Affairs 2018),
this interpretation is the subject of controversy for several reasons.
         First, the reduction in opioid prescriptions to curb abuse may have the unintended
consequence of reduced pain abatement for opioid users who do not suffer from addiction (Islam
and McRae 2014; Fishman et al. 2004; Volkow and McLellan 2011). There is, in fact, evidence
that regulations such as the OSI induce under-prescribing to avoid non-compliance with internal
regulations (Turk, Brody and Okifuji 1994; Institute of Medicine 2011; Ross-Degnan et al.
2004). Additionally, individuals with long-term pain not adequately managed by analgesics may
be mistakenly identified as abusers and be cut off from needed opioids (Brushwood 2003). In
the absence of effective alternative pain management strategies, sharp reductions in opioid
therapy may generate significant health-related trauma for veterans.19
         Second, sudden negative shocks to prescription painkillers could induce veterans to more
dangerous, and perhaps deadly, forms of opioid use such as heroin or fentanyl if these drugs are



         addiction." (Available at: https://turner.house.gov/media-center/press-releases/turner-and-moulton-
         legislation-shields-members-of-dod-from-prescription)
19
  The VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for Opioid Therapy for Chronic Pain (Sall and Rodgers 2018) warns
against sudden reductions in opioid treatment intensity as it may put those with a higher suicidal tendency at risk of
committing suicide due to withdrawal. On the other hand, if prescription drugs are a "gateway" to illicit opioid
consumption, it is possible that efforts at reducing opioid treatments could save lives (Compton et al. 2016).

                                                           8
substitutes. For instance, when OxyContin was reformulated to deter abuse, resulting in a
negative shock to supply, overdoses due to heroin (Alpert et al. 2018) and fentanyl (Evans et al.
2018) rose substantially.20


2.3 Exposure to Opium Supply During Deployments
         While greater use of prescription opioids to treat war injuries may be one path to
addiction, exposure to cheap opium during war deployments may be another. During the 1990s,
Afghanistan produced nearly three-quarters of the world's illicit opium supply via its domestic
poppy crop (Council on Foreign Relations 2010). While the Taliban strictly implemented an
Islamic law-driven ban on poppy production in 2000-2001, production again skyrocketed
following the U.S led-invasion (Operation Enduring Freedom) in late 2001. Estimates show that
by 2006,


         "...twenty-one of Afghanistan's thirty-four provinces were producing 94 percent of the
         world's supply, estimated at a pre-export value of $4 billion and equivalent to nearly 50
         percent of the country's GDP." (Council on Foreign Relations 2010; United Nations
         Office on Drugs and Crime 2007)


The post-2001 increase in opium supply greatly reduced per gram opium prices such that they
were often less than one-tenth their pureness- or quality-equivalent prices in major U.S. cities
(McKenna 2007).21 While United Nations-led efforts in the late 2000s and early 2010s to make
Afghanistan "poppy free" have proven largely successful in a number of northern provinces
including Kunduz, Takhar, Ghazni, Paktika, and Bamyan, southern supply chains in Hilmand,
Kandahar, and Badghis continued to flourish (Special Inspector General for Afghanistan
Reconstruction 2015).
         Opium production in Iraq was much rarer than in Afghanistan, but production in Iraq
began to grow in the aftermath of Operation Iraqi Freedom. Production appears to have
accelerated during the period just before and during the so-called "surge" of U.S. Armed Forces


20
   While mortality due to prescription painkillers plateaued from 2010 to 2014, fentanyl-related mortality rose by an
estimated 540 percent between 2014 and 2016 (Katz 2017).
21
   This finding is also consistent with data collected as part of the Afghanistan Opium Survey (United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime 2007).

                                                          9
to Iraq in 2007-2008 (Cockburn 2007; Tosti 2007).
        Much of the evidence on the impact of cheap opium access during deployments on opioid
abuse is anecdotal in nature, coming from military commanders and imbedded reporters. A 2008
report from the U.S. Army Strategic Studies Institute concludes that the availability of cheap
opium during deployments could be an important driver of abuse (Kan 2008)22 and top military
brass concurs, including former Drug Czar and retired General Barry McCaffrey.23
        Exposure to opium supplies during war deployments is not a new phenomenon.
Servicemembers deployed to Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War were also exposed to
cheap opium supplies.24 However, there are important differences between both the form of
opioid addiction and possible paths to wellness for the Vietnam and post-9/11 eras. First, abuse
of opioids in Vietnam was more often attributed to recreational heroin or morphine use, whereas
in the post-9/11 period, opioid addiction appears to be driven largely by prescription painkiller
misuse (Edlund et al. 2014). One contemporaneous study found that of 943 urine-tested
servicemen, 495, or 52 percent, tested positive for opium (Robins et al. 1974).25 Second, many
attribute the relatively low rates of relapse from opium addiction treatment among Vietnam
veterans to the fact that addiction often began during deployments, and the environmental shock
of returning to the U.S. without "triggers" present may have contributed to relatively high
recovery rates (Robins et al. 2010).26 In contrast, many post-9/11 veterans began addictions after


22
   Kan (2008) concludes that "when peacekeeping forces have been sent to conflicts where drugs are available, they
have not proven immune from succumbing to drug use themselves" and cites a 2003 Canadian Military police report
stating that "the presence of cheap and available narcotics in Afghanistan may risk higher incidence of drug abuse"
(Rubec 2004).
23
   At a 2009 meeting of the National Association of Addiction Treatment Providers, retired General Barry
McCaffrey warned:

        "I'd be astonished if we don't see soldiers who find 10 kilograms of heroin and pack it up in a birthday
        cake and send it home to their mother...The second thing is (soldiers) are going to stick it up their nose and
        like it." (Robert Weiner Associates 2009).
24
   Opioids were not always the substance of choice for combat veterans. During the Second World War, stimulant
use was pronounced because of the perceived benefits in terms of endurance and mood enhancement (Rasmussen
2011). Benzedrine (amphetamine) tablets, a common stimulant, were regularly supplied to soldiers in both the
American and British military (Rasmussen 2008). Such use under stressful circumstances led to dependence and
difficulty in post-service adjustment (Rasmussen 2008; World Health Organization 1957).
25
   Three-quarters of urine positive servicemembers stated that they became addicted while in Vietnam (Robins et al.
1974). Over 95 percent of those who screened positive for controlled substances admitted heroin use while in
Vietnam.
26
   Some estimates suggest that only 5 percent of Vietnam era servicemembers who sought treatment for heroin
addiction that began in Vietnam suffered a relapse within a year of returning home (Gupta 2015).


                                                         10
returning home, often after seeking treatment for war-injury induced chronic pain (Brady et al.
2009; Reisman 2016).


2.4 Drug Testing for Opioids in the U.S. Military
         One policy tool to curb opioid abuse among continuing and separating servicemembers is
random drug testing. The first urinalysis screening for illegal drug use in the military was
carried out by President Richard Nixon in 1971 in response to elevated rates of heroin and
marijuana use among those serving in Vietnam (Irving 1988; Robins 1974). Policymakers were
concerned that high rates of heroin addiction among returning veterans would be both a public
health epidemic as well as a political problem, dampening public support for the Vietnam War
(Massing 1998). Under a policy informally known as "Operation Golden Flow," American
soldiers serving in Vietnam were not permitted to redeploy to the United States until they passed
a urine test that screened for the presence of opiates, amphetamines, or barbiturates. If a soldier
failed a drug test, he was given five to seven days of detoxification and treatment prior to
returning home (Korsmeyer and Kranzler 2009).27
         Department of Defense Instruction 1010.1, issued in 1974, established regular random
testing for the first time in the US military. Officially, it was a clinical program to identify drug
users for treatment (Coombs and West 1991). While legal restrictions prohibited the military
from taking disciplinary action against servicemembers who tested positive between 1974 and
197928, the U.S. Military Court of Appeals subsequently overturned this decision, creating the
legal basis to use urinalysis as evidence in disciplinary proceedings.29
         In August 1981, Deputy Secretary of Defense Frank Carlucci issued Department of
Defense Memorandum No. 62884, which instituted a "zero tolerance" drug policy across all


27
   The onset of the War on Drugs is often marked by Operation Golden Flow. Dr. Robert Dupont, head of the
newly-created Special Office for Drug Abuse and Prevention during the Nixon Years, stated:

         "Today, people don't even connect Vietnam with the evolution of American drug policy. When Nixon
         declared war on drugs on January 1971 and started the first White House office, named the first White
         House drug czar, within 24 hours that czar was on a plane to Saigon. There was no mistaking what his
         priority was from the president." (Dupont 2001)
28
   United States v. Ruiz, decided by the United States Military Court of Appeals, found that punishment for a failed
drug test violated his right to the Fourth (search and seizure) and Fifth (self-incrimination) Amendment rights. The
decision prohibited punitive actions against military personnel with positive urinalysis tests (Coombs and West
1991).
29
   United States v. Ruiz, 1974

                                                         11
military branches (Pacula et al. 2017).30 Positive drug tests, including for heroin, were referred
to a court-martial or administrative board (Jemionek et al. 2008). Following the implementation
of this policy, reported illicit drug use among military personnel fell from 27.6 percent to 2.7
percent (Bray et al. 1995, 1999). By 2002, the Department of Defense was enforcing 100
percent annual (once-per-year) random drug testing for every member of the Armed Forces,
including active-duty enlisted servicemembers, officers, Reservists, and National Guardsmen.
Newly recruited servicemembers were given mandatory drug tests within 72 hours of entering
active-duty (O'Connell 2003).
         Common drug testing policies appear to have been somewhat ill-designed to handle the
onset of the opioid crisis. While heroin was included on drug testing panels prior to 1999,
prescription opioids were not included on drug testing panels until 2005, well after the onset of
the opioid epidemic began. Oxycodone and oxymorphone were the first prescription opioids to
be added to the drug test panel in 2005 (Platteborze et al. 2014). However, servicemembers with
prescriptions were not subject to disciplinary action if drug testing reflected the prescribed
dosage over the relevant time periods (Platteborze et al. 2014). Hydrocodone and
hydromorphone were not added to the drug testing panel until 2012 (Rooney 2012), the year
which also saw VA-issued opioid prescriptions beginning a steep decline.


                                                3. Identification
         To identify the causal impact of post-9/11 combat service on use and abuse of opioids,
we exploit a natural experiment generated by the procedures through which active-duty U.S.
Armed Forces personnel are assigned to overseas deployments. First, it is important to keep in
mind that individual servicemembers are rarely deployed overseas. Rather, units (e.g.,
battalions) receive deployment orders. When servicemembers are assigned to their units, and
those units are assigned by senior commanders (via Human Resources Command) to deployment
duties, servicemen of equivalent military rank and occupation specialty are treated as perfect


30
  In addition to United States v. Armstrong (1980), another motivation for this policy change was a tragic aviation
accident that occurred on May 26, 1981 aboard the USS Nimitz. After a missed approach to the aircraft carrier USS
Nimitz, a fuel-critical Marine Corps EA-6B Prowler crashed on the flight deck, killing 14 crewmen, injuring 45
others, and destroying or damaging 19 other aircraft. The accident generated $416 million in real dollars in damages.
Six postmortem autopsies revealed detectable levels of THC in those involved in the crash. Although it could not be
proved that the drug use contributed to the accident, media outlets and intense congressional hearings focused on the
drug scandal.

                                                         12
substitutes (Lyle 2006; Cesur et al. 2013; Cesur and Sabia 2016). As a rule, Human Resources
Command cannot take the individual preferences, family situation, personality, or background
characteristics of a servicemember into account when making deployment assignments (Lyle
2006; Engel et al. 2010). Senior commanders determine when, where (combat versus non-
combat operations), and for how long to deploy units based on (i) the state of operational
environment, which is dictated by world events, and (ii) the readiness and availability of suitable
units, determined by equipment availability, timing of training completion, and the occupational
composition of unit members (Army Regulation 220-1; Lyle 2006; Engel et al. 2010). These
factors are outside of the control of any active-duty servicemember and are plausibly exogenous
to subsequent opioid use and abuse of servicemembers.31
        Thus, while an active-duty servicemember can affect the probability of a combat
deployment by (i) choice of service branch, (ii) selection of military occupation, and (iii) re-
enlistment decision (rank), conditional on branch, rank (service length), and military occupation,
deployment assignments by Human Resources Command at any point in time are conditionally
random.
        The local average treatment effect (LATE) identified in this natural experiment is quite
different from the draft lottery, which has been used in a number of prior studies that have
examined the human capital and labor market effects of U.S. military service (Angrist 1993;
Angrist and Chen 2011; Angrist et al. 2011; Card and Lemieux 2001, 2002). However, the
LATE we identify captures an arguably more relevant policy parameter in the context of All-
Volunteer Armed Forces (see Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019 for a discussion).
        The natural experiment described above has been exploited by scholars examining the
impacts of military deployments on children's human capital acquisition (Lyle 2006; Engel et al.
2010), household violence (Cesur et al. 2016), veterans' binge drinking (Cesur et al. 2017), and
veterans' labor market outcomes (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019).


                                                     4. Data


31
   Lyle (2006) and Sabia and Skimmyhorn (2019) document that "stay-back selection" ­ the hold back of
approximately five percent of unit members at base as part of "stay-back" personnel ­ is an unimportant source of
bias. Using administrative data and a two-stage least squares approach (2SLS) where battalion-level deployment
orders are used as an instrument for individual deployment, these authors find that 2SLS and OLS estimates are
statistically equivalent.

                                                        13
           To estimate the impact of military deployments on opioid abuse, we draw data from two
sources: the military module of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent and Adult Health
(Add Health) and the Department of Defense Survey of Health and Related Behaviors Among
Active Duty Personnel (HRB), each with advantages and disadvantages, discussed below. Our
main analysis samples will include 482 male respondents from the Add Health and 11,542 men
in the HRB. We also analyze the impact of combat exposure on the likelihood of prescription
drug abuse among 3,198 servicewomen in the DOD data.


4.1 National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent and Adult Health (Add Health)
           The Add Health is a nationally representative, school-based survey of middle and high
school students in the United States, who were originally interviewed during the 1994-1995
school year (Wave I). Follow-up surveys were conducted in the subsequent academic year (the
calendar year 1996) and five years later, when respondents were ages 18 to 26, Waves II and III
respectively. The last wave of data (Wave IV) was collected in 2008. We draw data from the
military module of the Wave IV survey, collected in 2007-2008.
           Our analysis sample is comprised of 482 males ages 28 to 34 who reported active-duty
military service, were deployed overseas during the period of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, and
provided non-missing information on (i) military characteristics, including military rank and
occupation, branch of service, length and type of deployment (combat versus non-combat
deployment), and (ii) prescription painkiller use and abuse.
           We measure two opioid-related outcomes in the Add Health. First, using the Wave IV
supplemental medication file, we measure whether the respondent has been prescribed a pain
reliever by a physician.32 We generate a dichotomous variable, Prescription Painkiller, set equal



32
     Respondents are told:

           "As you know, I want to record all prescription medications that you have used in the past four weeks.
           These medications include solid and nonsolid formulations that you may swallow, inhale, apply to the skin
           or hair, inject, implant, or place in the ears, eyes, nose, mouth, or any other part of the body. Have you
           taken any prescription medications in the last four weeks?"

If respondents answered the above in the affirmative, then the Add Health interviewer is given the following
instruction:

           "If the interview is being conducted in the respondent's home or the medications are conveniently available
           (e.g., in a purse) ask the respondent to assemble the medications or their containers now so that you can

                                                          14
to 1 if the respondent has taken an analgesic prescription medication, comprised of narcotic
analgesics, narcotic analgesic combinations, and miscellaneous analgesics, and set equal to 0
otherwise. We find that 9.3 percent of servicemen who had been deployed overseas used
prescription pain reliever in the last month.33
        Our measure of prescription painkiller abuse is generated using responses to the
following survey item:
        "[Have] you ever taken pain killers that were not prescribed for you, taken [them] in
        larger amounts than prescribed, more often than prescribed, for longer periods than
        prescribed, or that you took only for the feeling or experience they caused?
We generate a dichotomous variable, Painkiller Abuse, set equal to 1 if the respondent reported
non-medical use of pain killers. We find that 12.9 percent of respondents reported recreational
use of prescription painkillers in their lifetime. Note that because this is an "ever" measure, we
cannot know the precise timing of abuse relative to deployments. However, the longitudinal
nature of the data will allow us to identify illicit substance use prior to enlistment.
        In the Add Health, we measure deployment assignment among active-duty deployed
servicemen using information about deployment histories. Combat Zone Deployment is set equal
to 1 if the respondent reports an overseas deployment to a combat zone and is set equal to 0 if the
respondent reports overseas assignment is exclusive to a non-combat zone. Approximately
three-quarters (75.5 percent) of our deployed sample reported assignment to a combat zone.
Conditional on military rank, occupation, and length/timing of service, it is this variation among
overseas deployed personnel that we exploit for identification.
        In addition to combat assignment, we also measure combat exposure among those
deployed to combat zones via an indicator for whether the respondent engages the enemy in
firefight in a combat zone, Combat Zone with Enemy Firefight.34 We find that 36.7 percent of
respondents reported assignment to a combat zone where they engaged the enemy in firefight.

        record information about them. If the respondent is unable or unwilling to assemble them now, ask him/her
        to list them from memory."

When all medications are collected, they are therapeutically classified using the most updated version of Multum
LexiconTM. We find that approximately 27 percent of the sample of previously deployed active-duty servicemen
reported taking prescription medication in the last four weeks.
33
   In contrast, 17.4 percent consumed only prescription medication that was not classified as a prescription pain
reliever.
34
    Respondents were asked: "During your combat deployment, how many times did you engage the enemy in a
firefight?"

                                                        15
Moreover, among those deployed to a combat zone where enemy firefight occurred, we also are
able to measure whether the serviceman was wounded in combat, Combat Zone with War
Wounding (8.9 percent of our sample).
       One of the important advantages of the Add Health data, discussed in Section 4 below, is
the inclusion of a rich set of military observables, which allows us to exploit a fairly clean
natural experiment. In fact, the Add Health include the set of observables available to Human
Resources Command when making deployment assignments. However, there are a number of
notable disadvantages to these data. These include (i) a relatively small analysis sample of less
than 500 servicemen, which creates a relatively low-power research design, (ii) an imprecisely
timed measure of prescription painkiller abuse (mitigated by the availability of panel data), and
(iii) a sample of servicemembers (ages 28 to 34) that may not be generalizable to the broader
post-9/11 veteran population.
       In addition, the measure of abuse is self-reported and thus likely to be lower-bound
estimates of actual opioid abuse use. However, as long as measurement error is unrelated to
military deployment, estimated marginal effects relative to the mean of the dependent variable
should be unbiased. Given some of these concerns, we turn to a second data source.


4.2 Department of Defense Health and Related Behaviors Survey (HRB)
       The 2008 DoD Survey of Health and Related Behaviors (HRB) Among Active Duty
Personnel is designed to be representative of all active-duty servicemembers in all branches and
pay grades of the U.S. Armed Forces. Collected by RTI, these data include 28,546 active-duty
military servicemembers between the ages 18 and 50. The HRB survey excluded individuals who
were absent without official leave (AWOL), incarcerated at the time of data collection, or
attending a service academy from the interview. Our analysis sample consists of 11,542 male
active-duty members of the armed forces who were deployed overseas and provided non-missing
information on prescription pain reliever use or abuse.
       Respondents are first asked:
       "Have you been prescribed medication to relieve pain or discomfort by a doctor or other
       health professional?"
Medication to relieve pain is defined in the survey (to the respondent completing it) as including
Oxycodone, OxyCotin, Percodan, Percocet, Tylox, Hydrocodone, Vicodin, Lortac, Codeine,

                                                 16
Demerol, Fentanyl, Methadone, and Morphine. We find that 12.9 percent report prior-month
(Prior-Month Painkiller) use of pain relievers.
         In addition, respondents were explicitly asked about the abuse of prescription painkillers:
         "When did you last use pain relievers for non-medical reasons?"
We find that 8.9 percent of respondents report the use of pain relievers for non-medical reasons
in the last 30 days (Prior-Month Painkiller Abuse).
         Finally, respondents are asked about their use of illicit narcotics, including heroin. We
estimate that 0.6 percent report prior-month heroin use (Prior-Month Heroin).35
         Concerning military deployments, we are unable to identify those deployed to combat
zones that do not experience enemy firefight as in the Add Health. Our primary measure of
combat assignment is, therefore, a measure of combat exposure, Enemy Firefight, generated
using responses to the following survey item:
         "Thinking about all of your deployments...how many times have you [or] members of
         [your] unit, received incoming fire from small arms, artillery, rockets, or mortars or fired
         on the enemy?"
If the respondent reports that his unit has experienced enemy firefight, Enemy Firefight is set
equal to 1, and is set equal to 0 otherwise.
         Moreover, we create a dichotomous variable War Wounding, set equal to 1 if the
respondent reported being "wounded in combat." We find that 5.2 percent of our deployed
sample reported being injured in combat. To supplement this measure, we construct a binary
variable Restricted Physical Activity, which reflects whether the serviceman suffered from pain
or injury that limited his duty or physical activity for a week or longer in the prior year. Our
estimates show that the prevalence of Restricted Physical Activity is about 10 percentage points
higher (44 percent vs. 34 percent) among those who engaged the enemy in firefight during
deployments relative to those that did not.
         In addition to physical injuries, there is evidence that traumatic battlefield experience,
particularly witnessing deaths on the battlefield or injuries/deaths among members of his unit
may suffer from substantially increased risk of PTSD, a risk factor for opioid abuse. We
construct a dichotomous variable, Witness Death, which measures whether the respondent "saw


35
   In contrast to the Add Health data, heroin use is measured separately from cocaine and is also not restricted to
injectable use.

                                                          17
dead bodies or human remains," and Witness Ally Injury or Death if the respondent "witnessed
members of [his] unit or an ally unit being seriously wounded or killed." We find that 36.5
percent of deployed servicemen saw dead bodies or human remains, and 22.7 percent witnessed
members of their units or allies seriously injured or killed. Finally, in our sample, we find that
approximately 10 percent of active-duty deployed servicemembers screen positive for Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder.36
         The HRB survey has a number of advantages over the Add Health, including a much
larger sample size, which permits greater power and the exploration of heterogeneous treatment
effects by the branch of service, rank (including enlisted versus officers), age, and gender. There
are also detailed measures of combat exposure and more comprehensive measures of the
mechanisms that could explain deployment effects on opioid abuse. However, an important
limitation is the lack of detailed information on military occupation, an omission designed to
protect the anonymity of the survey. This limitation could have an impact on our identification
strategy. However, the HRB data do include some measures of skill attainment and Major
Command, which have been shown to be very reasonable proxies for occupation in the context
of the natural experiment we exploit (see Cesur and Sabia 2016). Borrowing from this approach,
we use rank-by-branch-by-Major Command fixed effects to proxy for occupation, as well as
control for detailed measures of educational attainment. In Section 4.4 below, we discuss
descriptive empirical tests for the validity of our natural experiment.


4.3 Descriptive Statistics
         Tables 1A and 1B provide descriptive statistics on prescription pain reliever use and
abuse among the members of the armed forces, by their combat status. Table 1A shows findings
for the Add Health. The results show that the use of prescription painkillers in the past four


36
  We generate an indicator of PTSD based on a PTSD Checklist-Civilian Version (PCL-C) test (Weathers et al.
1993). Individuals were asked 17 questions that captured symptoms of PTSD in which a score was calculated
indicating whether they require further evaluation. Those who scored above 50 on this scale were coded as
screening positive for PTSD. Questions asked whether participants had a loss of interest in activities that used to be
enjoyable, being extremely alert or watchful, having physical reactions when reminded of a stressful experience, and
feeling jumpy or easily startled. Respondents were asked to indicate how much they had been bothered by each of
the 17 experiences in the last 30 days; response options were not at all, a little bit, moderately, quite a bit, and
extremely. Each statement was scored from 1 to 5, and a sum for all items was computed. The standard diagnostic
cutoff was used such that if the sum were greater than or equal to 50, participants were classified as needing further
evaluation for current (past month) PTSD; those with a score less than 50 were considered not to require further
evaluation.

                                                         18
weeks was modestly higher (1.8 percentage-points) among those deployed to combat zones
versus non-combat zones. Rates of prior-month prescription painkiller use were substantially
higher for those who engaged the enemy in firefight relative to those who were in combat zones
without such firefight (12.4 vs. 7.5 percent). Moreover, rates of prescription painkiller abuse
were higher among respondents who faced combat exposure relative to those who did not see
such exposure.
       Turning to the HRB Survey (Table 1B), we see a similar pattern of results. Means of
prescription painkiller use and abuse were substantially higher among those who experienced
enemy firefight in war relative to those who were not assigned to combat. Moreover, rates of
prescription drug use were higher among those serving in branches of the military where combat
is likely to be more intense (Army and Marines relative to Navy and Air Force). Finally, rates of
illicit heroin use were substantially higher among those assigned to combat duties.


4.4 Empirical Methodology
       First, to test the hypothesis that deployment assignments are unrelated to a wide set of
personal and family background characteristics, conditional on military observables, we draw
our Add Health sample and estimate the following equations:


        Combat Zone Deploymenti = 0 + 1Xi+ 2Pre-Enlistment Drug Usei + 3Mi + i                    (1)
Combat Zone with Enemy Firefighti = 0 + 1Xi+ 2Pre-Enlistment Drug Usei + 3Mi + i                  (2)


where Xi is a vector of pre-enlistment personal and family background characteristics for
serviceman i, including age, height, weight, religion, gender, race/ethnicity, Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (PPVT) score, parental household income, parental marital status, parental
educational attainment, and number of siblings. While the Add Health dataset does not
specifically include information on prescription painkiller abuse prior to enlistment, we are able
to measure pre-enlistment abuse of other illicit substances. Pre-Enlistment Drug Usei is set
equal to 1 if servicemember i reported consuming marijuana, cocaine, inhalants, or other illegal
drugs prior to enlistment and 0 otherwise. Finally, Mi is a vector of military observables
including the branch of service, military rank, length and timing of service, and occupation.



                                                19
        If military procedures conditionally randomly assign active-duty servicemembers to
combat deployments, then estimates of 1 and 2 should be statistically indistinguishable from
zero. Our results in Table 2 are consistent with this hypothesis. Conditional on military
observables, we find little evidence that background characteristics are individually or jointly
significant predictors of the probability of being deployed to a combat versus non-combat zone
(column 1) or to a combat zone with enemy firefight relative to an overseas combat deployment
without such firefight (column 2) or to a non-combat zone deployment (column 3). This
includes pre-enlistment illicit substance use. Of 81 coefficient estimates, only one is statistically
significant at conventional levels.37
        Turning to our central analysis, we estimate the relationship between post-9/11 combat
deployments and opioid consumption via the following least squares regression:


                     Opioidi = 0 + 1Combat Zone Deploymenti + 2Mi + µi                                           (3a)
Opioidi = 0 +1Combat Zone Deploymenti +2Mi+ 3Xi+ 2Pre-Enlistment Drug Useit-1+µi (3b)


where Opioidi measures respondent i's opioid use or abuse. In alternate specifications, Combat
Zone Deployment is disaggregated to include those deployed to combat zones where enemy
firefight emerges (Combat Zone with Enemy Firefight) and combat zones without enemy
firefight (Combat Zone without Enemy Firefight). If, as argued above, deployment assignment is
exogenous to prescription painkiller use and abuse, then estimates of 1 in equations (3a) and
(3b) should be largely unchanged.
        Turning to the HRB Survey, we estimate the following equation via least squares:


                 Opioidi = 0 + 1Enemy Firefight i + 2Mi + 3Xi + i                                          (4)


where Mi includes controls for branch of service, military rank, timing of service, and
installation-level Major Command (including interactive effects) and Xi includes controls for
age, race/ethnicity, and marital status. An important drawback of the HRB Survey is the lack of
information on military occupation, owed to concerns about DoD ensuring that surveys were


37
   In column (2), Hispanic ethnic identification negatively related to combat assignment (column 2). This control is
included in all regressions and restricting the sample to non-Hispanics produces a very similar pattern of results.

                                                        20
anonymous. However, recent work by Cesur and Sabia (2016) show compelling evidence that
detailed rank and branch-by-major command controls in the HRB Survey sufficiently proxy for
occupation such that the natural experiment we exploit remains valid. In addition, in Appendix
Table 1, we show that if we restrict our set of observables in the Add Health to the observables
available in the HRB survey, our estimates of 1 are quantitatively similar. We detect no
evidence that estimated combat effects are upwardly biased. This lends some support to the
hypothesis that estimates of 1 should be unbiased. Moreover, the DoD data do not allow us to
distinguish between deployments to combat zones with and without enemy firefight. Therefore,
if deployments to combat zones where enemy firefight does not materialize causes opioid abuse,
perhaps because of (i) adverse psychological effects of the risk of violence, or (ii) access to low-
cost domestic sources of opioids, then estimates from equation (2) will be lower-bound estimates
of the effect of combat.


                                                      5. Results
         Our main results are shown in Tables 3 through 10 below. All models are estimated via
OLS and standard errors corrected for heteroscedasticity are shown in parentheses.


5.1 Add Health Survey Results
         First, using data from the Add Health (Table 3), we find that an overseas deployment
assignment to a combat zone (relative to an overseas deployment to a non-combat zone) is
associated with a 3 to 5 percentage-point increase in the probability of past month prescription
painkiller use (column 1, Panels I-III). While these effects are not statistically distinguishable
from zero at conventional levels, when we disaggregate combat zone deployments by whether
combat exposure materialized (column 1, Panel IV), we find that combat exposure is associated
with a 7 percentage-point increase in prescription painkiller abuse (Panel IV). These effects are
largely driven by those who were wounded in combat (Panel V). This pattern of findings is
consistent with the hypothesis that opioid prescriptions were commonly issued to veterans who
suffered war injuries.38



38
  In unreported specifications, we also performed our balancing tests for wounding in combat. These exercises
produce qualitatively similar estimates to those presented in Table 2. In particular, out of 54 coefficients, only three
were statistically distinguishable from zero at conventional levels.

                                                           21
        Turning to prescription opioid abuse (column 2), we find that combat assignment is
associated with a 7 percentage-point increase in non-medical use of prescription painkillers
(Panel I). Controlling for individual and family characteristics (Panel II) and pre-enlistment drug
use (Panel III) has little effect on the magnitude of the combat effect, suggesting that combat
assignment (conditional on rank and occupation) is plausibly exogenous to background
characteristics of servicemen.
        In contrast to prescription use, we find that the probability of opioid abuse rises for those
assigned to combat zones whether or not enemy firefight materializes (column 2, Panel IV) and
independent of whether the veteran suffered a combat injury (column 2, Panel V). These
findings suggest that addiction may not occur only via one's own physical injuries, but also
through psychological, peer-related, or low-cost supply channels.


5.2 HRB Survey Results
        Our estimates from the HRB survey are generally consistent with those obtained using
the Add Health. Our findings in Table 4A show that assignment to a combat zone with enemy
firefight is associated with a 2.7 percentage-point increase in prescription painkiller use (column
1, Panel I), and a 3.1 percentage point-increase in prescription painkiller abuse (column 2, Panel
I). Moreover, if, as the Add Health results in Panel III of Table 3 suggest, combat zone
assignment without exposure increases opioid use disorders, estimated abuse effects in the HRB
survey may be lower bound estimates of the impact of post-9/11 combat assignment on opioid
abuse.39
        In addition to causing prescription painkiller abuse, our results also show that post-9/11
combat assignments induce some veterans to turn to the illicit heroin market (column 3). We
find that combat exposure is associated with a 1.4 percentage-point increase in prior month illicit
heroin use, a large effect relative to a small sample mean.
        Branch-specific findings in the remaining panels of Table 4A suggest the largest abuse
effects of combat assignment for those serving in the Army (Panel II), Marines (Panel III), and
Navy (Panel IV) relative to the Air Force (Panel V). This finding is consistent with smaller



39
  This is because those deployed to combat zones without enemy firefight and those deployed to non-combat zones
are pooled as the comparison group given data limitations in the HRB survey.


                                                      22
adverse physical and mental health effects of combat exposure for airmen due to lessened
proximity to deaths and injuries or heterogeneous treatment effects across servicemembers who
select into different service branches (Cesur et al. 2013).
         In Table 4B, we explore the intensive margin of prescription painkiller abuse.
Respondents are asked whether their prescription painkiller abuse has increased since the time of
enlistment. We estimate the impact of combat exposure on the probability of painkiller abuse
increasing since enlistment both unconditionally (column 1) and conditional on ever
experiencing abuse (column 2). The findings are consistent with the hypothesis that combat
exposure may increase the frequency or intensity with which those abusing prescription opioids
do so.
         To what extent does legitimate opioid use co-occur with prescription painkiller or heroin
abuse? In Table 5, we find that combat exposure increases the likelihood of prescription
painkiller use without abuse by 1.1 percentage points (column 1), which suggests that at least
some combat-induced opioid use is limited to its intended medical use. Moreover, we find that
combat exposure increases the probability of legitimate use and abuse of painkillers (column 2)
by a similar magnitude as abuse without a prescription (column 3). A similar pattern exists for
heroin use (columns 4 and 5). Together, these results suggest that while a veteran's own
prescriptions may be a source of abuse, alternate sources are probably also important.40


5.3 Heterogeneous Effects of Combat on Opioid Abuse
         Next, we examine whether the effects of combat on opioid abuse differ by age, gender,
and enlisted personnel as compared to officers. Our results in Table 6 show that the effect of
combat assignment on opioid abuse is largest for younger servicemen ages 18-to-24 years old
(Panel I) relative to those ages 25 and older (Panels II and III). This pattern of results is
consistent with prior evidence that the mental health and substance use effects of war are more
substantial for younger combat veterans (Cesur et al. 2016). This may be because older
individuals are often of higher rank and have re-enlisted, reflecting greater resilience, better
health, or particular personality traits that reduce the opioid abuse effects of combat.



40
  In Appendix Table 2, we estimate the impact of combat exposure on prescription painkiller abuse (columns 1 and
2) and heroin use (columns 3 and 4), conditional on receipt of an opioid prescription and non-receipt. The results
are similar to those presented in Table 5.

                                                        23
        Male servicemen comprise 78 percent of the total active-duty deployed sample in the
HRB survey. This is, in part, because prior to January 2013, the Department of Defense policy
banned women from many front-line combat positions via the Combat Exclusion Policy. Still,
females' assignments during the pre-2013 period still brought them in contact with combat
injuries and deaths, even as part of support operations. Moreover, the prevalence of insurgency
warfare was quite high during the Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom in
comparison to prior conflicts. Thus, female servicemembers faced much greater combat
exposure in the post-9/11 era than in prior conflicts (Street et al. 2009).41 When we examine the
impact of combat assignment on opioid abuse among females (Panel IV), we find some evidence
that combat assignment is associated with increases in opioid abuse.
        Prior military research finds that military deployments have larger adverse effects on the
health and wellbeing of enlisted servicemembers and their families as compared to officers
(Cesur and Sabia 2016; Lyle 2006). Our findings in Panels V and VI are largely consistent with
this result. This finding may reflect that those who become officers have particular cognitive or
non-cognitive skills, support networks, or financial resources that effectively mitigate the
adverse psychological effects of combat.


5.4 Mechanisms
        The above results provide consistent evidence that combat assignments increase the risk
of opioid abuse. In Table 7, we explore specific combat experiences that might be driving this
result. We find the effects of combat exposure on opioid use and abuse are largest, by a large
margin, among servicemen wounded in battle (Panel I). This result suggests that legitimate
treatment for war injuries is a likely pathway to addiction. However, there is some residual
opioid use and abuse effect of combat for those not wounded (see Appendix Table 4), suggesting
that there may be other pathways to addiction than treatment for combat injury. In Panels II and
III of Table 7, we show that traumatic battlefield experiences -- such as witnessing deaths,
particularly those of unit members or allies -- increase opioid abuse, consistent with the
hypothesis that a psychological channel may be important as well.




41
  As Appendix Table 3 shows, 38 percent of deployed women were assigned to combat zones with enemy firefight.
In addition, 22 percent of women witnessed deaths and injuries, and 2 percent were injured themselves in combat.

                                                      24
        To explore the relative importance of peers or exposure to supply-side channels, in Table
8, we isolate the impact of combat exposure from deployment frequency and usual deployment
length.42 If unit-level peer effects or supply side channels are important, we might expect longer
deployment lengths to be more important than combat exposure. Our results suggest that combat
exposure rather than deployment duration is more important.
        In Table 9, we take another tack to explore the relative importance of various channels.
In Panel I, we reproduce estimates of equation (4) (from Panel I of Table 4) and in subsequent
panels add controls for observable mechanisms through which combat exposure may affect
opioid use: being wounded in battle, being restricted from duty due to pain or injury, positive
screening for PTSD, and observing casualties or injuries in war.43
        The results suggest that about one-third of the effect of combat exposure on opioid abuse
can be explained by war injuries. A higher percentage of the heroin effect (close to 58 percent)
can be explained by war injuries. We observe a similar pattern in Panel III when we investigate
the potential role of physical mobility restrictions.
        Psychological channels related to PTSD (Panel IV) and battlefield trauma (Panel V) also
appear to be powerful mediators. In particular, witnessing war casualties can explain one-half to
two-thirds of the combat exposure effect we observe. Together (Panel VI), the psychological
and physical health-related mechanisms can explain at least 75 percent of the effect of combat
exposure on opioid use and abuse that we observe in the HRB survey.
        Finally, prior medical research suggests that the risk of opioid abuse may be exacerbated
by PTSD (Peck et al. 2018). We empirically confirm this suggestion in Appendix Table 6,
where we show that PTSD substantially increases the adverse effects of combat.


5.4 Joint Opioid and Other Prescription Abuse
        The combined use of opioids with other Central Nervous System (CNS) depressants,
such as benzodiazepines, barbiturates, sedatives, and tranquilizers can exacerbate the potential
detrimental effects of opioid abuse (Cone et al. 2004; Salzman 1991). During the period


42
   To complete this exercise, we use the information available in the HRB survey on the number of post-September
11 deployments and the length of combat deployments in the prior 12 months. In the HRB data, combat vs. non-
combat deployment status is only available for the past 12 months.
43
   Not surprisingly, we find that each of these outcomes is significantly positively associated with engaging the
enemy in firefight (Appendix Table 5).

                                                        25
corresponding to the national opioid crisis, the rate of simultaneous opioid and benzodiazepines
prescriptions increased significantly (Hwang et al. 2016) as did the prevalence of emergency
department visits for nonmedical joint use (Jones and McAninch 2015).
        The joint use of these prescription medications was also commonplace among the
members of the Armed Forces, with up to 27 percent of veterans who were prescribed opioids
also being prescribed benzodiazepines (Park et al. 2015). Roughly half of drug overdose deaths
occurred when veterans were jointly prescribed these medications (Park et al. 2015).44
        In Table 10, we explore whether combat-induced prescription drug abuse extends to
sedatives and tranquilizers.45 In the first three columns, we find that combat exposure increases
the use and abuse of sedatives and tranquilizers (column 3). Exposure also increases the joint
non-medical use of sedatives (column 4) and tranquilizers (column 5) with prescription
painkillers, which may be an especially deadly combination for veterans.


                                                6. Conclusions
        U.S. war veterans are at the forefront of the U.S. opioid epidemic. This study is the first
to estimate the impact of post-9/11 military deployments on opioid abuse. Using two national
datasets and exploiting a natural experiment in overseas deployment assignment, we find that
combat assignment significantly increases consumption of prescription narcotics both for
medical and non-medical purposes. We also uncover evidence that combat exposure increases
heroin use. Estimated combat effects are largest for younger, enlisted active-duty servicemen.
        We find that while treatment for war injuries is one channel through which combat
deployments increase opioid abuse, there are critical psychological channels at work as well,
including PTSD and the mental health effects of exposure to battlefield trauma. In addition, we
find that post-9/11 combat assignments are associated with a substantial increase in the
utilization of sedatives and tranquilizers for non-medical purposes. Moreover, we find that facing
the theatre of war increases the likelihood of concomitant abuse of opioids with other CNS
depressing drugs, such as benzodiazepines. This result is particularly worrisome given that the


44
   In response to this public health problem, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a 2016 directive that
the concomitant use of opioid medicines with benzodiazepines requires its strongest warning (FDA 2016).
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm518473.htm
45
   Examples of prescription sedatives include in the HRB Survey are Ambien, Lunesta, and Dalmane; examples of
prescription tranquilizers include Ativan or Lorapazem, Klonopin or Clonazepam, Vistaril, and Flexeril.

                                                        26
risk of overdose from these drugs, taken in combination with opioids, exacerbates the risk of
death. Together, our findings point to combating opioid abuse as an important front in the
Global War on Terrorism.
        The U.S. Department of Defense, aware of concerns about opioid addiction and overdose,
has undertaken a number of strategies to try to combat the problem, including (i) promotion of
non-pharmacological strategies for pain management such as yoga, acupuncture, sports, and
physical therapy, (ii) more holistic training in behavioral health for employees at Military
Treatment Facilities, (iii) increased availability of naloxone, an opioid antagonist, on military
installations, (iv) expanded education and communication programs, (v) more complete and
aggressive random drug testing, and (vi) increasing monitoring of opioid prescriptions via the
2017 Veterans Prescription Data Accountability Act46 (U.S. Department of Defense 2017).
        Since 2012, the rate of opioid prescribing by the VA has fallen by over 40 percent (U.S.
Department of Veteran Affairs 2018). This has been achieved, in part, by raising the costs for
prescriptions to patients by increasing the number of VA physician visits per refill as well as the
greater reluctance of VA physicians to recommend opioids to treat chronic pain. However, some
policymakers wonder whether dramatic cuts in opioid prescriptions by VA providers have
happened without well-targeted alternative effective chronic pain management strategies.
Substitution into the illicit heroin market and the psychological consequences of withdrawal
remain a concern.47
        One relatively recent strategy to treat chronic pain without the use of narcotics is through
the use of medical marijuana. There is growing evidence that state medical marijuana laws are


46
   The Veteran Affairs Prescription Data Accountability Act requires VA employees and VA-authorized prescribers
to report controlled substance prescriptions for both veterans and non-veterans to the PDMP in the state where they
practice. In January 2018, the Department of Defense released VA opioid prescribing data to the public at the
following website: https://www.data.va.gov/story/department-veterans-affairs-opioid-prescribing-data
47
   A 2017 Newsweek article describing this dilemma captured the sense of crisis and pressure military policymakers
are facing. See "How the VA Fueled the National Opioid Crisis and Is Killing Thousands of Veterans" at
http://www.newsweek.com/2017/10/20/va-fueled-opioid-crisis-killing-veterans-681552.html. See also:

        "[Veterans] eased the chronic pain with the help of narcotics prescribed for years by the...Veterans
        Medical Center. Then the VA made a stark and sudden shift: Instead of doling out pills to thousands of
        veteran...-- a policy facing mounting criticism -- they began cutting dosages or canceling prescriptions,
        and, instead, began referring many vets to alternative therapies such as acupuncture and yoga. At first, the
        change seemed to work: Worrisome signs of prescription drug addiction among a generation of vets
        appeared to ebb. But the well-intentioned change in prescription policy has come with a heavy cost. Vets
        cut off from their meds say they feel abandoned, left to endure crippling pain on their own, or to seek other
        sources of relief. Or worse." (Star Tribune 2017)

                                                        27
associated with a reduction in prescription pain medication fills (Bradford and Bradford 2016,
2017; Bradford et al. 2018), opioid-related hospitalization stays (Shi 2017), and overall age-
adjusted opioid death rates (Bachhuber et al. 2014). Reductions in painkiller-related addiction
and mortality appear to be driven mainly by medical marijuana laws that are accompanied by
dispensaries (Powell et al. 2018). While marijuana legalization is certainly not a silver bullet,
evidence that marijuana and opioids are substitutes suggests that access to medical marijuana may
provide an alternative, less addictive, and less unhealthy means of treating pain. However, a
January 2018 memo by Former Attorney General Jeff Sessions rescinded the Obama-era policy of
not interfering with state marijuana laws, pledging to support Federal law treating marijuana as a
Schedule I drug. While the VA has vowed to continue protecting doctor-patient communications
about medical marijuana use, critics worry that the Sessions memo will have the unintended
consequence of increasing illicit use of opioids among veterans.




                                                  28
                                        7. References

Adams, Rachel Sayko, Cindy Parks Thomas, Grant A. Ritter, Sue Lee, Mayada Saadoun,
Thomas V. Williams, and Mary Jo Larson. 2018. "Predictors of Postdeployment Prescription
Opioid Receipt and Long-Term Prescription Opioid Utilization Among Army Active Duty
Soldiers", Military Medicine 184(1-2): 101-109.

Ahmed, Azam. 2016. "Drug That Killed Prince Is Making Mexican Cartels Richer, US
Says," New York Times. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/10/world/americas/drug-that-killed-prince-is-making-
mexican-cartels-richer-us-says.html

Alpert, Abby, David Powell, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula. 2018. "Supply-Side Drug Policy in
the Presence of Substitutes: Evidence From the Introduction of Abuse-Deterrent
Opioids," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10(4): 1-35.

American Association of Family Physicians (AAFP). 2016. Available at:
https://www.aafp.org/dam/AAFP/documents/advocacy/prevention/risk/LT-VA-PDMPs-
050516.pdf

Angrist, Joshua D. 1993. "The Effect of Veterans Benefits on Education and
Earnings," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(4): 637-652.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Stacey H. Chen. 2011. "Schooling and the Vietnam-Era GI Bill:
Evidence from the Draft Lottery," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(2): 96-
118.

Angrist, Joshua D., Stacey H. Chen, and Jae Song. 2011. "Long-Term Consequences of
Vietnam-Era Conscription: New Estimates Using Social Security Data," American Economic
Review: 101(3): 334-38.

Army Regulation 220-1. 2010. Amy Unit Status Reporting and Force Registration ­
Consolidated Policies.

Aurin, Marcus. 2000. "Chasing the Dragon: The Cultural Metamorphosis of Opium in the United
States, 18251935," Medical Anthropology Quarterly 14(3): 414-441.

Axelrod, Jim. 2013. "Veterans Dying from Overmedication," CBS News. Available at:
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/veterans-dying-from-overmedication/

Bachhuber, Marcus A., Brendan Saloner, Chinazo O. Cunningham, and Colleen L. Barry. 2014.
"Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid Analgesic Overdose Mortality in the United States, 1999-
2010," Journal of the American Medical Association: Internal Medicine 174(10): 1668-1673.




                                             29
Baser, Onur, Lin Xie, Jack Mardekian, David Schaaf, Li Wang, and Ashish V. Joshi. 2014.
"Prevalence of Diagnosed Opioid Abuse and its Economic Burden in the Veterans Health
Administration," Pain Practice 14(5): 437-445.

Becker, William C., David A. Fiellin, Rollin M. Gallagher, Kelly S. Barth, Jennifer T. Ross, and
David W. Oslin. 2009. "The Association Between Chronic Pain and Prescription Drug Abuse in
Veterans," Pain Medicine 10(3): 531-536.

Birk, Erica, and Glen R. Waddell. 2017. "The Mitigating Role of Prescription Drug Monitoring
Programs in the Abuse of Prescription Drugs," Working Paper No. 10990, Institute for the Study
of Labor (IZA).

Bohnert, Amy SB, Mark A. Ilgen, Sandro Galea, John F. McCarthy, and Frederic C. Blow. 2011.
"Accidental Poisoning Mortality Among Patients in the Department of Veterans Affairs Health
System," Medical Care 393-396.

Booth, Martin. 1996. "Opium: A History," New York: St. Martin's Press.

Bradford, Ashley C., and W. David Bradford. 2016. "Medical Marijuana Laws Reduce
Prescription Medication Use in Medicare Part D," Health Affairs 35(7): 1230-1236.

Bradford, Ashley C., and W. David Bradford. 2017. "Medical Marijuana Laws May be
Associated With a Decline in the Number of Prescriptions for Medicaid Enrollees," Health
Affairs 36(5): 945-951.

Bradford, Ashley C., W. David Bradford, Amanda Abraham, and Grace Bagwell Adams. 2018.
"Association between US state medical cannabis laws and opioid prescribing in the Medicare
Part D population." JAMA Internal Medicine 178(5): 667-672.

Brady, Kathleen T., Peter Tuerk, Sudie E. Back, Michael E. Saladin, Angela E. Waldrop, and
Hugh Myrick. 2009. "Combat Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, Substance Use Disorders, and
Traumatic Brain Injury," Journal of Addiction Medicine 3(4): 179.

Bray, Robert M., Larry A. Kroutil, and S.C. Wheeless. 1995. "Department of Defense Survey of
Health Related Behaviors Among Military Personnel, Report No. RTI/6019/06-FR," Research
Triangle Institute, Research Triangle Park, NC.

Bray, Robert M., John A. Fairbank, and Mary Ellen Marsden. 1999. "Stress and Substance Use
Among Military Women and Men," The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 25(2):
239-256.

Brushwood, David B. 2003. "Maximizing the Value of Electronic Prescription Monitoring
Programs," The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics 31(1): 41-54.




                                               30
Buchmueller, Thomas C., and Colleen Carey. 2018. "The Effect of Prescription Drug Monitoring
Programs on Opioid Utilization in Medicare," American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 10(1): 77-112.

Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. "Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The
Unintended Legacy of the Vietnam War," American Economic Review 91(2): 97-102.

Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2002. "Did Draft Avoidance Raise College Attendance
During the Vietnam War?" Working Paper No. 46, Center for Labor Economics, University of
California, Berkeley.

Cesur, Resul, Joseph J. Sabia, and Erdal Tekin. 2013. "The Psychological Costs of War: Military
Combat and Mental Health," Journal of Health Economics 32(1): 51-65.

Cesur, Resul, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2016. "When War Comes Home: The Effect of Combat
Service on Domestic Violence," Review of Economics and Statistics 98(2): 209-225.

Cesur, Resul, Alexander Chesney, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2016. "Combat Exposure, Cigarette
Consumption, and Substance Use," Economic Inquiry 54(3): 1705-1726.

Clancy, Dr. Carolyn, M.D. 2015. "VA Opioid Prescription Policy, Practice and Procedures:
Hearings before the Committee on Veterans' Affairs, Senate, 114th Cong. 1"

Coombs, Robert H., and Louis Jolyon Wes, eds. 1991. "Drug Testing: Issues and Options," New
York: Oxford University Press.

Cockburn, Patrick. 2007. "Opium: Iraq's Deadly New Export," Independent, 23 May.

Compton, Wilson M., and Nora D. Volkow. 2006. "Major Increases in Opioid Analgesic Abuse
in the United States: Concerns and Strategies," Drug and Alcohol Dependence 81(2): 103-107.

Compton, Wilson M., Christopher M. Jones, and Grant T. Baldwin. 2016. "Relationship
Between Nonmedical Prescription-Opioid Use and Heroin Use," New England Journal of
Medicine 374(2): 154-163.

Cone, Edward J., Reginald V. Fant, Jeffrey M. Rohay, Yale H. Caplan, Mayra Ballina, Robert F.
Reder, and J. David Haddox. 2004. "Oxycodone Involvement in Drug Abuse Deaths. II.
Evidence for Toxic Multiple Drug-Drug Interactions," Journal of Analytical Toxicology 28(7):
616-624.

Congressional Research Service. 2018. "American War and Military Operations Casualties: Lists
and Statistics." Available at: https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/RL32492.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2017. "Drug Overdose Deaths in the United States,
1999­2016," NCHS Data Brief No. 294 Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db294.pdf

                                              31
Council on Foreign Relations. 2010. "The Good and Bad News About Afghan Opium."
Available at: https://www.cfr.org/expert-brief/good-and-bad-news-about-afghan-opium

Dowell, Deborah, Kun Zhang, Rita K. Noonan, and Jason M. Hockenberry. 2016. "Mandatory
Provider Review and Pain Clinic Laws Reduce the Amounts of Opioids Prescribed and Overdose
Death Rates," Health Affairs, 35(10): 1876-1883.

Dupont, R. and Amos, D. 2001. American Public Radio [Radio Series]. St. Paul: American
Public Media Group.

Edlund, Mark J., Bradley C. Martin, Joan E. Russo, Andrea DeVries, Jennifer Brennan Braden,
and Mark D. Sullivan. 2014. "The Role of Opioid Prescription in Incident Opioid Abuse and
Dependence Among Individuals With Chronic Noncancer Pain: the Role of Opioid
Prescription," The Clinical Journal of Pain 30(7): 557­564.

Engel, Rozlyn C., Luke B. Gallagher, and David S. Lyle. 2010. "Military Deployments and
Children's Academic Achievement: Evidence from Department of Defense Education Activity
Schools," Economics of Education Review 29(1): 73-82.

Evans, William N., Ethan MJ Lieber, and Patrick Power. 2018. "How the Reformulation of
OxyContin Ignited the Heroin Epidemic," Working Paper No. w24475, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Fishman, Scott M., Jennifer S. Papazian, Susana Gonzalez, Paul S. Riches, and Aaron Gilson.
2004. "Regulating Opioid Prescribing Through Prescription Monitoring Programs: Balancing
Drug Diversion and Treatment of Pain," Pain Medicine 5(3): 309-324.

Gellad, Walid F., Florentina E. Sileanu, Jennifer A. Hale, Thomas R. Radomski, Adam J.
Gordon, Chester B. Good, and Michael J. Fine. 2018. "Impact of Dual Use of Department of
Veterans Affairs and Medicare Part D Drug Benefits on Potentially Unsafe Opioid
Use," American Journal of Public Health 108(2): 248-255.

General Accounting Office. 2018. "VA HEALTH CARE: Progress Made Towards Improving
Opioid Safety, but Further Efforts to Assess Progress and Reduce Risk Are Needed." Available
at: https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/692061.pdf

Gupta, Dr. Sanjay, M.D. 2015. "Vietnam, Heroin and the Lesson of Disrupting Addiction,"
CNN, December 23. Available at: https://www.cnn.com/2015/12/21/health/vietnam-heroin-
disrupting-addiction/index.html.

Grecu, Anca M., Dhaval M. Dave, and Henry Saffer. 2019. "Mandatory Access Prescription
Drug Monitoring Programs and Prescription Drug Abuse," Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 38(1): 181-209.




                                              32
Hedegaard, Holly, Margaret Warner, and Arialdi M. Miniño. 2017. "Drug Overdose Deaths in
the United States, 1999-2015," NCHS Data Brief 273: 1-8.

Hwang, Catherine S., Elizabeth M. Kang, Cynthia J. Kornegay, Judy A. Staffa, Christopher M.
Jones, and Jana K. McAninch. 2016. "Trends in the Concomitant Prescribing of Opioids and
Benzodiazepines, 2002- 2014," American Journal of Preventive Medicine 51(2): 51-160.

Institute of Medicine of The National Academies. 2011. "Relieving Pain in America: A
Blueprint for Transforming Prevention, Care, Education, and Research." Available at:
https://iprcc.nih.gov/sites/default/files/IOM_Pain_Report_508C.pdf

Irving, J. 1988. "Drug Testing in the Military--Technical and Legal Problems," Clinical
Chemistry 34(3): 637-640.

Islam, M. Mofizul, and Ian S. McRae. 2014. "An Inevitable Wave of Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs in the Context of Prescription Opioids: Pros, Cons and Tensions," BMC
Pharmacology and Toxicology 15(1): 46.

Jemionek, John F., Curtis L. Copley, Michael L. Smith, and Marilyn R. Past. 2008.
"Concentration Distribution of the Marijuana Metabolite 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol-9-Carboxylic
Acid and the Cocaine Metabolite Benzoylecgonine in the Department of Defense Urine Drug-
Testing Program," Journal of Analytical Toxicology 32(6): 408-416.

Johannes, Catherine B., T. Kim Le, Xiaolei Zhou, Joseph A. Johnston, and Robert H. Dworkin.
2010. "The Prevalence of Chronic Pain in United States Adults: Results of an Internet-Based
Survey," Journal of Pain 11(11): 230-1239.

Jones, Mark R., Omar Viswanath, Jacquelin Peck, Alan D. Kaye, Jatinder S. Gill, and Thomas T.
Simopoulos. 2018. "A Brief History of the Opioid Epidemic and Strategies for Pain
Medicine," Pain and Therapy 7: 13-21.

Jones, Christopher M., and Jana K. McAninch. 2015. "Emergency Department Visits and
Overdose Deaths from Combined Use of Opioids and Benzodiazepines," American Journal of
Preventive Medicine 49(4): 493-501.

Kan, Paul R. 2008. "Drug Intoxicated Irregular Fighters: Complications, Dangers, and
Responses," Army War College Strategic Studies Institute, Carlisle Barracks, PA.

Katz, Josh. 2017. "The First Count of Fentanyl Deaths in 2016: Up 540% in Three Years," The
New York Times. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/09/02/upshot/fentanyl-
drug-overdose-
deaths.html?action=click&module=RelatedCoverage&pgtype=Article&region=Footer

Korsmeyer, Pamela, and Henry R. Kranzler. 2009. "Encyclopedia of Drugs, Alcohol &
Addictive Behavior," USA: Macmillan Reference.



                                               33
Lin, Lewei Allison, Talya Peltzman, John F. McCarthy, Elizabeth M. Oliva, Jodie A. Trafton,
and Amy SB Bohnert. 2019. "Changing Trends in Opioid Overdose Deaths and Prescription
Opioid Receipt Among Veterans." American Journal of Preventive Medicine 57 (1): 106-110.

Lyle, David S. 2006. "Using Military Deployments and Job Assignments to Estimate the Effect
of Parental Absences and Household Relocations on Children's Academic
Achievement," Journal of Labor Economics 24(2): 319-350.

Massing, Michael. 1998. "The Fix," New York: Simon & Schuster.

McCain, John. 2017. "Senator John McCain Reintroduces Legislation to Prevent
Overmedication and Combat Suicide Among Veterans." Available at:
https://www.mccain.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/2017/3/senator-john-mccain-reintroduces-
legislation-to-prevent-overmedication-combat-suicide-among-veterans

McFall, Miles E., Priscilla W. Mackay, and Dennis M. Donovan. 1992. "Combat-Related
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Severity of Substance Abuse in Vietnam Veterans," Journal of
Studies on Alcohol 53(4): 357-363.

McKenna, Cailin R. 2007. "Trends in Substance Abuse Research," Nova Publishers.

Meier, Andrea, Chantal Lambert-Harris, Mark P. McGovern, Haiyi Xie, Melissa An, and
Bethany McLeman. 2014. "Co-Occurring Prescription Opioid Use Problems and Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder Symptom Severity," American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 40(4): 304-
311.

Merboth, Marcia K., and Susan Barnason. 2000. "Managing Pain: the Fifth Vital Sign," The
Nursing Clinics of North America 35(2): 375-383.

Miller, Matthew, Catherine W. Barber, Sarah Leatherman, Jennifer Fonda, John A. Hermos,
Kelly Cho, and David R. Gagnon. 2015. "Prescription Opioid Duration of Action and the Risk of
Unintentional Overdose Among Patients Receiving Opioid Therapy," Journal of the American
Medical Association: Internal Medicine 175(4): 608-615.

Mosher, H. J., E. E. Krebs, M. Carrel, P. J. Kaboli, M. W. Vander Weg, and B. C. Lund. 2015.
"Trends in Prevalent and Incident Opioid Receipt: An Observational Study in Veterans Health
Administration, 2004­2012," Journal of General Internal Medicine 30(5): 597-604.

Mularski, Richard A., Foy WhiteChu, Devorah Overbay, Lois Miller, Steven M. Asch, and
Linda Ganzini. 2006. "Measuring Pain as the 5th Vital Sign Does Not Improve Quality of Pain
Management," Journal of General Internal Medicine 21(6): 607-612.

Murphy, Francis X. Forthcoming. "Social Influences on Human Capital Investment: Evidence
from a Continuing Education Program in the US Army," Journal of Labor Economics.



                                              34
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Phillips JK, Ford MA, Bonnie RJ,
editors. 2017. Pain Management and the Opioid Epidemic: Balancing Societal and Individual
Benefits and Risks of Prescription Opioid Use. (Washington DC: National Academies Press;
2017). Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK458662/

National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. 2015. "Report of the Working Group
on Strengthening Collaborations with the U.S. Department of Defense and U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs: Effectiveness Research on Mind and Body Interventions." Available at:
https://files.nccih.nih.gov/s3fs-public/Council_Working_Group_Final_Report_2015-01-
27.pdf?8sgspn_dqheKVmoueEM48z69u8gIEDsv

National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago. 2018. "AP-NORC Poll: Most
Americans See Drug Addiction as a Disease." Available at: http://www.apnorc.org/news-
media/Pages/AP-NORC-Poll-Most-Americans-see-drug-addiction-as-a-disease.aspx

Nixon, Richard. 1971. "Special Message to the Congress on Drug Abuse Prevention and
Control," The American Presidency Project. Available at:
http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=3048.

Leung, Pamela TM, Erin M. Macdonald, Matthew B. Stanbrook, Irfan A. Dhalla, and David N.
Juurlink. 2017. "A 1980 Letter on the Risk of Opioid Addiction," New England Journal of
Medicine 376(22): 2194-2195.

O'Connell, Thomas. W., ASD(SO/LIC). Department of Defense. 2003. "Department Drug
Demand Reduction Policy." Available at:
https://prhome.defense.gov/ForceResiliency/DDRP/Programpolicy/

Park, Tae Woo, Richard Saitz, Dara Ganoczy, Mark A. Ilgen, and Amy S.B. Bohnert. 2015.
"Benzodiazepine Prescribing Patterns and Deaths from Drug Overdose Among U.S. Veterans
Receiving Opioid Analgesics: Case-Cohort Study," bmj 350: h2698.

Pacula, Rosalie Liccardo, Sarah B. Hunter, Allison J. Ober, Karen Chan Osilla, Raffaele
Vardavas, Janice C. Blanchard, David DeVries et al. 2017. "Preventing, Identifying, and
Treating Prescription Drug Misuse Among Active-Duty Service Members," Rand Health
Quarterly 7(1).

Peck, Kelly R., Julie A. Schumacher, Paul R. Stasiewicz, and Scott F. Coffey. 2018. "Adults
With Comorbid Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, Alcohol Use Disorder, and Opioid Use Disorder:
The Effectiveness of Modified Prolonged Exposure," Journal of Traumatic Stress 31(3): 373-
382.

Platteborze, Peter L., Donald J. Kippenberger, and Thomas M. Martin. 2014. "Unauthorized
Drug Use in the U.S. Army Based on Medical Review Officer Evaluations," Journal of
Analytical Toxicology 38(9): 653-659.




                                              35
Porter, Jane, and Herschel Jick. 1980. "Addiction Rare in Patients Treated With Narcotics," New
England Journal of Medicine 302(2): 123.

Powell, David, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, and Mireille Jacobson. 2018. "Do Medical Marijuana
Laws Reduce Addictions and Deaths Related to Pain Killers?" Journal of Health Economics 58:
9-42.

Price, Rumi Kato, Nathan K. Risk, Ashley H. Haden, Collins E. Lewis, and Edward L.
Spitznagel. 2004. "Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, Drug Dependence, and Suicidality Among
Male Vietnam Veterans With a History of Heavy Drug Use," Drug and Alcohol Dependence 76:
S31-S43.

Rasmussen, Nicolas. 2008. "America's First Amphetamine Epidemic 1929­1971: A Quantitative
and Qualitative Retrospective With Implications for the Present," American Journal of Public
Health 98(6): 974-985.

Rasmussen, Nicolas. 2011. "Medical Science and the Military: the Allies' Use of Amphetamine
During World War II," Journal of Interdisciplinary History 42(2): 205-233.

Reisman, Anna B. 2016. "When the Medicine Doesn't Work," Slate. Available at:
https://slate.com/technology/2016/06/purdue-pharmas-marketing-of-their-painkillers-may-have-
muddied-my-relationships-with-my-patients.html

Robert Weiner Associates. 2009. "News Releases and Media Coverage of General Barry
McCaffrey." Available at:
http://www.weinerpublic.com/McCaffrey_NAATP_release_May_20_2009.doc

Robins, Lee N. 1974. "The Vietnam Drug User Returns. Final Report." Special Action Office
Monograph, Series A, No. 2, May 1974.

Robins, Lee N., Darlene H. Davis, and Donald W. Goodwin. 1974. "Drug Use by U.S. Army
Enlisted Men in Vietnam: A Follow-Up on Their Return Home," American Journal of
Epidemiology 99(4): 235-249.

Robins, Lee N., and Sergey Slobodyan. 2003. "PostVietnam Heroin Use and Injection by
Returning U.S. Veterans: Clues to Preventing Injection Today," Addiction 98(8): 1053-1060.

Robins, Lee N., J. E. Helzer, M. Hesselbrock, and E. Wish. 2010. "Vietnam Veterans Three
Years After Vietnam: How Our Study Changed Our View of Heroin," The American Journal on
Addictions 19(3): 203-211.

Rooney, Jo Ann, Undersecretary of Defense. Department of Defense. 2012. "Update to the
Department of Defense Drug Testing Panel." Available at:
https://prhome.defense.gov/ForceResiliency/DDRP/Programpolicy/




                                              36
Rosenblum, Andrew, Lisa A. Marsch, Herman Joseph, and Russell K. Portenoy. 2008. "Opioids
and the Treatment of Chronic Pain: Controversies, Current Status, and Future
Directions," Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology 16(5): 405.

Ross-Degnan, Dennis, Linda Simoni-Wastila, Jeffrey S. Brown, Xiaoming Gao, Connie Mah,
Leon E. Cosler, Thomas Fanning et al. 2004. "A Controlled Study of the Effects of State
Surveillance on Indicators of Problematic and Non-Problematic Benzodiazepine Use in a
Medicaid Population," The International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine 34(2): 103-123.

Rubec, Stephanie. 2004. "Drug Use Nightmare on Canadian Forces," Toronto Sun. November
14, 2004.

Sabia, Joseph J., and Bill Skimmyhorn. 2019. "Beyond the Draft: Modern Warfare, All-
Volunteer Forces, and Veterans' Economic Wellbeing," Working Paper, Center for Health
Economics & Policy Studies, San Diego State University.

Sall, James, and Eric Rodgers. 2018. "VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for Opioid Therapy
for Chronic Pain," Journal of the American Psychiatric Nurses Association 24(4): 378.

Salzman, Carl. 1991. "The APA Task Force Report on Benzodiazepine Dependence, Toxicity,
and Abuse," American Journal of Psychiatry 148: 151-152.

Sandbrink, Frienhelm, M.D. 2017. "VA's Acting National Program Director for Pain
Management." Available at: https://newsletter.samhsa.gov/2017/06/12/opioid-pain-
management-for-veterans-active-duty-military/

Schiff, Paul L. 2002. "Opium and its Alkaloids," American Journal of Pharmaceutical
Education 66(2): 188-196.

Schoenfeld, Andrew J., John Dunn, Julia Bader, and Philip Belmon. 2013. "The Nature and
Extent of War Injuries Sustained by Combat Specialty Personnel Killed and Wounded in
Afghanistan and Iraq, 2003­2011," Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery 75(2): 287-291.

Seal, Karen H., Shira Maguen, Daniel Bertenthal, Steven L. Batki, Joan Striebel, Murray B.
Stein, Erin Madden, and Thomas C. Neylan. 2016. "Observational Evidence for Buprenorphine's
Impact on Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms in Veterans With Chronic Pain and Opioid Use
Disorder," The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 77(9): 1182-1188.

Seth, Puja, Rose A. Rudd, Rita K. Noonan, and Tamara M. Haegerich. 2018. "Quantifying the
Epidemic of Prescription Opioid Overdose Deaths," American Journal of Public Health 108(4):
500-502.

Shi, Yuyan. 2017. "Medical Marijuana Policies and Hospitalizations Related to Marijuana and
Opioid Pain Reliever," Drug and Alcohol Dependence 173: 144-150.




                                             37
Shiner, Brian, Christine Leonard Westgate, Nancy C. Bernardy, Paula P. Schnurr, and Bradley
V. Watts. 2017. "Trends in Opioid Use Disorder Diagnoses and Medication Treatment Among
Veterans With Posttraumatic Stress Disorder," Journal of Dual Diagnosis 13(3): 201-212.

Silverman, Robert, Jeanne Tuttle, and Roberto Santos. 2014. "State Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs VHA Participation [Webinar Slides]." Available at:
https://www.pdmpassist.org/pdf/TTAC_Veterans_Affairs_webinar_20140319.pdf

Street, Amy E., Dawne Vogt, and Lissa Dutra. 2009. "A New Generation of Women Veterans:
Stressors Faced by Women Deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan," Clinical Psychology
Review 29(8): 685-694.

Tanielian, Terri, and Lisa H. Jaycox. 2008. Invisible Wounds of War: Psychological and
Cognitive Injuries, Their Consequences, and Services to Assist Recovery. Santa Monica, CA:
Rand Corporation.

Teeters, Jenni B., Cynthia L. Lancaster, Delisa G. Brown, and Sudie E. Back. 2017. "Substance
Use Disorders in Military Veterans: Prevalence and Treatment Challenges," Substance Abuse
and Rehabilitation 8: 69.

Toblin, Robin L., Phillip J. Quartana, Lyndon A. Riviere, Kristina Clarke Walper, and Charles
W. Hoge. 2014. "Chronic Pain and Opioid Use in U.S. Soldiers After Combat
Deployment," Journal of the American Medical Association: Internal Medicine 174(8): 1400-
1401.

Tompkins, D. Andrew, J. Greg Hobelmann, and Peggy Compton. 2017. "Providing Chronic Pain
Management in the "Fifth Vital Sign" Era: Historical and Treatment Perspectives on a Modern-
Day Medical Dilemma," Drug and Alcohol Dependence 173: S11-S21.

Tosti, Padideh. 2007. "Global Illicit Sectors: An Analysis of Drugs in International
Relations," PhD. diss., London School of Economics and Political Science (United Kingdom).

Turk, Dennis C., Michael C. Brody, and E. Akiko Okifuji. 1994. "Physicians' Attitudes and
Practices Regarding the Long-Term Prescribing of Opioids for Non-Cancer Pain," Pain 59(2):
201-208.

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2007. "Afghanistan Opium Survey." Available at:
https://www.unodc.org/documents/crop-monitoring/Afghanistan-Opium-Survey-2007.pdf

U.S. Department of Defense. 2017. "House Report 114­537, Page 174, Accompanying H.R.
4909, the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017: Report on Prescription
Opioid Abuse and Effects on Readiness." Available at:
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwjX3e
Wzs73bAhU3CDQIHarQAUEQFggzMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fhealth.mil%2FReference-
Center%2FReports%2F2017%2F10%2F29%2FPrescription-Opioid-Abuse-and-Effects-on-
Readiness&usg=AOvVaw3nmTmRD-Dr-NwHjK5-tInC

                                              38
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. 2018. "National Survey on
Drug Use and Health 2016 (NSDUH-2016-DS0001)." Available at: https://datafiles.samhsa.gov/

U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. 2013. "Disclosure to Participate in State Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs. Interim Final Rule," Federal Register 78(28): 9589.
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. 2018. "Department of Veterans Affairs Opioid Prescribing
Data 2012 -- 2018 [Data set]." Available at: https://www.data.va.gov/story/department-veterans-
affairs-opioid-prescribing-data

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2016. "FDA Warns About Serious Risks and Death When
Combining Opioid Pain or Cough Medicines With Benzodiazepines; Requires Its Strongest
Warning."

Veterans Heath Administration. 2018. Alleged Inappropriate Controlled Substance Prescribing
Practices at a Veterans Integrated Service Network 20 Medical Facility. Available at:
https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VAOIG-16-05323-200.pdf

Veterans Affairs Prescription Data Accountability Act. 2017. Available
at: https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ86/PLAW-115publ86.pdf

Volkow, Nora D., and Thomas A. McLella. 2011. "Curtailing Diversion and Abuse of Opioid
Analgesics Without Jeopardizing Pain Treatment," Journal of the American Medical Association
305(13): 1346-1347.

Wenger, Jennie W., Caolionn O'Connell, and Linda Cottrell. 2018. "Examination of Recent
Deployment Experience Across the Services and Components," RAND Corporation.

World Health Organization. 1957. "Expert Committee on Addiction-Producing Drugs, Seventh
Report. World Health Organization Technical Report," 116: 9­10.




                                               39
                                     Table 1A: Add Health Summary Statistics by Combat Assignment
                                                              All              Combat Zone          Combat Zone            Enemy         Enemy
                                                                               Deployment =         Deployment =        Firefight = 1 Firefight = 0
                                                                                    1                    0
   Dependent Variables

   Prescription Painkiller                                   0.093                  0.099                0.076              0.124            0.075
                                                            (0.291)                (0.299)              (0.267)            (0.331)          (0.264)
   Painkiller Abuse                                          0.129                  0.130                0.127              0.143            0.118
                                                            (0.336)                (0.337)              (0.335)            (0.351)          (0.323)

   Combat Service Variables

   Combat Zone Deployment                                    0.755                  1.000                0.000              1.000            1.000
                                                            (0.430)                 0.000                0.000              0.000            0.000

        Combat Zone with Enemy Firefight                     0.367                  0.486                0.000              1.000            0.000
                                                            (0.483)                (0.501)               0.000              0.000            0.000
        Combat Zone without Enemy Firefight                  0.388                  0.514                0.000              0.000            1.000
                                                            (0.488)                (0.501)               0.000              0.000            0.000

        Combat Zone with War Wounding                        0.089                  0.118                0.000              0.181            0.059
                                                            (0.285)                (0.323)               0.000             (0.386)          (0.236)
        Combat Zone without War Wounding                     0.666                  0.882                0.000              0.819            0.941
                                                            (0.472)                (0.323)               0.000             (0.386)          (0.236)

   Non-Combat Zone Deployment                                0.245                  0.000                1.000              0.000            0.000
                                                            (0.430)                 0.000                0.000              0.000            0.000


   Observations                                               482                    364                  118                177              187
Standard deviations in parentheses. The means are generated using data for males drawn from Wave IV of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to
Adult Health.

                                                                            40
                                     Table 1B: DOD-HRB Summary Statistics by Combat Assignment
                                                                 Enemy              Enemy
                                                   All                                              Army         Marines         Navy        Air Force
                                                              Firefight = 1      Firefight = 0

 Dependent Variables
    Prior-Month Painkiller                       0.129            0.151             0.106           0.185         0.117          0.106          0.116
                                                (0.335)          (0.358)           (0.307)         (0.389)       (0.322)        (0.308)        (0.320)
     Prior-Month Painkiller Abuse                0.089            0.107             0.070           0.133         0.084          0.081          0.066
                                                (0.285)          (0.310)           (0.254)         (0.339)       (0.277)        (0.272)        (0.248)
     Prior-Month Heroin                          0.006            0.012             0.001           0.010         0.008          0.005          0.003
                                                (0.079)          (0.107)           (0.030)         (0.100)       (0.089)        (0.071)        (0.057)

 Combat Service Variables
   Enemy Firefight                               0.515            1.000             0.000           0.805         0.706          0.220          0.443
                                                (0.500)           0.000             0.000          (0.396)       (0.456)        (0.414)        (0.497)
     War Wounding                                0.052            0.099             0.002           0.116         0.064          0.026          0.016
                                                (0.221)          (0.298)           (0.042)         (0.320)       (0.244)        (0.160)        (0.127)
     Restricted Physical Activity                0.389            0.440             0.335           0.497         0.420          0.332          0.337
                                                (0.488)          (0.496)           (0.472)         (0.500)       (0.494)        (0.471)        (0.473)
     Witness Death                               0.365            0.634             0.083           0.626         0.482          0.196          0.241
                                                (0.482)          (0.482)           (0.276)         (0.484)       (0.500)        (0.397)        (0.428)
     Witness Ally Injury or Death                0.227            0.427             0.017           0.454         0.320          0.092          0.114
                                                (0.419)          (0.495)           (0.129)         (0.498)       (0.466)        (0.289)        (0.317)

 Observations                                    11542            5948              5594            2563           2507           3374          3098
Standard deviations in parentheses. The means are generated using data for males drawn from the 2008 Department of Defense Health and Related Behaviors
Survey.




                                                                            41
                 Table 2: Evidence on the Exogeneity of Deployment Assignment, Add Health
                                              Combat Assignment    Enemy Firefight    Enemy Firefight
                                                      vs                 vs                 vs
                                                 No Combat           No Enemy           No Combat
                                                 Assignment           Firefight         Assignment
                                                     (1)                 (2)                (3)

Pre-Deployment Ever Drug Use                        -0.055              0.059                -0.053
                                                   (0.042)             (0.050)              (0.057)

Wave 1 Height                                       0.005               0.008                 0.012
                                                   (0.008)             (0.009)              (0.010)
Wave 1 Weight                                       -0.001              -0.000               -0.002
                                                   (0.001)             (0.001)              (0.001)

Wave 1 Protestant                                   0.002              0.020               0.041
                                                   (0.075)            (0.090)             (0.110)
Wave 1 Catholic                                     0.059              0.032               0.052
                                                   (0.083)            (0.101)             (0.124)
Wave 1 Other Religion                               0.062              0.011               0.149
                                                   (0.136)            (0.167)             (0.229)
F-test (p-value) for Religion Indicators        0.456 (0.714)      0.0410 (0.989)      0.145 (0.933)

Age in Years                                        0.322              -0.252               0.260
                                                   (0.355)             (0.452)            (0.467)
Age in Years Squared                               -0.006               0.004              -0.005
                                                   (0.006)             (0.008)            (0.008)
F-test (p-value) for Age                        0.514 (0.600)       0.833 (0.437)      0.249 (0.780)

Race: Black                                         0.022              -0.108              -0.072
                                                   (0.059)            (0.073)             (0.088)
Race: Other                                         0.081              -0.057               0.041
                                                   (0.065)            (0.073)             (0.133)
F-test (p-value) for Race                       0.551 (0.649)      2.187 (0.0935)      0.412 (0.745)

Race: Hispanic                                     -0.005             -0.164**               -0.054
                                                   (0.055)             (0.074)              (0.103)

Some College                                        0.028              -0.011             0.028
                                                   (0.055)            (0.060)            (0.084)
College                                             0.105               0.018             0.065
                                                   (0.085)            (0.101)            (0.148)
F-test (p-value) for Education                  0.814 (0.445)      0.0738 (0.929)     0.0979 (0.907)


Wave 1 PPVTS                                       -0.001              -0.002                -0.003
                                                   (0.002)             (0.002)              (0.002)




                                                   42
                                                          Combat Assignment            Enemy Firefight            Enemy Firefight
                                                                  vs                         vs                         vs
                                                             No Combat                   No Enemy                   No Combat
                                                             Assignment                   Firefight                 Assignment
                                                                 (1)                         (2)                        (3)

$19K=<Parental Income <$28K                                     -0.030                      -0.002                     -0.065
                                                                (0.090)                     (0.098)                   (0.141)
$28K=<Parental Income <$36K                                      0.027                       0.060                      0.066
                                                                (0.078)                     (0.095)                   (0.121)
$36K=<Parental Income <$45K                                      0.071                       0.006                      0.084
                                                                (0.095)                     (0.095)                   (0.140)
$45K=<Parental Income <$56K                                      0.096                       0.057                      0.113
                                                                (0.083)                     (0.091)                   (0.124)
$56K=<Parental Income <$83K                                      0.183                       0.104                      0.246
                                                                (0.112)                     (0.117)                   (0.166)
$83K=<Parental Income                                            0.136                       0.096                      0.224
                                                                (0.111)                     (0.143)                   (0.194)
F-test (p-value) for Parental Income                         0.994 (0.433)               0.331 (0.920)             0.836 (0.545)

Parents: Married                                                -0.116                      -0.065                     -0.254
                                                                (0.096)                     (0.144)                   (0.172)
Parents: Divorced, Separated or Widowed                         -0.121                      -0.051                     -0.253
                                                                (0.102)                     (0.153)                   (0.169)
F-test (p-value) for Parental Marital Status                 0.781 (0.460)               0.116 (0.891)             1.162 (0.317)

Mothers Education: High School                                  -0.005                      -0.032                     -0.006
                                                                (0.101)                    (0.078)                    (0.116)
Mothers Education: Above High School                            -0.029                      -0.007                      0.029
                                                                (0.095)                    (0.082)                    (0.132)
F-test (p-value) for Parental Education                      0.146 (0.864)              0.162 (0.851)              0.169 (0.845)
One sibling                                                      0.046                       0.086                      0.041
                                                                (0.103)                    (0.165)                    (0.158)
Two siblings                                                     0.058                       0.106                      0.074
                                                                (0.112)                    (0.182)                    (0.197)
Three siblings                                                   0.031                       0.083                      0.004
                                                                (0.107)                    (0.166)                    (0.177)
Four siblings                                                    0.012                       0.088                     -0.017
                                                                (0.104)                    (0.167)                    (0.166)
Five or more siblings                                            0.011                       0.067                      0.005
                                                                (0.105)                    (0.155)                    (0.179)
F-test (p-value) for Number of Siblings                      0.182 (0.969)              0.0936 (0.993)             0.246 (0.941)

Joint F-test (p-value) for all covariates                    0.900 (0.616)               0.966 (0.523)             1.389 (0.119)

Observations                                                       482                        482                        295
       Notes: Standard errors clustered on the school are in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Each model
       includes controls for military-specific variables, including binary indicators for current active-duty military service
       status, total service length, military rank, branch of service, timing of service, and occupation. Coefficient(s) and
       standard error(s) are separately estimated for each variable (group). Each specification also includes dummies for
       missing information. The sample is comprised of male servicemembers only.

                                                                  43
 Table 3: The Effect of Combat on Prescription Pain Reliever Use and Abuse, Add Health

                                                                                  (1)                       (2)
                                                                            Prescription               Painkiller
                                                                             Painkiller                 Abuse
 Panel I: Military Controls
 Combat Zone Deployment                                                         0.036                   0.070**
                                                                               (0.030)                  (0.031)
 Panel II: Panel I + Individual and Family Controls
 Combat Zone Deployment                                                         0.046                   0.071**
                                                                               (0.032)                  (0.034)
 Panel III: Panel II + Pre-Enlistment Drug Use
 Combat Zone Deployment                                                         0.049                   0.081**
                                                                               (0.033)                  (0.034)
 Panel IV: All Controls
 Combat Zone with Enemy Firefight                                              0.074**                   0.074*
                                                                               (0.037)                  (0.041)
 Combat Zone without Enemy Firefight                                            0.025                   0.088**
                                                                               (0.040)                  (0.040)
 Panel V: All Controls
 Combat Zone with War Wounding                                                0.255***                   0.057
                                                                               (0.073)                  (0.068)
 Combat Zone without War Wounding                                               0.029                   0.084**
                                                                               (0.033)                  (0.035)

 Observations                                                                    482                       480
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Military
Controls include binary indicators for current active-duty military service status, total service length, military rank,
branch of service, service exclusively after September 11, and occupation. Individual and family controls include
height, weight, religion indicators, age, age squared, race/ethnicity indicators, Wave 1 Picture Vocabulary Test
Score, parental income dummies, parental marital status indicators, maternal education, and number of siblings
indicators. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the control variables with missing
information. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                           44
        Table 4A: The Effect of Combat on Opioid Use and Abuse, DOD HRB Survey

                                                      (1)                       (2)                     (3)
                                                Prior-Month              Prior-Month              Prior-Month
                                               Painkiller Use          Painkiller Abuse              Heroin
Panel I: All
Enemy Firefight                                   0.027***                  0.031***                0.014***
                                                   (0.006)                   (0.007)                 (0.003)
Observations                                       11,412                    11,501                  11,512
Panel II: Army
Enemy Firefight                                     0.025*                   0.042*                   0.016
                                                    (0.013)                  (0.022)                 (0.009)
Observations                                         2,537                    2,555                   2,558
Panel III: Marines
Enemy Firefight                                   0.049***                  0.045***                  0.018
                                                   (0.007)                   (0.008)                 (0.009)
Observations                                        2,472                     2,494                   2,498
Panel IV: Navy
Enemy Firefight                                    0.030**                  0.040**                  0.021**
                                                   (0.011)                  (0.015)                  (0.008)
Observations                                        3,338                    3,364                    3,366
Panel V: Air Force
Enemy Firefight                                      0.012                    0.012                  0.006**
                                                    (0.008)                  (0.008)                 (0.002)
Observations                                         3,065                    3,088                   3,090
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Each model
controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
age squared and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                         45
Table 4B: The Effect of Combat on Opioid Abuse on Intensive Margin, DOD HRB Survey

                                                                     (1)                            (2)

                                                                                          Prescription Drug
                                                           Prescription Drug
                                                                                           Abuse Increased
                                                         Abuse Increased Since
                                                                                          Since Enlistment |
                                                              Enlistment
                                                                                          Any Abuse Sample

 Panel I: All
 Enemy Firefight                                                 0.018***                       0.098***
                                                                  (0.004)                        (0.030)
 Observations                                                     11,379                          1,081
 Panel II: Army
 Enemy Firefight                                                  0.020*                        0.131**
                                                                  (0.008)                       (0.044)
 Observations                                                      2,526                          324
 Panel III: Marines
 Enemy Firefight                                                  0.019**                       0.114**
                                                                  (0.006)                       (0.031)
 Observations                                                      2,469                          257
 Panel IV: Navy
 Enemy Firefight                                                 0.024***                         0.040
                                                                  (0.005)                        (0.054)
 Observations                                                      3,324                           314
 Panel V: Air Force
 Enemy Firefight                                                   0.013                          0.112
                                                                  (0.008)                        (0.077)
 Observations                                                      3,060                           186
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Each model
controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
age squared and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only. Column (1) presents the results in
the full sample. In column (2), the estimation sample is limited to those who misused prescription drugs at least
once.




                                                        46
                           Table 5: The Effect of Combat on Co-Use and Abuse of Opioids, DOD HRB Survey

                                     (1)                          (2)                      (3)                      (4)                         (5)
                                 Prescription                                          Prescription                Heroin                     Heroin
                                  Painkiller              Painkiller Abuse              Painkiller                   &                           &
                                      &                          &                          &                  No Prescription              Prescription
                               No Opioid Abuse            No Prescription                 Abuse                  Painkiller                  Painkiller

Enemy Firefight                     0.0109***                 0.0145***                 0.0154***                  0.0066***                 0.0068***
                                     (0.0036)                  (0.0047)                  (0.0034)                   (0.0018)                  (0.0019)

Dependent Var. Mean                   0.0990                    0.0587                    0.0287                    0.0031                     0.0031

Observations                          11,400                    11,501                    11,501                    11,501                     11,501
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Each model controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators,
education dummies, age, age squared and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                                              47
       Table 6: The Effect of Combat on Opioid Use and Abuse by Age and Gender,
                                   DOD HRB Survey

                                                (1)                  (2)                (3)
                                           Prior-Month          Prior-Month        Prior-Month
                                          Painkiller Use      Painkiller Abuse        Heroin
Panel I: Ages 18 to 24
Enemy Firefight                              0.055***            0.057***            0.044***
                                              (0.015)             (0.014)             (0.012)
Observations                                   2,530               2,553               2,556
Panel II: Ages 25 to 32
Enemy Firefight                              0.026**             0.029***            0.008**
                                             (0.010)              (0.010)            (0.003)
Observations                                  3,843                3,873              3,879
Panel III: Ages 33 to 50
Enemy Firefight                               0.014*             0.024***            0.004**
                                              (0.008)             (0.008)            (0.001)
Observations                                   5,039               5,075              5,077
Panel IV: Women
Enemy Firefight                              0.038**                0.007             0.008*
                                             (0.015)               (0.016)            (0.004)
Observations                                  3,162                 3,184              3,183
Panel V: Enlisted
Enemy Firefight                              0.038***            0.042***            0.017***
                                              (0.007)             (0.008)             (0.004)
Observations                                   8,745               8,814               8,824
Panel VI: Officer
Enemy Firefight                                 -0.003                 -0.002             0.002*
                                               (0.013)                (0.008)            (0.001)
Observations                                     2,667                  2,687              2,688
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of
observations is in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively. Each model controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific
major command indicators, education dummies, age, age squared and race/ethnicity dummies.
The sample is comprised of men only.




                                               48
  Table 7: The Effect of Combat Injuries and Death Exposures on Opioid Use and Abuse,
                                   DOD HRB Survey

                                                                (1)                   (2)                  (3)
                                                                                 Prior-Month
                                                           Prior-Month                               Prior-Month
                                                                                  Painkiller
                                                          Painkiller Use                                Heroin
                                                                                    Abuse
Panel I: Wounding
Wounded                                                       0.113***             0.122***            0.088***
                                                               (0.014)              (0.018)             (0.022)
Observations                                                   11,280               11,365              11,377
Panel II: Witnessed Death
Witnessed Death or Injury                                     0.034***             0.039***            0.015***
                                                               (0.004)              (0.007)             (0.003)
Observations                                                   11,315               11,402              11,414
Panel III: Ally Hurt or Dead
Witness Ally Death                                            0.043***             0.058***            0.024***
                                                               (0.009)              (0.008)             (0.005)
Observations                                                   11,332               11,420              11,432
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Each model
controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
age squared and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                         49
Table 8: The Impact of Deployment Assignment, Number of Deployments, and Deployment
                  Length on Opioid Use and Abuse, DOD HRB Survey

                                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)

Panel I: Prior-Month Painkiller
Enemy Firefight                                               0.045***                                  0.044***
                                                               (0.009)                                   (0.009)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                             0.003                         -0.000
                                                                           (0.002)                       (0.002)
Months Deployed Last Year                                                                 0.002*           0.001
                                                                                          (0.001)        (0.001)
Observations                                                   11,412       11,349        11,320         11,291

Panel II: Prior-Month Painkiller Abuse
Enemy Firefight                                               0.038***                                  0.033***
                                                               (0.007)                                   (0.007)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                           0.005***                         0.002
                                                                           (0.001)                       (0.002)
Months Deployed Last Year                                                                0.004***        0.003**
                                                                                          (0.001)        (0.001)
Observations                                                   11,501       11,436        11,406          11,375


Panel III: Heroin
Enemy Firefight                                               0.018***                                  0.017***
                                                               (0.003)                                   (0.003)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                             0.002                         0.001
                                                                           (0.001)                       (0.001)
Months Deployed Last Year                                                                0.001**          0.001
                                                                                         (0.000)         (0.000)
Observations                                                   11,445       11,379        11,350         11,319
Notes: Standard errors clustered on the stratum are in parentheses. Statistically significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%.
Regressions control for military rank, branch of service, branch-specific major command indicators, education
indictors, age, age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample includes male servicemembers only.




                                                         50
   Table 9: Examining Mechanisms that Mediate Effect of Enemy Firefight on Opioid Use
                            and Abuse, DOD HRB Survey

                                                                           (1)                 (2)                (3)
                                                                        Prior-           Prior-Month           Prior-
                                                                        Month             Painkiller           Month
                                                                       Painkiller           Abuse              Heroin
Panel I: Baseline Estimates
Enemy Firefight                                                        0.029***            0.031***           0.013***
                                                                        (0.006)             (0.007)            (0.003)
Panel II: Controlling for Wounding
Enemy Firefight                                                        0.019***            0.022***           0.006***
                                                                        (0.006)             (0.006)            (0.001)
Wounded                                                                0.111***            0.109***           0.086***
                                                                        (0.015)             (0.018)            (0.021)
Panel III: Controlling for Restricted Activity
Enemy Firefight                                                        0.021***            0.029***           0.013***
                                                                        (0.006)             (0.007)            (0.003)
Restricted Physical Activity                                           0.163***            0.056***           0.008***
                                                                        (0.011)             (0.008)            (0.002)
Panel IV: Controlling for PTSD
Enemy Firefight                                                        0.021***            0.025***           0.011***
                                                                        (0.006)             (0.007)            (0.003)
PTSD                                                                   0.113***            0.087***           0.037***
                                                                        (0.012)             (0.014)            (0.007)
Panel V: Controlling for Witnessing War
Enemy Firefight
Casualties                                                                0.011              0.009            0.005***
                                                                        (0.008)             (0.007)            (0.002)
Witnessed Death or Injury                                                0.016*             0.013*             0.002*
                                                                        (0.008)             (0.007)            (0.001)
Witness Ally Death                                                      0.030**            0.044***           0.020***
                                                                        (0.012)             (0.008)            (0.005)
Panel VI: Controlling for All Channels
Enemy Firefight                                                          0.005               0.006             0.003**
                                                                        (0.007)             (0.007)            (0.001)
Wounded                                                                0.067***            0.074***           0.078***
                                                                        (0.014)             (0.017)            (0.019)
Restricted Physical Activity                                           0.156***            0.050***           0.005***
                                                                        (0.010)             (0.008)            (0.001)
PTSD                                                                   0.080***            0.066***           0.027***
                                                                        (0.010)             (0.013)            (0.005)
Witnessed Death or Injury                                                0.007               0.008              -0.001
                                                                        (0.008)             (0.007)            (0.001)
Witness Ally Death                                                       0.003             0.022***            0.004**
                                                                        (0.013)             (0.007)            (0.002)
Observations                                                             11,044             11,118              11,126
 Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
 significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Each model controls for military rank, branch of service,
 branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age, age squared and race/ethnicity dummies. The
 sample is comprised of men only.

                                                           51
           Table 10: The Effect of Combat on Other Central Nervous Systems Depressants and Joint Use with Opioids,
                                                     DOD HRB Survey

                                            (1)                        (2)                     (3)                    (4)                      (5)
                                       Prior-Month                                        Prior-Month            Prior-Month              Prior-Month
                                    Depression/Anxiety           Prior-Month              Tranquilizer           Painkiller &             Painkiller &
                                     /Sleep Medicine            Sedative Abuse                Abuse             Sedative Abuse         Tranquilizer Abuse
 Enemy Firefight                         0.030***                 0.020***                 0.023***               0.018***                 0.019***
                                          (0.005)                   (0.004)                  (0.005)                (0.003)                  (0.005)

 Dependent Var. Mean                       0.0358                    0.0138                  0.0259                  0.0110                   0.0223

 Observations                              11,437                    11,496                  11,497                  11,501                   11,501
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Each model controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators,
education dummies, age, age squared and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                                              52
 Appendix Table 1: Exploring Degree of Bias in HRB Survey Estimates using Add Health
                          and Xs Available in Both Datasets
                                                                  (1)                              (2)
                                                        Prescription Painkiller             Painkiller Abuse
 Panel I: Enemy Firefight
 DOD-HRB Controls
   Combat Zone with Enemy Firefight                               0.064*                           0.045
                                                                  (0.033)                         (0.037)
    Combat Zone without Enemy Firefight                            0.008                           0.053
                                                                  (0.034)                         (0.038)
 Full Controls
    Combat Zone with Enemy Firefight                             0.074**                          0.074*
                                                                 (0.037)                         (0.041)
    Combat Zone without Enemy Firefight                           0.025                          0.088**
                                                                 (0.040)                         (0.040)

 Observations                                                       482                             480
 Panel II: Wounding
 DOD-HRB Controls
   Combat Zone with War Wounding                                0.222***                           0.039
                                                                 (0.070)                          (0.053)
    Combat Zone without War Wounding                              0.012                            0.050
                                                                 (0.029)                          (0.033)

 Full Controls
    Combat Zone with War Wounding                               0.255***                          0.057
                                                                 (0.073)                         (0.068)
    Combat Zone without War Wounding                              0.029                          0.084**
                                                                 (0.033)                         (0.035)

 Observations                                                       482                             480
Standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. Number of observations is in brackets. *,
**, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models control for age,
age squared, race/ethnicity indicators, education indicators, military rank, timing of military service, and branch of
service. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the control variables. In every model estimated
those who are deployed to a non-combat zone constitute the comparison group.




                                                         53
 Appendix Table 2: The Effect of Enemy Firefight on Painkiller Abuse and Heroin Use by Legitimate Prescription Painkiller
                                                        Receipt


                                                   (1)                             (2)                          (3)                           (4)

                                             Prior-Month                    Prior-Month                   Prior-Month                    Prior-Month
                                           Painkiller Abuse               Painkiller Abuse                   Heroin                         Heroin


 Enemy Firefight                               0.0588***                     0.0193***                      0.0451***                     0.0078***
                                                (0.0207)                      (0.0055)                       (0.0139)                      (0.0021)

 Observations                                     1,467                         9,933                          1,468                         9,934

 Dependent Var. Mean                             0.2256                        0.0679                         0.0245                        0.0036

 Sample                                      Prior-Month                   Prior-Month                    Prior-Month                   Prior-Month
                                              Prescription                  Prescription                   Prescription                  Prescription
                                             Painkiller = 1                Painkiller = 0                 Painkiller = 1                Painkiller = 0
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Each model controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators,
education dummies, age, age squared and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                                              54
                     Appendix Table 3: DOD-HRB Summary Statistics by Combat Assignment, Female Sample

                                                                 Enemy              Enemy
                                                   All                                              Army         Marines         Navy        Air Force
                                                              Firefight = 1      Firefight = 0

 Dependent Variables
    Prior-Month Painkiller                       0.180            0.215             0.159           0.241         0.197          0.162          0.144
                                                (0.385)          (0.411)           (0.365)         (0.428)       (0.398)        (0.368)        (0.352)
     Prior-Month Painkiller Abuse                0.102            0.117             0.093           0.160         0.103          0.088          0.073
                                                (0.303)          (0.321)           (0.290)         (0.367)       (0.304)        (0.283)        (0.260)
     Prior-Month Heroin                          0.003            0.007             0.001           0.004         0.006          0.003          0.001
                                                (0.056)          (0.086)           (0.023)         (0.064)       (0.075)        (0.057)        (0.032)

 Combat Service Variables
   Enemy Firefight                               0.381            1.000             0.000           0.670         0.489          0.144          0.333
                                                (0.486)           0.000             0.000          (0.470)       (0.500)        (0.351)        (0.472)
     War Wounding                                0.020            0.050             0.002           0.039         0.028          0.014          0.008
                                                (0.141)          (0.219)           (0.045)         (0.195)       (0.166)        (0.119)        (0.089)
     Restricted Physical Activity                0.424            0.491             0.382           0.521         0.525          0.354          0.364
                                                (0.494)          (0.500)           (0.486)         (0.500)       (0.500)        (0.478)        (0.481)
     Witness Death                               0.218            0.445             0.081           0.330         0.214          0.170          0.185
                                                (0.413)          (0.497)           (0.272)         (0.470)       (0.411)        (0.376)        (0.388)
     Witness Ally Injury or Death                0.107            0.255             0.017           0.212         0.115          0.055          0.076
                                                (0.309)          (0.436)           (0.130)         (0.409)       (0.319)        (0.227)        (0.264)

 Observations                                    3198             1218              1980             725           536            925           1012
Standard deviations in parentheses. The means are generated using data for males drawn from the 2008 Department of Defense Health and Related Behaviors
Survey.




                                                                            55
      Appendix Table 4: Differentiating the Effect of Enemy Firefight With vs. Without
                                   Wounding, DOD HRB

                                                           (1)                 (2)                     (3)
                                                      Prior-Month         Prior-Month             Prior-Month
                                                       Painkiller       Painkiller Abuse             Heroin

Enemy Firefight with Wounding                          0.124***              0.136***               0.093***
                                                        (0.015)               (0.019)                (0.023)
Enemy Firefight without Wounding                       0.018***              0.020***               0.005***
                                                        (0.006)               (0.006)                (0.001)

Observations                                             11,280               11,365                 11,377
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Each model
controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
age squared and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                         56
  Appendix Table 5: The Impact of Enemy Firefight on Wounding, PTSD and Witnessing
                             War Casualties, DOD HRB

                                      (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)
                                                   Restricted                                          Witness
                                   War             Physical                           Witness         Ally Injury
                                 Wounding           Activity          PTSD            Death            or Death

Enemy Firefight                   0.078***         0.054***         0.065***          0.466***         0.329***
                                   (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.009)           (0.020)          (0.024)

Observations                        11,338           11,418           11,366           11,373           11,391
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Each model
controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
age squared and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                         57
Appendix Table 6: Interactive Effect of PTSD and War Injuries on Opioid Use and Abuse,
                                        DOD HRB

                                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)

                                                         Prior-Month          Prior-Month           Prior-Month
                                                          Painkiller        Painkiller Abuse           Heroin
Panel I: Control for Wounding and PTSD
Enemy Firefight                                             0.015**              0.013**               0.004**
                                                            (0.007)              (0.006)               (0.002)
War Wounding                                               0.092***             0.089***              0.081***
                                                            (0.014)              (0.017)               (0.020)
PTSD                                                       0.103***             0.078***              0.028***
                                                            (0.012)              (0.014)               (0.005)

Observations                                                  11,137              11,211               11,219
Panel II: PTSD and Wounding Interaction
Enemy Firefight                                             0.015**              0.014**               0.004**
                                                            (0.007)              (0.006)               (0.002)
War Wounding                                               0.062***              0.047**               0.019**
                                                            (0.019)              (0.018)               (0.009)
PTSD                                                       0.090***             0.059***                0.001
                                                            (0.016)              (0.013)               (0.002)
War Wounding*PTSD                                            0.096*              0.133**              0.197***
                                                            (0.053)              (0.050)               (0.044)

Observations                                                  10,989              11,061               11,069
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Each model
controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
age squared and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                         58
