                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA

                                       Charles I. Jones
                                      Christopher Tonetti

                                      Working Paper 26260
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26260


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2019, Revised April 2020




We are grateful to Dan Bjorkegren, Yan Carriere-Swallow, V.V. Chari, Sebastian Di Tella,
Joshua Gans, Avi Goldfarb, Mike Golosov, Vikram Haksar, Ben Hebert, Pete Klenow, Hannes
Malmberg, Aleh Tsyvinski, Hal Varian, Laura Veldkamp, and Heidi Williams for helpful
comments and to Andres Yany for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Charles I. Jones and Christopher Tonetti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Nonrivalry and the Economics of Data
Charles I. Jones and Christopher Tonetti
NBER Working Paper No. 26260
September 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. E0,O4

                                           ABSTRACT

Data is nonrival: a person's location history, medical records, and driving data can be used by any
number of firms simultaneously. Nonrivalry leads to increasing returns and implies an important
role for market structure and property rights. Who should own data? What restrictions should
apply to the use of data? We show that in equilibrium, firms may not adequately respect the
privacy of consumers. But nonrivalry leads to other consequences that are less obvious. Because
of nonrivalry, there may be large social gains to data being used broadly across firms, even in the
presence of privacy considerations. Fearing creative destruction, firms may choose to hoard data
they own, leading to the inefficient use of nonrival data. Instead, giving the data property rights to
consumers can generate allocations that are close to optimal. Consumers balance their concerns
for privacy against the economic gains that come from selling data to all interested parties.


Charles I. Jones
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305-4800
and NBER
chad.jones@stanford.edu

Christopher Tonetti
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
tonetti@stanford.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26260
                        NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                           1


1    Introduction

In recent years, the importance of data in the economy has become increasingly appa-
rent. More powerful computers and advances in algorithms such as machine learning
have led to an explosion in the usefulness of data. Examples include self-driving cars,
real-time language translation, medical diagnoses, product recommendations, and so-
cial networks.
    This paper develops a theoretical framework to study the economics of data. We
are particularly interested in how different property rights for data determine its use
in the economy, and thus affect output, privacy, and consumer welfare. The starting
point for our analysis is the observation that data is nonrival. That is, at a technological
level, data is infinitely usable. Most goods in economics are rival: if a person consumes
a kilogram of rice or an hour of an accountant's time, some resource with a positive
opportunity cost is used up. In contrast, existing data can be used by any number of
firms or people simultaneously, without being diminished. Consider a collection of a
million labeled images, the human genome, the U.S. Census, or the data generated by
10,000 cars driving 10,000 miles. Any number of firms, people, or machine learning
algorithms can use this data simultaneously without reducing the amount of data avai-
lable to anyone else.
    The key finding in our paper is that policies related to data have important econo-
mic consequences. When firms own data, they may not adequately respect the pri-
vacy of consumers. But nonrivalry leads to other consequences that are less obvious.
Because data is nonrival, there are potentially large gains to data being used broadly.
Markets for data provide financial incentives that promote broader use, but if selling
data increases the rate of creative destruction, firms may hoard data in ways that are
socially inefficient.
    An analogy may be helpful. Because capital is rival, each firm must have its own
building, each worker needs her own desk and computer, and each warehouse needs
its own collection of forklifts. But if capital were nonrival, it would be as if every auto
worker in the economy could use the entire industry's stock of capital at the same time.
Clearly this would produce tremendous economic gains. This is what is possible with
data. Obviously there may be incentive reasons why it is inefficient to have all data
used by all firms. But an equilibrium in which firms own data and sharply limit its use
   2                                 JONES AND TONETTI



by other firms may also be inefficient. Our numerical examples suggest that these costs
can be large.
   Another allocation we consider is one in which a government -- perhaps out of
concern for privacy -- sharply limits the use of consumer data by firms. While this
policy succeeds in generating privacy gains, it may potentially have an even larger
cost because of the inefficiency that arises from a nonrival input not being used at the
appropriate scale.
   Finally, we consider an institutional arrangement in which consumers own the data
associated with their behavior. Consumers then balance their concerns for privacy
against the economic gains that come from selling data to all interested parties. This
equilibrium results in data being used broadly across firms, taking advantage of the
nonrivalry of data. Across a wide range of parameter values explored in our numerical
example, consumer ownership of data generates consumption and welfare that are
substantially better than firm ownership.
   To put this concretely, suppose doctors use software to help diagnose skin cancer.
An algorithm can be trained using images of potential cancers labeled with pathology
reports and cancer outcomes. Imagine a world in which hospitals own data and each
uses labeled images from all patients in its network to train the algorithm. Now com-
pare that to a situation in which competing algorithms can each use all the images
from all patients in the United States, or even the world. The software based on larger
samples could help doctors everywhere better treat patients and save lives. The gain
to any single hospital from selling its data broadly may not be sufficient to generate
the broad use that is beneficial to society, either because of concerns related to creative
destruction or perhaps because of legal restrictions. Consumers owning their medical
data and selling it to all interested researchers, hospitals, and entrepreneurs may result
in a world closer to the social optimum in which such valuable data is used broadly to
help many.
   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The introduction continues
with a discussion of how we model data and on the similarities and differences between
data and ideas -- another nonrival good -- and provides a literature review. Section 2
provides a simple model to demonstrate the link between nonrivalry and scale effects.
Section 3 turns to the full model and presents the economic environment. Section 4
                        NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                          3


examines the allocation chosen by the social planner. Section 5 turns to a decentralized
equilibrium in which firms own data and shows that it may be privately optimal for a
firm to both overuse its own data and to sharply limit data sales to other firms. Section 6
instead considers an allocation in which consumers own data and, weighing privacy
considerations, sell some of it to multiple firms. Section 7 shows what happens if the
government outlaws the selling of data. Section 8 collects and discusses our main
theoretical results while Section 9 presents a numerical simulation of our model to
illustrate the various forces at work.



1.1     Data versus Ideas

We find it helpful to define information as the set of all economic goods that are nonri-
val. That is, information consists of economic goods that can be entirely represented as
bit strings, i.e., as sequences of ones and zeros. Ideas and data are types of information.
Following Romer (1990), an idea is a piece of information that is a set of instructions for
making an economic good, which may include other ideas. Data denotes the remai-
ning forms of information. It includes things like driving data, medical records, and
location data that are not themselves instructions for making a good but that may still
be useful in the production process, including in producing new ideas. An idea is a
production function whereas data is a factor of production.
      Some examples distinguishing data from ideas might be helpful. First, consider a
million images of cats, rainbows, kids, buildings, etc., labeled with their main subject.
Data like this is extremely useful for training machine learning algorithms, but these
labeled images are clearly not themselves ideas, i.e., not blueprints. The same is true of
the hourly heart-rate history of a thousand people or the speech samples of a popula-
tion. It seems obvious at this level that data and ideas are distinct.
      Second, consider the efforts to build a self-driving car. The essence is a machine
learning algorithm, which can be thought of as a collection of nonlinear regressions at-
tempting to forecast what actions an expert driver will take given the data from various
sensors including cameras, lidar, GPS, and so on. Data in this example includes both
the collection of sensor readings and the actions taken by expert drivers. The nonli-
near regression estimates a large number of parameters to produce the best possible
forecasts. A successful self-driving car algorithm -- a computer program, and hence an
      4                                  JONES AND TONETTI



idea -- is essentially just the forecasting rules that come from using data to estimate
the parameters of the nonlinear model. The data and the idea are distinct: the software
algorithm is the idea that is embedded in the self-driving cars of the future; data is an
input used to produce this idea.
      Another dimension along which ideas and data can differ is the extent to which they
are excludable. On the one hand, it seems technologically easier to transmit data than
to transmit ideas. Data can be sent at the press of button over the internet, whereas
we invest many resources in education to learn ideas. On the other hand, data can be
encrypted. Engineers change jobs and bring knowledge with them; people move and
communicate causing ideas to diffuse, at least eventually. Data, in contrast, especially
when it is "big," may be more easily monitored and made to be highly excludable.
The "idea" of machine learning is public, whereas the driving data that is fed into the
machine learning algorithm is kept private; each firm is gathering its own data.


1.2       Relation to the Literature

The "economics of data" is a new but rapidly-growing field. In this paper we provide
a macro perspective. Since we emphasize nonrivalry, there are parallels between how
data appears in our model and how ideas appear in the growth literature. Compared to
the growth literature, the most distinctive features of our model are

  1. The use of nonrival goods: our setup features the simultaneous broad use of data
          by many firms; in Romer (1990) and Aghion and Howitt (1992) style models, each
          firm produces using a single idea.

  2. The market for nonrival goods: our setup features markets through which each
          firm decides on a quantity of data to buy and sell; in idea-based models, typically
          the inventing firm produces itself or sells a single blueprint to a single monopoly
          producer.

  3. Property rights: in idea-based models, property rights for ideas are always held
          by firms; in our setup, comparing consumer versus firm ownership of data is
          fundamental.

      At the core of our analysis of decentralized equilibria is a market for data. This
feature is related to the market for ideas in Akcigit et al. (2016). In their setup the idea is
                      NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                            5


used by only one firm at a time and the market helps to allocate the idea to the firm who
could best make use of it. In contrast, our market for data allows multiple firms to use
the nonrival good simultaneously. The literature on patent-licensing would be the clo-
sest to our paper since it studies legal arrangements under which multiple firms can use
a given idea at the same time. From a more micro perspective, see Ali et al. (2019) who
study the sale of nonrival information in a search and matching decentralized market
and emphasize that nonrivalry generates inefficiency due to the under-utilization of
information. Ichihashi (2019) studies competition among data intermediaries. Akcigit
and Liu (2016) show in a growth context how the information that certain research
paths lead to dead ends is socially valuable and how an economy may suffer from an
inefficient duplication of research if this information is not shared across firms.
   Given our macroeconomic perspective, we remain silent on many of the interesting
related topics in industrial organization. Varian (2018) provides a general discussion of
the economics of data and machine learning. He emphasizes that data is nonrival and
refers to a common notion that "data is the new oil." Varian notes that this nonrivalry
means that "data access" may be more important than "data ownership" and sugge-
sts that while markets for data are relatively limited at this point, some types of data
(like maps) are currently licensed by data providers to other firms. Our paper explores
these and other insights in a formal model. Our results suggest that data ownership is
likely to influence data access. In addition to thinking about property rights granted to
firms who can sell their nonrival goods, we consider granting property rights to data
to consumers. The fact that consumer interaction is necessary to create data in our
setup makes the consumers-own-data property right regime a natural consideration,
whereas the growth literature almost exclusively focuses on property rights granted to
firms.
   Data as a byproduct of economic activity also has analogues in the information
economics literature. For example, see Veldkamp (2005), Ordonez (2013), Fajgelbaum
et al. (2017), and Bergemann and Bonatti (2019). Arrieta Ibarra, Goff, Jimenez Hernan-
dez, Lanier and Weyl (2018) and Posner and Weyl (2018) emphasize a "data as labor"
perspective: data is a key input to many technology firms, and people may not be
adequately compensated for the data they provide, perhaps because of market power
considerations.
   6                                  JONES AND TONETTI



   Acquisti, Taylor and Wagman (2016) discuss the economics of privacy and how con-
sumers value the privacy of their data. In the context of medical records, Miller and
Tucker (2017) find that approaches to privacy that give users control over redisclosure
encourage the spread of genetic testing, consistent with the mechanism that we high-
light in this paper. See Ali et al. (2018) who study consumer disclosure of personal
information to firms and the consequent pricing and welfare implications. Goldfarb
and Tucker (2011) highlight a tradeoff between privacy and the effectiveness of online
advertising. Abowd and Schmutte (2019) emphasize that privacy isn't binary; there is
an intensive margin to privacy with a choice of how much data to use. They propose a
differential privacy framework to produce the socially optimal use of data that respects
privacy concerns. Our paper features such an intensive margin of data use with corre-
sponding tradeoffs.
   Farboodi and Veldkamp (2019) is a paper complimentary to ours. We focus on pro-
perty rights and how the associated sale and use of nonrival data can affect efficiency.
They emphasize that data is information that can be used to reduce forecast errors,
suggesting a production function with bounded returns to data. Our main point is that
there can be large losses when a nonrival input is not used broadly. Most of our analysis
focuses on a level effect, although there is also a growth effect in the edge case in which
data sales are outlawed. We suspect that these level effects would survive even with
bounded returns; our Cobb-Douglas specification is helpful for tractability. Farboodi
and Veldkamp (2017) study the implications of expanding access to data for financial
markets. Begenau, Farboodi and Veldkamp (2017) suggest that access to big data has
lowered the cost of capital for large firms relative to small ones, leading to a rise in firm-
size inequality.
   Acemoglu, Makhdoumi, Malekian and Ozdaglar (2019) study privacy and data mar-
kets. They note that in some settings, data about me can reveal some characteristics
about you. Under some circumstances, these externalities can cause data markets to
break down and deliver both inefficiently low prices for data and inefficiently large
privacy losses, as we both sell our data at low prices because we think the other person
is selling anyway. We suspect that these problems can be substantial for some kinds
of data, such as health or social media information, but smaller for other kinds of
data, such as speech recognition or driving data (or whenever data can be adequately
                       NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                            7


anonymized and there are no adverse selection concerns).
   Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb (2018) provide an overview of the economics of ma-
chine learning. Bajari, Chernozhukov, Hortacsu and Suzuki (2018) examine how the
amount of data impacts weekly retail sales forecasts for product categories at Amazon.
They find that forecasts for a given product improve with the square-root of the number
of weeks of data on that product. However, forecasts of sales for a given category do not
seem to improve much as the number of products within the category grows. Azevedo,
Deng, Montiel Olea, Rao and Weyl (2019) suggest that the distribution of outcomes in
A/B testing in internet search may be fat-tailed: rare outcomes can have very high re-
turns. Carriere-Swallow and Haksar (2019) note that credit bureaus are a long-standing
market institution that facilitates the broad use of nonrival data, at least in one context.
Hughes-Cromwick and Coronado (2019) view government data as a public good and
study its value to U.S. businesses.
   In order to emphasize the relationship between nonrivalry and scale effects and
to study different property right regimes in a simple environment, our model omits
some interesting features prevalent in the literature on data. In our model, data does
not affects a firm's ability to discriminate against consumers via price or quantity. For
example, we do not model firms that are able to learn the degree to which individuals
are price sensitive or to refuse to sell insurance to people with high health risks. These
considerations are important, so we view our paper as emphasizing an underappre-
ciated channel relevant to the design of data property rights, but it does not provide
a complete accounting of the pros and cons of the widespread availability and use of
data.
   A question that comes up immediately in this paper is why the Coase (1960) theo-
rem does not apply: why does it matter whether firms or consumers own data initially?
With trade and monetary transfers, why isn't the allocation the same in either case? One
could certainly set up the model so that this would be true. However, to illustrate the
importance of data sharing, we assume that the Coase theorem fails. In particular, we
assume that consumers cannot commit to sell their data to only a single firm. Notice
that this issue arises solely because of nonrivalry: a given apple can only be eaten
once. This lack of commitment serves to illustrate various properties of an economy
with data; similar assumptions are typically made in growth models with knowledge
    8                                 JONES AND TONETTI



spillovers and creative destruction. How it plays out in the real world is a distinct
and interesting question, but we simply note that there are many recent episodes in
the news in which firms display a remarkable inability to avoid selling or using data
that they have access to, often at odds with public statements on data-use policy, so
this assumption -- in addition to its pedagogical role -- may actually have real-world
relevance. Dosis and Sand-Zantman (2019) provide a micro-founded model of the
failure of the Coase theorem in studying the property rights over the use of data. They
emphasize that whether it is better for firms or consumers to own data depends on
the overall value of the data to the firm and on the extent to which consumers can
monetize their data. They do not consider the nonrivalry of data, however. See also
Chari and Jones (2000) for some of the problems in implementing the Coase theorem
in economies with public goods.



2    A Simple Model

Suppose the economy consists of N varieties. To be concrete, think of self-driving cars
(e.g. Tesla, Uber, Waymo, and so on). Consumption of each variety combines in a CES
fashion to produce a utility aggregate Y , which we also think of as aggregate output.
With symmetry, Y is given by
                                                                      
                                                 N         -1         -1
                                                           
                                  Y =                Yi         di
                                             0
                                             
                                    = N -1 Yi .


    Variety i is produced by combining an idea of quality Ai and labor Li


                                        Yi = Ai L i .


The nonrival nature of ideas means there are constant returns to labor and increasing
returns to labor and ideas together; this is the Romer (1990) insight that the nonrivalry
of ideas gives rise to increasing returns.
    Data is used to improve the quality of ideas:

                                                
                                         Ai = D i .
                       NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                             9


Intuitively, a given amount of data can be used to train a machine learning algorithm
to help make cars safer. With a little data, this may allow the car to apply emergency
braking when needed. A machine learning algorithm trained on even more data may
be able to drive on highways and in bumper-to-bumper traffic. In other words, data
can be viewed as improving the quality of an idea.
   Importantly, a given amount of data trains a machine learning algorithm that can
then be used in 1 car, 1000 cars, or 1 million cars simultaneously; this is the nonrivalry
of the idea that is produced by the data. This is distinct from the nonrivalry of data,
which will make its appearance shortly when we note that the same data can be used
by many different firms to produce their own trained machine learning algorithms.
The parameter  will ultimately be a key determinant of the importance of data in the
economy.
   Putting these last two equations together,

                                                       
                               Yi = Di Li = D i L/N = Di 


where L is the total amount of labor in the economy, allocated symmetrically across
varieties, and   L/N is firm size measured by employment.
   Whenever a variety is consumed, it generates one piece of data: each mile driven
generates data that raises the productivity of future trips. Data generated by Tesla cars
is useful to Tesla. But data generated by Uber and Waymo could also potentially be
useful to Tesla. We formalize this as


                                 Di = xYi + (1 - )B

                                    = xYi + (1 - )~
                                                  xN Yi

                                    = [x + (1 - )~
                                                 xN ]Yi                                     (1)


In the first line, Yi is the amount of data generated by Tesla trips, and x is the fraction of
that data that Tesla is allowed to use. B is the bundle of data from other varieties that
Tesla -- and every other firm -- gets to use. The way this aggregate bundle B enters firm
i's constraint in the first line is the most important feature of the model. This expression
incorporates the key role of the nonrivalry of data: the bundle B can be used by any
number of firms simultaneously. The parameter  measures the importance of Tesla's
      10                                  JONES AND TONETTI



own data relative to the data bundle from other firms.
      The second line in this expression uses the fact that B  x
                                                               ~N Yi . The quantity N Yi
is the amount of data generated by Uber, Waymo, and the other varieties in the eco-
nomy (because variety i is infinitesimal and because firms are symmetric), and x
                                                                               ~ is
the fraction of other firms' data that Tesla gets to use. Both x and x
                                                                     ~ are endogenous
allocations in our richer model, chosen subject to privacy considerations. For now,
though, we just treat them as parameters.
      Substituting this expression for data back into variety i's production function gives

                                                              1
                                                  xN ]  ) 1- .
                                 Yi = ([x + (1 - )~


There is a multiplier associated with data. The more people consume your product,
the more data you have. This raises productivity and generates more output and con-
sumption and hence more data, completing the circle. The sum of this geometric series
      1
is   1- ,   which is the key exponent in this production function.
      Finally, substituting into the CES aggregator,

                                                                     1
                                                   xN ]  ) 1- .
                              Y = N -1 ([x + (1 - )~


Or, in terms of output per person y  Y /L:

                                      1                           
                               y = N -1 ([x + (1 - )~
                                                    xN ] ) 1- ,                           (2)


where we've used L = N on the right side.
      Income per person in this economy depends on the number of firms in two ways.
                                                                                          1
The first is through the traditional expanding variety effect, associated with the        -1
exponent, well-known since Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). What is new here is the second
                                                                          
role of N , entering through the data term and raised to the power       1- .   To understand
this term, consider two allocations. In one, we prohibit the use of data by other firms
by setting x
           ~ = 0. In this case, each firm learns only from its own consumers. For the
second case, suppose x
                     ~ > 0. In this case, each firm learns from every other firm in the
industry: Tesla learns from the customers of Uber and Waymo as well as from its own
customers. In this case, there is an additional scale effect: the more firms there are in
                           NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                                     11


the economy, the more data is created, so the more Tesla is able to learn, which raises
Tesla's productivity.1 But every firm benefits similarly, and so overall output per person
is higher. This is one of the basic insights of the paper: because data is nonrival, there
are social gains to having data be used broadly instead of narrowly.
    To highlight the key role of the nonrivalry of data, suppose data were a rival input
instead of nonrival. That case can be thought of by setting 1 -  = 0. The result of this is
immediately given by the analysis above where we set x
                                                     ~ = 0. In both cases -- whether it
is illegal for the same data to be used by multiple firms or whether it is technologically
impossible -- there is no scale effect associated with data.
    The richer model we develop in the rest of the paper builds on this simple frame-
work. We endogenize the number of firms by allowing for free entry, and we endogenize
the allocation in the economy, including x and x
                                               ~, by incorporating concerns for privacy
into the utility function.



3    Economic Environment

The economic environment that we work with throughout the paper builds on the sim-
ple model above and is summarized in Table 1. There is a representative consumer with
log utility over per capita consumption, ct . There are Nt varieties of consumer goods
that combine to enter utility with a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregator.
There are Lt people in the economy and population grows exogenously at rate gL .
    Privacy considerations also enter flow utility in two ways, as seen in equation (4).
The first is via xit , which denotes the fraction of an individual's data on consumption of
variety i that is used by the firm producing that variety. The second is through x
                                                                                 ~it , which
denotes the fraction of an individual's data on variety i that is used by other firms in the
economy. For example, xit could denote the fraction of data generated by Tesla drivers
that is used by Tesla, while x
                             ~it is the fraction of that Tesla driving data that is used by
Waymo and GM. Privacy costs enter via a quadratic loss function, where  and ~ capture
the weight on privacy versus consumption. Because there are Nt varieties, we add up
the privacy costs across all varieties and then assume the utility cost of privacy depends
   1
     We are holding firm size  constant in this comparative static, which means L must be rising as N rises.
This is exactly the source of the scale effect we are considering. In the full model, this is micro-founded
through entry.
    12                                 JONES AND TONETTI




                              Table 1: The Economic Environment


                                            
Utility                                        e-t Lt u(ct , xit , x
                                                                   ~it )dt                                             (3)
                                        0

                                                                                           Nt                         Nt
                                                                               1                           ~ 1
Flow Utility                                       ~it ) = log ct -
                                      u(ct , xit , x                                            x2
                                                                                                 it di -                   ~2
                                                                                                                           x it di
                                                                              2 Nt2    0                   2 Nt   0
                                                                                                                       (4)
                                                                         
                                                      Nt     -1          -1
Consumption per person                ct =                   
                                                           cit di              with  > 1                               (5)
                                                  0

Data creation                         Jit = cit Lt                                                                     (6)

Variety resource constraint           cit = Yit /Lt                                                                    (7)

                                             
Firm production                       Yit = Dit Lit with   (0, 1)                                                      (8)

Data used by firm i                   Dit  xit Jit + (1 - )Bt with xit  [0, 1]                                         (9)

                                                         ~it  [0, 1]
                                            ~it Jit with x
Data on variety i shared with others Dsit = x                                                                         (10)

                                                                 Nt     -1        -1
                                                      -1
Data bundle                           Bt =       Nt                   Dsit di              with > 1                   (11)
                                                             0


Innovation (new varieties)             t = 1 · Let
                                      N                                                                               (12)
                                           

                                                                                           Nt
Labor resource constraint             Let + Lpt = Lt where Lpt                                  Lit di                (13)
                                                                                       0


Population growth (exogenous)         Lt = L0 egL t                                                                   (14)

Aggregate output                      Yt  ct Lt                                                                       (15)

                                                      0 2
Creative destruction                   (~
                                        xit ) =        x
                                                       ~                                                              (16)
                                                      2 it
                          NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                                  13


on the average. There is an additional 1/Nt scaling of the xit privacy cost. Because
~it reflects costs associated with data use by all other (Nt ) firms in the economy, it is
x
natural that there is a factor of Nt difference between these costs, and this formulation
generates interior solutions along the balanced growth path.
       A simplifying assumption is that the unweighted average of xit and x
                                                                          ~it enters utility.
A more natural alternative would be to weight by the share of good i in the consumption
bundle. In the more natural case, consumers would be tempted to buy more of a variety
from a firm that better respects privacy. Our unweighted average shuts down this force,
which simplifies the algebra without changing the spirit of the model.
       Where does data come from? Each unit of consumption is assumed to generate one
unit of data as a byproduct. This is our "learning by doing" formulation and is captured
in equation (6): Jit = cit Lt = Yit , where Jit is data created about variety i.
       Firm i produces variety i according to equation (8) in the table, just as in the simple
                                       
model. Recall Yit = Ait Lit and Ait = Dit and therefore

                                          
                                   Yit = Dit Lit , with   (0, 1)


where Dit is the amount of data used in producing the quality of variety i and Lit is
labor. As before, the parameter  captures the importance of data. We will show some
evidence in Section 9 suggesting that  might take a value of 0.03 to 0.10; we think of it
as a small positive number.2
       Data used by firm i is the sum of two terms:


                                    Dit  xit Jit + (1 - )Bt .


The first term captures the amount of variety i data that is used to help firm i produce.
In some of our allocations, firm i will be able to use all the variety i data -- for example if
firms own data. However, if consumers own data, they may restrict the amount of data
that firms are able to use (xit < 1). The second part of the equation incorporates data
from other varieties that is used by firm i. Shared data on other varieties is aggregated
into a bundle, Bt . For example, xit Jit is the data from Tesla drivers that Tesla gets to use
while Bt is the bundle of data from other self-driving car companies like Waymo, GM,
   2
    We require  < 1/ . For firm size to be finite, the increasing returns from data must be smaller than
the price elasticity with respect to size coming from CES demand.
   14                                 JONES AND TONETTI



and Uber that is also available to Tesla. The weights  and 1 -  govern the importance
of own versus others' data. The way the aggregate bundle Bt enters the individual firm's
constraint in equation (9) is the most important feature of the model. This expression
incorporates the key role of the nonrivalry of data: the bundle Bt can be used by any
number of firms simultaneously; hence it does not have an i subscript.
   How is the bundle of data created? Let Dsit  x
                                                ~it Jit denote the data about variety i
that is "shared" (hence the "s" subscript) and available for use by other firms to produce
their varieties. Shared data is bundled together via a CES production function with
elasticity of substitution :

                                                 Nt     -1      -1
                                       -1
                               Bt =   Nt              Dsit di        .
                                             0


We divorce the returns to variety from the elasticity of substitution in this CES function
using the method suggested by Benassy (1996). In particular, this formulation implies
that B will scale in direct proportion to N and is given by B = N Dsi in the symmetric
allocation, which simplifies the analysis.
   For tractability, we set up the model so that data produced today is used to produce
output today, i.e., roundabout production. We think of this as a within-period timing
assumption. We also assume that data depreciates fully every period. These two as-
sumptions imply that data is not a state variable, greatly simplifying the analysis.
   The creation of new varieties is straightforward:  units of labor are needed to create
a new variety. Total labor used for entry, Let , plus total labor used in production, Lpt ,
equals total labor available in the economy, Lt .
   Equation (15) in Table 1 is simply a definition. Aggregate output in the economy, Yt ,
equals aggregate consumption; there is no capital.
   Notice that in our environment, ideas and data are well-defined and distinct. An
idea is a blueprint for producing a distinct variety, and each new blueprint is created
by  units of labor. Data is a byproduct of consumption, and each time a good is
consumed, one unit of data is created that is in turn useful for improving productivity,
which can be thought of as the quality of the idea. A new idea is a new production
function for producing a variety while data is a factor of production.
   Finally, equation (16) is not actually part of the economic environment, but it is
                      NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                            15


an important feature of the economy. We've already mentioned one downside to the
broad use of data -- the privacy cost to individuals. Data sharing also increases the rate
of creative destruction: ownership of variety i changes according to a Poisson process
with an arrival rate  (~
                       xit ). The more that competitors know about an incumbent firm,
the greater the chance that the incumbent firm is displaced by an entrant. Since this is
just a change in ownership, it is not part of the technology that constrains the planner.



Discussion. There are alternative assumptions we could make about our economic
environment. For example, instead of having data be generated as a byproduct of
consumption, we could instead assume firms have access to a separate production
function for data ("learning or doing" instead of "learning by doing"). Both occur in
the world: Tesla gathers data while people drive their cars, while Waymo sets up its
own artificial towns in which they test-drive cars to generate data.
   Second, economic growth (gL > 0) is not necessary to make most of the main points
of the paper; our results are almost entirely "level effects" rather than "growth effects"
and would exist even with no aggregate growth. The presence of growth helps bring out
the distinction between ideas and data and also simplifies the algebra.
   Third, another way to simplify the algebra is to have the bundle of data combine
with a firm's own data using a Cobb-Douglas aggregator instead of our perfect substi-
tutes approach. A further advantage of Cobb Douglas is that the 1 -  parameter that
captures the nonrivalry of data shows up explicitly in key places including the growth
rate of the economy (see Appendix E.1). Given these advantages, future research may
benefit from building on the Cobb-Douglas data aggregator case. The main down-
side--which was decisive for us--is that in the Cobb-Douglas case, the data bundle
is essential and therefore we could not study laws that outlaw the selling of data.
   Fourth, even without increasing returns to scale in the production of variety i, the
nonrivalry of data matters. For example, if we modeled ideas as rival by modifying
                                      1-
the production function to be Yit = Dit Lit , the long-run growth rate of the economy
would be unchanged (see Appendix E.2).
   Fifth, we model privacy costs as a direct utility loss. We see this as a stand in for
the many reasons people may not want firms to have their data. The main point of our
paper is to highlight a way in which the broad use of data is beneficial, not to explore
    16                              JONES AND TONETTI



the precise nature of privacy costs. We include them to show that even when privacy
costs are large, our mechanism can still be quantitatively important.
    Finally, our model assumes that all firms benefit from data equally and that each
firm's data is equally useful. In this sense, the model might more naturally be compared
to a particular industry, such as radiology or autonomous cars. Output and welfare dif-
ferences across property right regimes should therefore be interpreted as losses within
an industry, most applicable for sectors in which data is an important input.




4    The Optimal Allocation

The optimal allocation in our environment is easy to define and characterize. Using
symmetry, the production structure of the economy can be simplified considerably.
Consumption per person is

                                                    
                                                         Yit
                               ct = Nt-1 cit = Nt-1          .                      (17)
                                                         Lt

Moreover, the production of a variety is

                                                        Lpt
                                Yit = Dit Lit = Dit ·       .                       (18)
                                                        Nt

Combining these two expressions, aggregate output in the symmetric economy is

                                            1
                                              
                                   Yt = Nt-1 Dit Lpt .                              (19)


Next, symmetry allows us to further simplify the data component:


                            Dit = xit Yit + (1 - )Nt x
                                                     ~it Yit

                                = [xit + (1 - )~
                                               xit Nt ]Yit                          (20)


This expression can be substituted into the production function for variety i in (18) to
yield

                                                                 1
                                             xit Nt ) Lit ] 1- .
                         Yit = [(xit + (1 - )~                                      (21)
                         NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                          17


The increasing returns associated with data shows up in the 1/(1 -  ) exponent. The
term xit +(1 - )~
                xit Nt will appear frequently. This derivation shows that the xit piece
reflects firms using data from their own variety while the (1 - )~
                                                                 xit Nt piece reflects
firms using data from other varieties. Moreover, when data is shared, this data term
scales with the measure of varieties, Nt . This ultimately provides an extra scale effect
associated with data nonrivalry.
   Finally, substituting the expression for Dit into the aggregate production function
in (19) and using the symmetry conditions Lit = Lpt /Nt , xit = xt , and x     ~t yields
                                                                         ~it = x

                                                                 
                                          1                              1
                                          -1   xt               1-
                                                                        1-
                            Yt = Nt               + (1 - )~
                                                          xt           Lpt .            (22)
                                               Nt

                                                                                            1
This equation captures the two sources of increasing returns in our model. The Nt-1
is the standard increasing returns from love-of-variety associated with the nonrivalry
                 1
               1-
of ideas. The Lpt captures the increasing returns associated with data. In the optimal
allocation, both play important roles.
   We can now state the social planner problem concisely. The key allocations that
need to be determined are how to allocate labor between production and entry and
how much data to share. The optimal allocation solves

                                
                                                       1 2   ~ 2
                max                e-~t
                                        L0 log ct -      xt - x
                                                              ~         dt, ~   - gL    (23)
             {Lpt ,xt ,x
                       ~t } 0                         2N     2 t
                         s.t.

                       ct = Yt /Lt
                                                            
                                    1                              1
                                    -1    xt               1-
                                                                 1-
                      Yt = Nt                + (1 - )~
                                                     xt         Lpt
                                          Nt
                      t = 1 (Lt - Lpt )
                     N
                          
                      Lt = L0 egL t


   The planner wants to share variety i data with firm i because that increases pro-
ductivity and output. Similarly, the planner wants to share variety i data with other
firms to take advantage of the nonrivalry of data, increasing the productivity and out-
put of all firms. Tempering the planner's desire for sharing are consumers' privacy
   18                                  JONES AND TONETTI



concerns. Finally, the planner weighs the gains from new varieties against the gains
from producing more of the existing varieties when allocating labor to production and
entry. The optimal allocation is given in Proposition 1.

Proposition 1 (The Optimal Allocation): Along a balanced growth path, as Nt grows
large, the optimal allocation converges to

                                                                1/2
                                              1   
                               x
                               ~it = x
                                     ~sp =      ·                                                (24)
                                              ~ 1-
                                              

                                                                          1/2
                                            ~       1   
                          xit = xsp =     ·           ·                                          (25)
                                        1-          ~ 1-
                                                    
                                             -1
                                 Lsp
                                  i =  ·         sp                                              (26)
                                             1-
                                          Lt
                               Ntsp =            sp Lt                                           (27)
                                        gL + sp

                                       Lsp
                                        pt = sp sp Lt                                            (28)
                                                1                     1      1
                                                                          + 1-
                       Ytsp = sp (1 - ) x
                                        ~ sp
                                               1-
                                                     (sp Lt ) -1                                 (29)
                                                            1      1            1      
                         Yt                      1              + 1-                + 1-
                  csp
                   t =      = sp (1 - ) x
                                        ~ sp
                                                1-    -1
                                                     sp              
                                                                          Lt-1           
                                                                                                 (30)
                         Lt

                                sp       1   
                               gc  =       +                    gL                               (31)
                                         -1 1-
                                                                  1
                              sp
                             Di  = [(1 - )~
                                          xsp sp sp Lt ] 1-                                      (32)
                                                        1                      1
                                                                           1+ 1-
                     Dsp = N Di = [(1 - )~
                                         xsp sp ] 1- (sp Lt )                                    (33)
                                                   1                       
                         Yisp = sp (1 - ) x
                                          ~ sp
                                                  1-
                                                        (sp Lt ) 1-                              (34)

                                   1            ~ 2     gc
                            U0 =     L0 log c0 - x~sp +                                          (35)
                                   ~            2        ~

Proof See Appendix A.
   The most important result in the proposition is the solution for aggregate output
per person in equation (30). In particular, that solution shows that output per person is
                                                                                             1     
proportional to the size of the economy raised to some power. The exponent,                  -1 + 1- ,
captures the degree of increasing returns to scale in the economy and is the sum of
two terms. First is the standard "love of variety" effect that is smaller when varieties
                        NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                         19


are more substitutable. The second term is new and reflects the increasing returns
associated with the nonrivalry of data. It is increasing in  , the importance of data
to the economy. A larger economy is richer because it produces more data which then
feeds back and makes all firms more productive. This equation also makes clear why
we require  < 1; if   1, then the degree of increasing returns to scale is so large that
the economy becomes infinitely rich: more output leads to more data, which leads to
more output, and the virtuous circle explodes.
    The next equation, (31), expresses the implications for growth: the growth rate of
consumption per person, in the long run, is proportional to the growth rate of popula-
tion, where the factor of proportionality is the degree of increasing returns to scale.
    The remaining results in the optimal allocation break down in a simple way. First,
optimal data sharing x
                     ~sp and xsp are decreasing in the privacy costs (~ and ) and
increasing in the importance of data in the economy ( ), as shown in equations (24)
and (25).
    Next, equation (27) shows that optimal variety Ntsp is proportional to the popula-
tion in the economy, and the factor of proportionality is defined to be the parameter
sp . Higher entry costs, a higher rate of time preference, and faster population growth
all reduce variety along the balanced growth path. A higher elasticity of substitution
between varieties makes new varieties less valuable and reduces Ntsp . Finally, if data
is more important (  ) the economy devotes less resources to entry (which does not
create data) and more resources to production (which does).
    This is even more apparent in equation (26), which shows employment per firm,
Lsp
 it ,   which equals a combination of parameters that we define to be sp . The compa-
rative statics for firm size are essentially the opposite of those for variety. Optimal firm
size is constant along a balanced growth path and invariant to the overall population of
the economy. This reflects the assumption that the entry cost is a fixed amount of labor
that does not change as the economy grows. The fact that the size distribution of firms
seems stationary in the U.S. suggests this may be a reasonable assumption as Bollard,
Klenow and Li (2016) document. We show later that the key findings of our paper are
robust to variations of this assumption.
    We will return to these results after discussing other ways to allocate resources in
this environment. The  and  parameters for the different allocations will be an im-
      20                                   JONES AND TONETTI



portant part of that comparison.



5     Firms Own Data

We now explore one possible way to use markets to allocate resources. In this equi-
librium, we assume that firms own data and decide whether or not to sell it. Data is
bought and sold via a data intermediary that bundles together data from all varieties
and resells it to each individual firm. Throughout the paper, sellers of data always set
prices if they have market power and buyers of data are always price takers.



5.1        Decision Problems

Household Problem. Households have one unit of labor that they supply inelastically
in exchange for the wage wt . They hold assets that pay a return rt (these assets are
claims on the value of the monopolistically competitive firms). The representative
household solves

                                                     
                                 U0 = max               e-~t
                                                             L0 u(ct , xit , x
                                                                             ~it ) dt       (36)
                                        {cit }   0
                                                                
                                                Nt     -1       -1
                          s.t.   ct =                  
                                                     cit di                                 (37)
                                            0
                                                                          Nt
                                  t = (rt - gL )at + wt -
                                 a                                             pit cit di   (38)
                                                                      0


Notice that households do not choose how data is used or sold (xit and x
                                                                       ~it ) since firms
are the ones who own data in this allocation. The price of ct is normalized to one so
that all prices are expressed in units of ct .



Firm Problem. Each incumbent firm chooses how much data to buy and sell and how
much labor to hire. Each sale generates data: Jit = Yit . The firm uses the fraction xit of
this data itself and sells a fraction x
                                      ~it to the data intermediary at a price psit that it sets
via monopolistic competition. Because of nonrivalry, the firm can both use and sell the
same data simultaneously. In addition, the firm buys bundles of data Dbit at price pbt ,
which it takes as given. Finally, each firm takes demand for its variety (aggregating the
                                NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                                         21


FOC from the Household Problem) as given:

                                                             1             1
                                                       ct            Yt    
                                             pit =               =             .                              (39)
                                                       cit           Yit

Recall our simplifying assumption that the xit that enters the consumer's utility function
is an unweighted average, so that households do not demand more from a firm that
uses or sells less of its data.
   Letting Vit denote the market value of firm i, the incumbent firm problem is:

                                             1
                                       Yt    
                                                                                           it -  (~
   rt Vit =          max                         Yit - wt Lit - pbt Dbit + psit x
                                                                                ~it Yit + V       xit )Vit    (40)
              {Lit ,Dbit ,xit ,x
                               ~it }   Yit
                                   
                       s.t. Yit = Dit Lit                                                                     (41)

                              Dit = xit Yit + (1 - )Dbit                                                      (42)

                               xit  [0, 1], x
                                            ~it  [0, 1]                                                       (43)
                                                                 1
                                           -1            Bt
                              psit =   DI Nt                                                                  (44)
                                                       x
                                                       ~it Yit

where the last equation is the downward-sloping demand curve for firm i's data from
the data intermediary, which is described next. Firm i takes the aggregates DI , Bt , Nt ,
and Yt as given in solving this problem.
   Each firm wants to use all the data on its own variety: it owns the data already
and does not consider consumers' privacy concerns. The firm may also want to sell
some of the data on its variety to other firms, but this desire is limited by the threat
of creative destruction. When more information about the firm's variety is available
to competitors, the firm is more likely to be replaced by a competitor. The firm may
want to buy some of the bundle of other firms' data, weighing the cost of purchase
against the gains from increased productivity and sales. Finally, the firm hires labor to
reach its desired scale, recognizing the downward sloping demand curve for its variety
as governed by the elasticity of substitution across varieties,  , and that more sales
generates more data.



Data Intermediary Problem.                       The "b" and "s" notation for buying and selling beco-
mes tricky with the data intermediary: Dbit is the amount that firm i buys from the data
   22                                        JONES AND TONETTI



intermediary, so it is the amount the data intermediary sells to firm i. Similarly, psit is
the price at which firm i sells data to the data intermediary, so it is the price at which
the data intermediary purchases data.
   We originally hoped to model the data intermediary sector as perfectly competitive.
However, the nonrival nature of data makes this impossible: if agents could buy non-
rival data at a given price and then sell data at a given price, they would want to buy
one unit and sell it an infinite number of times. Nonrivalry poses problems for perfect
competition, as in Romer (1990).
   Our alternative seeks to minimize frictions in data intermediation by treating the
market for data as contestable. We assume that the data intermediary is a monopolist
subject to free entry at a vanishingly small cost, so that the data intermediary earns
zero profits. Moreover, we assume the actual and potential data intermediaries take
the price at which they buy data from firms, psit , as given. This setup delivers a limit
pricing condition with zero profits even though data is nonrival.
   The data intermediary takes its purchase price of data psit as given and maximizes
profits by choosing the quantity of data to purchase from each firm and the price at
which it sells bundles of data to firms:

                                     Nt                    Nt
                   max pbt                Dbit di -             psit Dsit di                           (45)
                 {pbt ,Dsit }    0                     0

                                      s.t.
                                                                     Nt                       -1
                                                       -1                           -1
                                Dbit  Bt =            Nt                  (Dsit )        di        i   (46)
                                                                 0

                                pbt  pbt                                                               (47)


subject to the demand curve pbt (Dbit ) from the Firm Problem above, where pbt is the
limit price associated with the zero profit condition that comes from free entry.
   This expression for profits combined with the resource constraint on data in (46)
incorporates the fact that the data intermediary can buy data once and sell it multiple
times, i.e., the nonrivalry of data. This is shown in the first term of profits, where
revenue essentially equals Nt pbt Bt -- the firm is able to sell the same bundle Bt multiple
times. For example, location data from consumers can, technologically, be sold to every
firm in the economy, not just to the store in which consumers happen to be shopping
                              NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                                             23


at the moment.


Firm Entry and the Creation of New Varieties.                             A new variety can be designed and
created at a fixed cost of  units of labor. In addition, new entrants are the beneficiaries
of business stealing: they obtain the property rights to the varieties that suffer from
creative destruction.3 The free entry condition is then

                                                               Nt
                                                              0      (~
                                                                      xit )Vit di
                                        wt = Vit +                                .                              (48)
                                                                      Nt

The left side wt is the cost of the  units of labor needed to create a new variety. The
right side has two terms. The first is the value of the new variety that is created. The
second, is the per-entrant portion of the rents from creative destruction.


5.2     The Equilibrium when Firms Own Data

The equilibrium in which firms own data consists of quantities {ct , Yt , cit , xit , x
                                                                                      ~it , at ,
Yit , Lit , Dit , Dbit , Bt , Dsit , Nt , Lpt , Let , Lt } and prices {pit , pbt , psit , wt , rt , Vit } such that

   1. {ct , cit , at } solve the Household Problem

   2. {Lit , Yit , pit , psit , Dbit , Dit , xit , x
                                                   ~it , Vit } solve the Firm Problem

   3. (Dsit , Bt ) Data markets clear: Dbit = Bt and Dsit = x
                                                            ~it Yit

   4. (pbt ) Free entry into data intermediation gives zero profits there (constrains pb as
       a function of ps )

   5. (Let ) Free entry into producing a new variety leads to zero profits, as in equa-
       tion (48)

                                          Nt
   6. Definition of Lpt : Lpt =          0     Lit di

   7. wt clears the labor market: Lpt + Let = Lt

                                                         Nt
   8. rt clears the asset market: at Lt =               0     Vit di
   3
     We could alternatively assume that existing firms get these benefits or that they are split in some
proportion. How the rents from business stealing are assigned is not the main focus of our paper, and
this assumption simplifies the analysis in the numerical exercise later. In particular, it acts as a subsidy to
entry so that the equilibrium number of varieties is closer to optimal.
      24                              JONES AND TONETTI



                                      t = 1 (Lt - Lpt )
    9. Nt follows its law of motion: N    


 10. Yt  ct Lt denotes aggregate output

 11. Exogenous population growth: Lt = L0 egL t

      In Section 8, we compare this equilibrium allocation to the optimal allocation as
well as to alternative allocations. Before that, we define the alternative allocations,
allowing us to efficiently make the comparisons all at once. For this reason, we turn
next to an equilibrium in which consumers own data.



6      Consumers Own Data

We now consider an allocation in which consumers own data associated with their
purchases. They can sell data to a data intermediary and choose how much data to
sell to balance the gain in income versus the cost to privacy. Firms own zero data as it
is created but can purchase data from the data intermediary. As we discussed earlier,
consumers cannot commit to sell their data to only a single firm. Thus, it is not possible
for firm i to charge consumers a lower price in exchange for the consumers agreeing not
to sell their data to others.
      Why is this departure from the Coase theorem helpful? Motivated by concerns
about creative destruction, firm i would like to strike a deal with consumers: we will
pay you for exclusive access to your data. At the right price, individual consumers
would accept, and firms would be better off. But this would reproduce the "firms own
data" allocation that limits data sales. Instead, we assume here that such deals cannot
be struck (for example, either because of a law that prohibits exclusive contracts or
because of a commitment problem). This allows us to study an equilibrium in which
data is used more widely across firms.


6.1        Decision Problems

Household Problem.        The household problem is similar to when firms own data, ex-
cept now the household chooses how much data to sell. Consumers license the same
data in two ways when selling it: they sell data on variety i with a license that allows
firm i to use it and, separately, they sell data on variety i with a license that allows it to
                                 NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                                                                25


be bundled and sold to all other firms. Because data can be sold in two ways, there are
two different prices, which consumers take as given: data on variety i that will be used
only by firm i sells at price pa
                               st , while data on variety i that can be bundled and sold to

any firm sells at price pb
                         st . The representative household solves

                                         
             U0 =      max                  e-~t
                                                 L0 u(ct , xit , x
                                                                 ~it ) dt                                                             (49)
                    {cit ,xit ,x
                               ~it } 0
                                                
                            Nt     -1           -1
      s.t.   ct =                  
                                 cit di                                                                                               (50)
                        0
                                                          Nt                       Nt                          Nt
              t = (rt - gL )at + wt -
             a                                                 pit cit di +             xit pa
                                                                                             st cit di +            ~it pb
                                                                                                                    x    st cit di
                                                      0                        0                           0
                                                          Nt
                 = (rt - gL )at + wt -                         qit cit dt                                                             (51)
                                                      0


where qit  pit - xit pa    ~it pb
                      st - x    st is the effective price of consumption, taking into ac-

count that the fractions xit and x
                                 ~it of each good consumed generate income when the
associated data is sold.



Firm Problem.         Each incumbent firm chooses how much data to buy. Two types of
data are available for purchase: data from the firm's own variety (Dait ) and data from
other varieties (Dbit ). Each firm sees the downward-sloping demand for its variety
(aggregating the FOC from the Household Problem):

                                                 1                    1
                                         ct                    Yt     
                             qit =                   =                    = pit - xit pa    ~it pb
                                                                                       st - x    st                                   (52)
                                         cit                   Yit

so that
                                                                 1
                                                       Yt        
                                          pit =                      + xit pa    ~it pb
                                                                            st + x    st .                                            (53)
                                                       Yit

Letting Vit denote the market value of firm i, the incumbent firm problem is:

                                                1
                                         Yt     
      rt Vit =       max                             + xit pa    ~it pb
                                                            st + x    st Yit - wt Lit - pat Dait - pbt Dbit
                 Lit ,Dait ,Dbit         Yit
                                     it -  (~
                                   +V       xit )Vit                                                                                  (54)
                                    
                    s.t.     Yit = Dit Lit
   26                                           JONES AND TONETTI



                     Dit = Dait + (1 - )Dbit                                                           (55)

                    Dait  0, Dbit  0


   Firms no longer face a simple constant elasticity demand curve because the ef-
fective price that consumers pay is different from the price that firms receive (because
consumers sell data). From the perspective of the firm, Dait and Dbit are perfect substi-
tutes: the firm is indifferent between using its own data versus an appropriately-sized
bundle of other firms' data.



Data Intermediary Problem. Because we have two types of data, we now introduce
two different data intermediaries: one handles the sale of "own" data and the other
handles the bundle. Each is modeled as earlier, i.e., as a monopolist who is constrained
by free entry into data intermediation.
   Taking the price pa
                     st of data purchased from consumers as given, the data interme-

diary for own data solves the following problem at each date t:

                                           Nt                             Nt
                           maxa
                                                pait Dait di -                 pa   a
                                                                                st Dcit di             (56)
                         {pait ,Dcit } 0                              0

                                                     s.t.
                                                       a
                                                Dait  Dcit i                                           (57)

                                                pait  pait                                             (58)


subject to the demand curve pait (Dait ) from the Firm Problem above, where pait is the
limit price associated with the zero profit condition that comes from free entry.
   Similarly, taking the price pb
                                st of data purchased from consumers as given, the data

intermediary for bundled data solves

                               Nt                        Nt
                 max                pbit Dbit di -            pb   b
                                                               st Dcit di                              (59)
                       b }
               {pbit ,Dcit 0                         0

                                         s.t.
                                                                     Nt                       -1
                                                            -1              b       -1
                                    Dbit  Bt =        Nt                  (Dcit )        di        i   (60)
                                                                 0

                                    pbit  pbit                                                         (61)
                          NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                                     27


subject to the demand curve pbit (Dbit ) from the Firm Problem above, where pbit is the
limit price associated with the zero profit condition that comes from free entry.
      The two data intermediaries are monopolists who choose the prices pait and pbit
of data as well as how much data to buy from consumers of each variety and type,
taking the prices pa       b
                   st and pst as given. From the standpoint of the consumer, one unit

of consumption generates one unit of data and data from all varieties sell at the same
price, while each type of license may sell at a different price.
      The constraints on the data intermediary problems are critical. Equation (57) says
that the largest amount of own data the intermediary can sell to firm i is the amount
of variety i data that the data intermediary has purchased. In contrast, equation (60)
recognizes that data from all varieties can be bundled together and resold to each indi-
vidual firm.
      Zero profits from free entry into data intermediation together with the fact that the
two types of data are perfect substitutes in the firm production function pin down the
prices pa and pb .


6.2     Equilibrium when Consumers Own Data

An equilibrium in which consumers own data consists of quantities {ct , Yt , cit , xit , x
                                                                                         ~it , at ,
                                 a , D b , B , N , L , L , L } and prices {q , p , p , p , pa , pb , w ,
Yit , Lit , Dit , Dait , Dbit , Dcit  cit   t   t   pt  et  t               it it ait bit st st       t

rt , Vit } such that

   1. {ct , cit , xit , x
                        ~it , at } solve the Household Problem

   2. {Lit , Yit , pit , Dait , Dbit , Dit , Vit } solve the Firm Problem

   3. (qit ) The effective consumer price is qit = pit - xit pa    ~it pb
                                                              st - x    st

       a , D b , B , p , and p
   4. Dcit  cit   t   ait     bit solve the Data Intermediary Problem subject to the

        constraint that there is free entry into this sector, so it makes zero profits

   5. pa                                                        a
       st clears the data market so that supply equals demand: Dcit = xit cit Lt


   6. pb                                                        b
       st clears the data market so that supply equals demand: Dcit = x
                                                                      ~it cit Lt

   7. (Let ) Free entry into producing a new variety leads to zero profits (including the
                                                                                       Nt
                                                                                             (~
                                                                                              xit )Vit di
        entrant's share of the rents from creative destruction): wt = Vit +            0
                                                                                              Nt
      28                                 JONES AND TONETTI


                                  Nt
  8. Definition of Lpt : Lpt =   0     Lit di

  9. wt clears the labor market: Lpt + Let = Lt

                                                 Nt
 10. rt clears the asset market: at Lt =        0     Vit di

                                    t = 1 (Lt - Lpt )
 11. Nt follows its law of motion: N    


 12. Yt  ct Lt denotes aggregate output

 13. Exogenous population growth: Lt = L0 egL t


6.3        Understanding the Equilibrium when Consumers Own Data

While Section 8 will discuss the key features of this allocation, it is worth pausing here
to highlight some smaller results.
      First, because own data and the bundle of other-variety data are perfect substitutes
(see equation (55)), in equilibrium

                                                   
                                          pat =      pbt                              (62)
                                                  1-

where we've dropped the i subscript because of symmetry. At any other price ratio,
firms would buy only one type of data and not the other. Similarly, the consumer prices
for each type of data satisfy


                                 pa             b
                                  st = pat and pst = Nt pbt .                         (63)


      Second, consider the inequality constraints in the Data Intermediary problems. In
equilibrium, the data intermediary will sell any data that it buys. Moreover, because
of nonrivalry, data can be bought once and sold multiple times. This means that both
                                                 a = x Y ; that is, all data on variety
inequality constraints will bind. First, Dait = Dcit  it it

i that the data intermediary purchases will be sold to firm i. Second, Dbit = Bt =
   b = Nx
N Dcit  ~it Yit (using symmetry); that is, all data that is licensed for sharing that the
data intermediary buys will be sold to all firms as bundled data.
                       NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                         29


7    Outlaw Data Sales

The final allocation that we consider is motivated by recent concerns over data privacy.
In the world in which firms own data, suppose the government, in an effort to protect
privacy, limits the use of data. In particular, it mandates that


                                      x
                                      ~it = 0

                                      xit  x
                                           ¯  (0, 1].


That is, firms are not allowed to sell their data to any third parties: x
                                                                        ~it = 0. A similar
allocation without the broad use of data may arise from an opt-out law that grants con-
sumers the right to prevent firms from selling their data, since there are privacy costs
to the consumer and no counteracting direct income gain. Moreover, the government
may restrict firms to use less than 100 percent of their own-variety data, parameterized
by xit = x
         ¯. We require x
                       ¯ > 0 in our setting -- otherwise output of each firm would be
zero because data is an essential input to production.
    With this determination of x
                               ~it and xit , the rest of the equilibrium looks exactly like
the firms-own-data case, so we will not repeat that setup here. Instead, we turn next to
comparing the equilibrium outcomes across these different allocations.




8    Key Insights from Comparing the Different Allocations

This section delivers the payoff from the preparation we've made in the previous secti-
ons: we see how the different allocation mechanisms we've studied lead to different
outcomes. We compare the allocations on the balanced growth path for the social
planner (sp ), when consumers own data (c ), when firms own data (f ), and when the
government outlaws the selling of data (os ). When firms restrict the sale of data to limit
their exposure to creative destruction, what are the consequences? When consumers
own data and can sell it, is the allocation optimal? What if selling data is banned out of
a concern for privacy?
      30                                     JONES AND TONETTI



Privacy and Data Sales. The steady-state fraction of data that is used by other firms
is given by4

                                                  1/2
                                      1   
                          x
                          ~sp =         ·                                                       (64)
                                      ~ 1-
                                      
                                                          1/2
                                      1      -1
                           x
                           ~c =         ·  ·                                                    (65)
                                      ~ 1-
                                             
                                                  1/2
                                         2                             ( - 1)
                           x
                           ~f =                         where                                   (66)
                                      (2 - )0                         -1 - 

                           x
                           ~os = 0.                                                             (67)


Interestingly, even when consumers own and sell their data, the equilibrium allocation
                                                                 -1
features inefficiently low data sales because of the                  < 1 term in equation (65). The
equilibrium price of data that consumers receive in exchange for selling is influenced
by this same factor:

                                              -1 1           1
                                pb
                                 st =       ·   ·    (c Lt ) -1 .
                                         1-       x
                                                  ~c

                
Recall that     -1   is the standard monopoly markup in the goods market, so the intuition
is that the monopoly markup distortion leads data to sell for a price that is inefficiently
low, causing consumers to sell too little data.
      The strong similarity between the consumer and optimal x
                                                             ~ can be contrasted with
data sales when firms own data, given in equation (66). First, the utility cost associated
with privacy ~ does not enter the firm solution, as firms do not inherently care about
privacy. Second, x
                 ~f depends on 0 , capturing the crucial role of creative destruction
-- which does not enter the planner or consumer solutions for x
                                                              ~. As we will see in our
numerical examples, reasonable values for 0 mean that creative destruction concerns
are first-order for firms, so they may sell little data to other firms and choose a small x
                                                                                          ~f .
Thus, firms inadvertently deliver privacy benefits to consumers. But as we will see, this
aversion to selling data has other consequences. An extreme version of this allocation
is the one that outlaws data sales entirely, so that x
                                                     ~os = 0.
      The privacy considerations that involve only firm i and consumption of variety i are


  4
      We assume   -1
                       >  and   -1
                                     > 3
                                       2
                                            1
                                          - 2  so that   (0, 2) holds in equation (66).
                          NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                       31


similar. In particular,

                                               ~
                                       xsp =     ·x
                                                  ~sp                                  (68)
                                             1-
                                               ~
                                        xc =     ·x
                                                  ~c                                   (69)
                                             1-
                                        xf = 1                                         (70)

                                             ¯  (0, 1].
                                       xos = x                                         (71)


These equations show that when firms own data, they overuse it. That is, firms set
xf = 1, while the social planner and consumers take into account the privacy costs
associated with  and generally choose less direct use of data, xc < xsp < 1.


Firm Size.   Because of symmetry, firm size Lit equals the ratio of production employ-
ment to varieties, Lpt /Nt . This quantity plays an important role in all of the allocations
and is denoted by the parameter  :

                                     alloc
                               Lpt
                   Lalloc
                    it    =                   alloc , for alloc  {sp, c, f, os}        (72)
                               Nt

where

                                     -1
                              sp   ·                                                   (73)
                                     1-
                                        +  (~xc )  - 1
                              c  gL ·             ·                                    (74)
                                             xc ) 1 - 
                                      gL +  (~
                                        +  (~xf )    -1
                              f  gL ·             ·                                    (75)
                                             xf ) 1 -  -1
                                      gL +  (~
                                      -1
                              os   ·       .                                           (76)
                                     1 - 

   For all allocations, firm size as measured by employees is constant. This is because
the entry cost technology is such that a fixed number of workers can create a new
variety. Several economic forces determine firm size. First, notice how similar sp and
os are. That is, steady-state firm size in the allocation with no data sales features a firm
size that looks superficially similar to the optimal firm size. Both are increasing in 
(the entry cost) and  (the rate of time preference). Higher values of these parameters
deter entry, and since the two uses for labor are entry and production, this increases
   32                                      JONES AND TONETTI



labor used in production.
   The only difference between the two expressions is that the optimal firm size de-
pends on 1 -  where the equilibrium firm size depends on 1 -  . This difference is
subtle and important to understand, as this same difference plays an important role
throughout the allocations. Ultimately, this wedge results from the standard appropri-
ability problem, that the profit earned by creating a new variety is less than the social
surplus. To understand this difference in detail, we rewrite the optimal allocation as
                                     sp
                             Lpt                           1/(1 -  )
                                          = sp = Const ·             .                   (77)
                             Nt                            1/( - 1)

   The left-hand side of this expression is the ratio of production labor to the amount
of varieties, and variety is closely related to entry. The right-hand side is the ratio of two
elasticities. The numerator, 1/(1 -  ), is the degree of increasing returns to scale at the
firm level that results from the nonrivalry of data. The denominator, 1/( - 1), is the
degree of increasing returns to scale associated with the love of variety. The planner
makes the ratio of production labor to the amount of varieties proportional to the ratio
of these two elasticities, which capture the social value of production labor and entry.
   In contrast, consider the equilibrium allocation when selling data is outlawed. Flip-
ping the numerator and denominator, equation (76) can be expressed as
                                      os
                               Nt              1            1 - 
                                           =      = Const ·      .                       (78)
                               Lpt             os            -1

   As shown in Appendix equation (A.73), this expression derives from the equilibrium
free entry condition. The number of firms in the economy, Nt , depends on profits
earned after entry relative to entry costs. Aggregate profits as a share of aggregate
output equals (1 -  )/ · 1/(1 -  ), while aggregate payments to production labor
as a share of output equals ( - 1)/ · 1/(1 -  ). Equation (78) says that the equilibrium
amount of varieties is proportional to this ratio.
   Equations (73) and (76) imply that firm employment is larger in the equilibrium
with no data sales than in the optimal allocation since  > 1. This occurs because
of the profit share term. Intuitively, the equilibrium allocation creates varieties based
on profits, while the social planner creates varieties based on the full social surplus.
Because of the standard appropriability problem, the outlaw-sales equilibrium features
                        NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                         33


too few firms. The flip side is that firms in equilibrium are inefficiently large.
   Going even further, the nonrivalry of data is essential to generating a wedge bet-
ween equilibrium and optimal entry. If  = 1 such that data were rival, then equili-
brium entry and firm size would be optimal for all property right regimes.
   We will discuss the equations for c and f after considering the number of firms
and varieties, next.


Number of Firms and Varieties.        The effect of the appropriability problem on the
measure of varieties can be seen more directly in our next set of equations. The number
of firms (varieties) in an allocation is proportional to the labor force:

                                                             1
                       Ntalloc = alloc Lt where alloc                .                (79)
                                                          gL + alloc

Notice that the last half of the denominator of the  expression is just the  term itself.
For gL small, variety is basically inversely proportional to firm size, verifying intuition
provided above about firm size and variety.
   Next, we compare firm size and variety between the equilibrium in which consu-
mers own data and the outlaw-sales equilibrium in which firms own data. Equati-
ons (74) and (76) show that firm sizes differ in these two allocations only because of
creative destruction, which enters in two ways. In the numerator of (74), there is a
     xc ) term. This captures the extent to which creative destruction raises the effective
 +  (~
rate at which firms discount future profits. In the denominator, however, there is an
additional term involving  (~
                            xc ). This term captures the rents from destroyed firms as
they flow to new entrants -- business stealing -- essentially raising the return to entry.
If  = gL , then these two terms cancel and creative destruction does not influence firm
size and variety creation.
   A similar effect impacts firm size and the number of firms in the equilibrium when
firms own data and can legally buy and sell it, as seen in equation (75). However, in that
allocation, data sales are typically lower than when consumers own data, implying that
creative destruction is also lower, reducing the role of this term.


Aggregate Output and Economic Growth.           The key finding of the paper is how data
use influences living standards. The next set of equations shows aggregate output in
   34                                  JONES AND TONETTI



the various allocations. For the allocations that feature some data sharing, the equation
for aggregate output is

                                       1                    1      
                                                         1+ -   + 1-
                            ~
     Ytalloc = alloc (1 - ) x alloc
                                      1-
                                           (alloc Lt )        1             for alloc  {sp, c, f }.   (80)


There are essentially three key terms in this expression, and all have a clear interpre-
tation. First, alloc captures the size of each individual firm, and it is raised to the
power 1/(1 -  ) because of the increasing returns to scale at the firm level associated
with data. Second, the term (1 - )~
                                  xalloc captures data. In particular, recall (e.g., from
equation (33)) that

                                                                xit
               Dit = [xit + (1 - )~
                                  xit Nt ]Yit = Nt                  + (1 - )~
                                                                            xit Yit .                 (81)
                                                                Nt

As Nt grows large, the own use term xit /Nt disappears, and data is ultimately pro-
                                                                               
portional to (1 - )~
                   xalloc . This is raised to the power  because of the usual Dit term
in the production function for output, and it is further raised to the power 1/(1 -  )
because of the feedback effect through Yit . Finally, the last term in equation (80) is
                                               1          
Nt = alloc Lt raised to the power 1 +          -1   +    1- .   This exponent captures the overall
degree of increasing returns to scale in the economy: 1/( - 1) comes from the standard
variety effect associated with the nonrivalry of ideas while /(1 -  ) comes from the
extra degree of increasing returns associated with the nonrivalry of data. This last effect
enters directly because of the Nt term associated with broad data use in (81) that we just
discussed.
   Aggregate output when there is some data sharing can be contrasted with output
when selling data is outlawed:

                                                    1                   1
                             Ytos = [os  x     1- ( L )1+  -1 .                                       (82)
                                          os ]     os t



Two main differences stand out. The first is related to the  and  terms and the diffe-
rences in the allocations in these two economies. But the second is perhaps surprising
and potentially even more important: there is a fundamental difference in the role of
scale between the allocations that involve data sharing and the outlaw-sales equili-
                                                                        1      
brium. In the allocations with broad data use, the exponent on Lt is 1+ - 1 + 1- , while
                        NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                         35


in the outlaw-sales equilibrium, the additional returns associated with broad data use
 
1-   are absent. The reason for this can be seen directly in equation (81) above: when
~ = 0, the additional scale term associated with (1 - )~
x                                                      xNt disappears and the amount
of data just depends on xos . That is, firms learn only from their own production and
not from the Nt other firms in the economy.
     The results for per capita income illustrate this even more clearly. In this economy,
consumption per person equals output per person, Yt /Lt . Dividing the equations above
by Lt gives

                                       1      
                                           + 1-
                         calloc
                          t      Lt-1           
                                                    for alloc  {sp, c, f }             (83)
                                    1
                              cos   -1
                               t  Lt       .                                           (84)


     This effect can be seen by taking logs and derivatives of these equations to obtain
the growth rate of income and consumption per person along a balanced growth path:

                    alloc      1       
                   gc     =       +                gL    for alloc  {sp, c, f }        (85)
                               -1 1-
                      os       1
                     gc  =         gL .                                                (86)
                               -1

Even though this is a semi-endogenous growth setup in which standard policies have
level effects but not growth effects, we see that data use is different. Allocations in
which data is used broadly feature faster long-run rates of economic growth.
     The nature of data use matters for all of these results related to the degree of incre-
asing returns to scale in equations (80) to (86), whether in levels or in growth rates. If
every firm sells to 10 others, then this mimics the "outlaw selling" equilibrium because
the number of firms benefiting from the data does not grow with the economy. Con-
versely, if all firms sell their data to one quarter of the other firms, then this economy
features the additional scale effect: the number of firms benefiting from data increases
as the economy grows larger.
     In an economy in which firms do not sell data, firms learn only from their own
production. Because the entry cost is a fixed number of units of labor, the number
of firms is directly proportional to the amount of labor in the economy. But this is
just another way of saying that firm size is invariant to the overall population of the
       36                                      JONES AND TONETTI



economy: a bigger economy has more firms but not larger firms. This means that in the
outlaw-sales economy, there is no additional data benefit to having a larger economy.
Contrast this with an economy in which data is used more broadly. In that case, the
amount of data that each firm can learn from is an increasing function of the size of the
economy. Therefore, the scale of the economy and the increasing returns associated
with the nonrivalry of data interact.5


Data and Firm Production.              This difference in the returns to scale shows up throug-
hout the allocations. This can be seen, for example, in the comparisons of data used by
each firm and aggregate data use:

                                                               1
                    alloc
                   Dit                   xalloc alloc Lt ] 1- for alloc  {sp, c, f }
                          = [alloc (1 - )~                                                                (87)
                                           1
                       os
                      Dit = [os xos ]     1-                                                              (88)


and

                                                   1                   1
         alloc                                                     1+ 1-
        Dt     = N Di = [alloc (1 - )~
                                     xalloc ] 1- (alloc Lt )                for alloc  {sp, c, f }        (89)
                             1
             os
            Dt  = [os xos ] 1- os Lt .                                                                    (90)


       The scale difference also shows up in firm production. While firm size measured by
employment is invariant to the size of the economy, firm production is not invariant
when data is used broadly. In that case, firm production grows with the overall size of
the economy because of the nonrivalry of data:

                                                   1                
                  alloc
                Yit                    ~
                        = alloc (1 - ) x alloc
                                                  1-
                                                       (alloc Lt ) 1- for alloc  {sp, c, f }              (91)
                                      1
                    os
                  Yit  = [os  xos ]
                                    1- .                                                                  (92)


Wages, Profits, and Pricing.           In the equilibrium allocations, i.e., alloc  {c, f, os}, the
factor income share of production labor and profits in aggregate output add to one and
   5
     Notice that this finding is robust to specifying the entry cost differently. For example, if the entry cost
is such that the number of firms is N = L , then firm size will be N       L
                                                                             = L1- and firm data will grow
in proportion. Notice that  could be less than one or greater than one: it is possible that firm size is
decreasing in the overall scale of the economy if varieties are easy to create. Contrast that with the data
                                                                                               L
sharing case, in which each firm benefits from all data in the economy: Di  N Yi  N · N            = L. That is,
regardless of  , the full scale effect is passed through.
                            NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                                                  37


are given by

                   c                      os                                        f
          wt Lpt                wt Lpt                  -1                 wt Lpt              -1
                        =                      =                ,                       =                          (93)
           Yt                    Yt                     (1 -  )             Yt               (1 -  -1 )
                   c                     os                                         f                -1
           Nt t                 Nt t              1 -                       Nt t            1 - 
                        =                     =            ,                            =            -1       .    (94)
            Yt                   Yt                (1 -  )                   Yt              (1 -         )

   By comparison, recall from equation (19) that the aggregate production function for
the economy is

                                                                 1
                                                              
                                                   Yt = Nt-1 Dit Lpt .                                             (95)


Therefore, the marginal product of production labor multiplied by Lpt as a share of
aggregate output from the social planner's perspective is equal to one. That is, as is
standard in models with varieties, labor is underpaid relative to its social marginal
product so that the economy can provide some profits to incentivize the creation of
new varieties.
   It is also interesting to compare the monopoly markup and pricing in the different
equilibrium allocations. The price of a variety is

                            1                     1
                c
               qit = Nt-1 = (c Lt ) -1                                                                             (96)
                                     -1                     1
                                                                            -1                   1
               pc
                it =    1+·                                 -1
                                                          Nt     =   1+·                (c Lt ) -1                 (97)
                                     (1 -  )                                (1 -  )
                            1                      1
               pf
                it = Nt
                        -1
                           = (f Lt ) -1                                                                            (98)
                         1                            1
               pos
                it = Nt
                         -1
                                 = (os Lt ) -1 .                                                                   (99)


Two points are worth noting. First, the effective price paid by consumers (i.e., incor-
porating the fact that they can sell their data) in the consumers-own-data allocation --
 c -- and the actual price paid by consumers in the other allocations -- pf , pos -- are
qit                                                                       it it
                    1
both equal to Nt-1 . Of course, Nt will differ across these allocations, but the point is
that the consumer prices are both the same function of the number of firms. Moreover,
there is no "markup" term that shows up in this expression. This is a feature of the
exogenous labor supply in our environment. One way or the other, labor can only be
used to produce goods and so the monopoly markup does not result in a misallocation
       38                                 JONES AND TONETTI



of labor. This is true even though firms internalize that they have increasing returns
because of the learning-by-doing associated with data.
       Second, notice that the price that firms receive for their sales in the consumers-
                                                                                       -1
own-data equilibrium, pc
                       it , does involve a markup term given by 1 +  ·                (1- ) .   If  = 0,
this term would drop out. Instead, it captures the fact that firms know that consumers
can sell their data. Therefore, firms charge an additional markup over marginal cost to
capture this revenue.


The Value of Data.      The value of data as a share of GDP is given by
                                                      c
                           Nt (pat Dat + pbt Dbt )              -1
                                                          =                                       (100)
                                     Yt                       1- 
                                                      f
                            Nt (pat Yit + pbt Dbt )                         -1
                                                          =        -1   ·      .                  (101)
                                      Yt                      1-            

We will use these expressions in the numerical examples shortly.6


Efficiency.     Comparing the amount of data shared by the planner and consumers, x
                                                                                  ~,
in equations (64) and (65), it is clear that the monopolistic markup distorts the equili-
brium allocation. One might naturally wonder if a production subsidy to correct this
distortion would lead the "Consumers Own Data" allocation to be efficient. This turns
out not to be true, however. Creative destruction in the equilibrium affects incentives
for entrants to introduce new varieties, and this second distortion requires a second
instrument. More specifically, let revenue in the firm problem for variety i be increased
by sy , and let entry costs be reduced by se . Then the subsidies that replicate the optimal
allocation are

                                            1
                           1 + sc
                                y =                                                               (102)
                                       + (1 -  ) -
                                                 
                                                   1

                                               xsp ) 1 -  ( + sc
                                        gL +  (~               y)
                           1 - sc
                                e =     ·           ·             .                               (103)
                                      gL  +  (~
                                              xsp )      1-

                                                                                                     
       The revenue subsidy, sc
                             y , is smaller than the conventional markup correction                  -1
because of the presence of  and increasing returns. The entry subsidy addresses the
   6
    When firms own the data, the total value above is the sum of own and purchased data. Since own data
                                                         
is not purchased, we price it at its shadow value pat = 1- p , driven by perfect substitutability.
                                                            bt
                          NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                                     39


fact that firm size and entry are distorted in the equilibrium allocation by creative de-
struction and business stealing; see the discussion above following equation (79). We
know that the "Consumers Own Data" allocation is inefficient. What we see next in our
numerical examples, is that this inefficiency is relatively small.



9        Numerical Examples

We now provide a set of numerical examples to illustrate the forces in the model. This
should not be viewed as a formal calibration that can be compared quantitatively to
facts about the U.S. economy. Nevertheless, we find it useful to think about how large
the various forces in the model might possibly be.


How Large is  ?       We have two approaches to gaining insight into the value of  . First,
from equation (100), in the equilibrium allocation in which consumers own data, the
                                                 -1
share of GDP spent on data is given by        1-           (and when firms own data, this formula
provides an excellent approximation to the value of own and purchased data).7 Taking
                                                       
a standard value of  = 4, this equals .75 ·           1- .   How important is data as a factor of
production? A casual guess is that it accounts for no more than 5 percent of GDP, which
would imply a value of  = .0625. And 10 percent of GDP seems like a solid upper
bound, implying a value of  = .1176. With this as motivation, we take a benchmark va-
lue of  = .06 and consider robustness to values of 0.03 and 0.12, with some preference
for the two lower values.
        An alternative way to gain insight into  is to look at machine learning error rates
and how they change with the quantity of data. Sun, Shrivastava, Singh and Gupta
(2017) study how the error rate in image recognition applications of machine learning
changes with the number of images in the learning sample. They examine four different
approaches with a number of images that ranges from 10 million to 300 million. If we
assume that the error rate is proportional to M - where M is the number of images,
then we can compute an estimate of  . Using their data, together with a related exercise
from Facebook from Joulin, van der Maaten, Jabri and Vasilache (2015), we obtain 5
different estimates of  , ranging from 0.033 to 0.143, with a mean of 0.082, as shown in
    7                                                 -1
    We choose a large value of equal to 50, so that         1; plugging this into equation (101) gives the
result.
       40                                  JONES AND TONETTI




                Figure 1: Estimating  from Image Recognition Algorithms




 Note: The parameter  comes from a model in which the error rate is proportional to M - . More
 specifically,  is estimated by regressing the log of the error rate 1 - mAP on the log number of images
 using data from Sun, Shrivastava, Singh and Gupta (2017) in the first three panels and from Joulin,
 van der Maaten, Jabri and Vasilache (2015) in the last panel. A fifth estimate from Figure 4a of Sun,
 Shrivastava, Singh and Gupta (2017) with fine tuning is omitted but yields an estimate of  = 0.040.
 The data are plotted in blue while the fitted log-linear curve is shown in green.




Figure 1.8 At this mean value, a doubling of the amount of data leads the error rate to fall
by 5.9 percent. Notably, the power function fits well and there is no tendency (at least in
the Google study) for the error rate to flatten at a high number of images. Furthermore,
as data proliferates, firms will develop new algorithms and applications that make even
better use of more data. Posner and Weyl (2018) suggest that this can delay or even
offset sharp diminishing returns to data. Obviously, it would be valuable to use a bro-
ader set of applications in order to estimate  in different contexts; Hestness, Narang,
Ardalani, Diamos, Jun, Kianinejad, Patwary, Yang and Zhou (2017) provide estimates
ranging from 0.07 to 0.35 for a variety of applications, including speech recognition,
language translation, and image classification.
       In order to map the estimate of  into the parameter  in our model, we need

   8
   We are grateful to Abhinav Shrivastava and Chen Sun for providing the data from their paper and the
Facebook paper and for help interpreting the "mAP" metric.
                      NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                         41


to make some assumption about how the error rate translates into productivity. If
productivity equals the inverse of the error rate, then  =  . However, there is no
reason why this assumption needs to hold, and one could imagine that productivity is
the error rate raised to some other exponent. Without knowledge of this exponent, we
cannot map the estimates from the machine learning literature directly into  . Hence,
we prefer our earlier approach to calibration based on data's share of GDP. What we find
most valuable about the machine learning evidence is that it supports the power law
formulation that is assumed in our model.



Other parameters.     Other parameter values used in our example are reported in Ta-
ble 2. We consider an elasticity of substitution of 4 implying that the degree of incre-
                                    1
asing returns in the economy is     -1   = 0.33 when there are no data sales, rising to
 1     
 -1 + 1-   = 0.40 when data is used broadly. Population growth in advanced economies
is around 1 percent per year, but the growth rate of R&D labor is closer to 4 percent;
as a compromise, we choose gL = 0.02. Combined with the returns to scale, this
implies steady-state growth rates of consumption per person of 0.67 percent when
selling data is outlawed and 0.79 percent when data is used broadly. Of course these
are lower than what we see in advanced economies, but our model omits other sources
of growth, so we probably should not match a higher growth rate. We set L0 = 100,
corresponding to a workforce of around 100 million people; labor units are therefore
millions of people. We set the rate of time preference to 2.5 percent (it must be larger
than gL ). Entry requires  = 0.01 workers; because labor units are in millions of people,
this corresponds to 10,000 people, and with an R&D share of the population of around
1 percent, this would mean 100 researchers. We set the weight on own data to  = 0.5;
as long as (1 - ) > 0, the particular value of this parameter is inconsequential for our
results.
   The privacy and creative destruction parameters are less standard, so we choose
baseline values, but also explore a wide range of values in our numerical exercise. Re-
garding the privacy cost parameters,  and ~ , Athey, Catalini and Tucker (2017) show
that people express concerns about privacy but are willing to share once incentivized,
even by a relatively small reward: a majority of MIT students in their survey were wil-
ling to share the email addresses of three close friends in exchange for a free pizza.
      42                                    JONES AND TONETTI




                                       Table 2: Parameter Values


              Description                                      Parameter           Value
              Importance of data                                                   0.06
              Elasticity of substitution (goods)                                    4
              Weight on privacy                                   =~               0.20
              Population level                                      L0             100
              Population growth rate                                gL             0.02
              Rate of time preference                                              0.025
              Labor cost of entry                                                  0.01
              Creative destruction                                  0               0.4
              Weight on own data                                                   1/2
              Elasticity of substitution (data)                                     50
              Use of own data in OS                                  x
                                                                     ¯              1

              Note: Baseline parameter values for the numerical example.




Nevertheless, we give an important role to privacy; an individual's privacy concerns
regarding all their economic activity may be different than that exhibited in the lab. We
set ~ = 0.20, implying that having all of one's data shared with all firms is equivalent
to a reduction in consumption of 10 percent; we explore robustness to values between
0.02 and 0.99. Selling all of a variety's data increases the rate of creative destruction by
0 /2, which we calibrate to 20 percent; absent any other death, this corresponds to an
expected lifetime of 5 years. We explore robustness to values of 0 between 0.02 and
0.99.




9.1        Consumption-Equivalent Welfare

Consumers care about consumption as well as privacy. A consumption-equivalent
welfare measure incorporates both. Along a balanced growth path, welfare is given by

                                       L0                  ~ 2       g alloc
                             alloc
                            Uss    =        log calloc
                                                 0     -     ~alloc + c
                                                             x                 .
                                        ~                  2            ~
                        NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                           43


Notice that the xit "own privacy" term drops out because it is scaled by 1/N ; recall
                   alloc () denote steady-state welfare when we perturb the allocation
equation (4). Let Uss
of consumption by some proportion :

                                    L0                    2        g alloc
                       alloc
                      Uss    () =        log(calloc
                                              0     )-     xalloc + c        .
                                     ~                   2            ~

      Then consumption equivalent welfare alloc is the proportion by which consump-
tion must be decreased in the optimal allocation to deliver the same welfare as in some
other allocation:

                                     sp alloc      alloc
                                    Uss (     ) = Uss    (1).


Moreover, it is straightforward to see that this consumption equivalent welfare measure
is given by

                                                   ~ 2                alloc - g sp
                                                                     gc        c
               log alloc = log calloc
                                0     - log csp
                                             0 -     ~alloc - x
                                                     x        ~2sp +               .   (104)
                                                   2                       ~
                               Level term           Privacy term      Growth term

That is, there is an additive decomposition of consumption-equivalent welfare into
terms reflecting differences in the level of consumption, the extent of privacy, and the
growth rate.



9.2     Quantitative Analysis of Welfare and Property Rights

In this section we compare consumption-equivalent welfare for the consumers-own-
data and firms-own-data property right regimes. The parameters that we have the
most uncertainty over are 0 , , and ~ , so we hold all other parameters at the baseline
calibration and explore the behavior of the model across a wide range values for these
parameters. In the next section, we study the allocations in detail for a particular set of
parameter values.
      Figure 2 shows the ratio of consumption-equivalent welfares, c /f , for various
combinations of  , 0 , and ~ = . When this ratio is less than one -- the red triangular
region in the plots -- the "Firms Own Data" allocation is superior. In the majority of the
plot, however, this ratio is larger than one, indicating that the "Consumers Own Data"
      44                                       JONES AND TONETTI



allocation is generally superior. In fact the result is even stronger. When  = 0.06, the
smallest this ratio gets is 0.998. Moreover, across the three plots (for different values of
 ), the lowest value this ratio ever reaches is 0.993. In other words, even in the relatively
rare instances that the "Firms Own Data" allocation generates higher welfare, it does so
by only a small amount. But when the "Consumers Own Data" allocation is superior, it
typically generates substantially higher welfare.
      The theory can help us understand the parameter combinations for which the "Firms
Own Data" allocation is better. Recall that when consumers own data, they typically
                                                  ~c < x
sell a bit less than is socially optimal, so that x    ~sp ; the reason is that the markup
in the economy means that firms generally value data less than the planner, so the
equilibrium price of data is inefficiently low. In contrast, the amount of data that firms
              ~f , depends on the creative destruction parameter 0 . As shown in equa-
sell broadly, x
                                                      ~f . So by choosing the parameter
tion (66), the lower is this parameter, the higher is x
                                                                       ~f that is close
appropriately, the "Firms Own Data" allocation can generate a value of x
   ~sp . This is what we see in Figure 2: for the right low values of 0 , the "Firms Own
to x
                                                                                      ~f ,
Data" allocation is superior. Of course, as this parameter falls further, this raises x
                           ~f >> x
and it eventually leads to x     ~sp : if creative destruction is not a problem for firms,
they will sell even more data than the planner desires. In this case, the "Firms Own
Data" allocation becomes inferior once again. This general logic explains why there is
a range of values for 0 , on the low end, where firms owning data is better.9
      To summarize, this sensitivity analysis that explores model behavior across the pa-
rameter space suggests that the "Consumers Own Data" allocation typically generates
substantially higher welfare. It is only when the creative destruction force is very weak
and privacy concerns are very large that the "Firms Own Data" policy can be slightly
better.


9.3        The Baseline Numerical Example

Now that we understand that welfare is generally higher when consumers own data,
we explore allocations across property-right regimes in more detail for our baseline
parameterization to understand the sources of the welfare differences. The top panel
   9
     This is also related to the bulge in the left side of the red region in the  = 0.12 plot in Figure 2. In that
region, the firm would like to sell even more than 100% of its data: unconstrained by technology, it would
choose x~f > 1.
                         NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                                    45




                                   Table 3: Numerical Example


                                         Summary Statistics
                                Data Use            Firm                  Consu-                      Creative
                            "own" "others"          size       Variety    mption       Growth          Destr.
Allocation                    x        x
                                       ~                      N/L =         c             g              

Social Planner                0.56         0.56         798    1002         45.3        0.79           0.064
Consumers Own Data            0.49         0.49         848     955         44.7        0.79           0.048
Firms Own Data                 1           0.13         953     867         40.7        0.79           0.003
Outlaw Sales                   1            0           987     843         22.4        0.67           0.000



                              Consumption-Equivalent Welfare
                                                                   ---- Decomposition ----
                                Welfare                         Level      Privacy    Growth
Allocation                                        log           term        term        term

Optimal Allocation                   1              0             ..             ..              ..
Consumers Own Data                 0.995          -0.005       -0.0128        0.0080           0.0000
Firms Own Data                     0.925          -0.078       -0.1078        0.0303           0.0000
Outlaw Sales                       0.396          -0.927       -0.7037        0.0319         -0.2553

Note: The table reports statistics from our numerical example for the different allocations using the
parameter values in Table 2. The top panel shows baseline statistics along a balanced growth path. Firm
size is multiplied by 106 and therefore is measured in people. The bottom panel reports consumption
equivalent welfare calculated according to equation (104). In particular,  is the fraction by which
consumption must be decreased in the optimal allocation to deliver the same welfare as in some
alternative allocation.
   46                                      JONES AND TONETTI




                  Figure 2: Consumption-Equivalent Welfare Ratio: c /f




 Note: The plots show the ratio of consumption-equivalent welfare, c /f , for various combinations of
  , 0 , and ~ = . When this ratio is larger than one -- which holds for most parameter combinations --
 the "Consumers Own Data" allocation is superior. When this ratio is less than one -- the red triangular
 region in the plots -- the "Firms Own Data" allocation is superior. The smallest and average values of
 c /f in each plot are                          Minimum Mean
                                        .03     0.999      1.029
                                        .06     0.998      1.055
                                        .12     0.993      1.082

 A black circle in each figure shows our benchmark calibration.




of Table 3 shows summary statistics for key variables. The fraction of data that is used
broadly differs dramatically across the allocations. The social planner chooses to share
                            NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                               47


56 percent of data, even taking privacy considerations into account. When consumers
own data, they sell less at 49 percent.10 As discussed earlier, the reason for this dif-
                                           
ference is the monopoly markup             -1   = 1.33 that leads the price at which consumers
sell their data to be too low relative to what the planner would want. These "high use"
allocations can be contrasted with the bottom two allocations. When firms own data,
they distort the use of data in two ways. First, they use 100 percent of their own data,
more than what consumers or the planner would desire. In this sense, firms do not
satisfy the privacy concerns of consumers. Second, there is too little sharing with other
firms relative to the planner: firms sell only 13 percent of their data to other firms. The
key factor in this decision is creative destruction. And of course, when selling data is
outlawed, the allocation features no data sales.
       The next two columns of the top panel show that firm size and the number of varie-
ties differ across the allocations. When firms own data or when selling is outlawed, the
rate of creative destruction is low (see the last column). Less creative destruction has
two countervailing effects. On the one hand, it raises the present value of profits, which
tends to promote entry. On the other hand, it reduces the boost to entry associated with
business stealing. When  > gL the business stealing effect dominates and higher rates
of creative destruction lead to more entry and smaller firms. This can be seen in the
top panel of Table 3, where the number of varieties is higher when consumers own data
than in the two limited-sales allocations. Similarly, firm size is smaller when consumers
own data.
       The outlaw-sales equilibrium features a smaller scale effect, which shows up both
in economic growth being slower and in the overall level of consumption being sub-
stantially lower.
       The bottom panel of Table 3 shows the welfare decomposition using the baseline
parameter values. The allocation in which data selling is outlawed is stunningly infe-
rior: consumption-equivalent welfare is only 40 percent of that of the social planner.
A small part of this is the growth rate differential, but the bulk comes from distortions
to the level of consumption, most importantly the missing scale effect associated with
broad data use. Laws that prohibit data sales can have dramatic effects, reducing inco-
mes substantially.

  10
       In the planner and consumers-own-data allocations x = x
                                                             ~ because we've set  = ~ and  = 1/2.
     48                              JONES AND TONETTI



     One institution that appropriately balances these concerns is assigning ownership
of data to consumers. Data use is close to that of the social planner and consumption-
equivalent welfare falls just short of optimal in this example. Consumers take their own
privacy considerations into account but are incentivized by markets to sell their data
broadly to a range of firms, leading them to nearly-optimal allocations.
     In contrast, when firms own data, concerns about creative destruction sharply limit
the amount of data they sell to other firms. While limited sharing generates some
privacy benefits, equal to about 3 percent of consumption, the social loss from nonrival
data not being used by other firms is much larger. Of course, the way we've modeled
privacy is ad hoc, as privacy considerations are not the main focus of the paper. Ho-
wever, our baseline parameterization of ~ was intentionally set to deliver large utility
costs from lack of privacy, and still the welfare losses are dominated by the use of data
in production.
     Equilibrium welfare is just 93% of optimal when firms own data, compared to 99+%
of optimal when consumers own data. Failing to appropriately take advantage of the
nonrivalry of data leads consumption to be lower by more than seven percent along
the balanced growth path, even in this example in which there are sharply diminishing
returns to additional data.




10        Discussion

Implications for IO. Several issues related to antitrust and IO are raised by this fra-
mework. First, because firms see increasing returns to scale associated with data and,
perhaps more importantly, because of the nonrivalry of data, firms in this economy
would like to merge into a single economy-wide firm. Our paper provides a concept
of a firm as the boundary of data usage and the nonrivalry of data may create strong
pressures to increase scale. Return to the example of medical data being used within
hospital networks to improve the accuracy of diagnoses. If hospitals merged, they
would be able to estimate a more accurate algorithm, leading to better service on this
dimension for all of its patients. This suggests data policy and antitrust policy may best
be designed jointly.
     Second, data may serve as a barrier to entry. A natural concern about the limited-
                        NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                        49


sales allocations is that as a firm accumulates data, this may make it harder for other
firms to enter. In our framework, this force appears somewhat mechanically through
the dependence of the rate of creative destruction  (~
                                                     x) on the amount of data sold. It
would be interesting in future research to consider this force more explicitly, say, in a
quality ladder model.
   Third, if data were produced both as a byproduct of consumption and as the result
of active firm investment, then optimal property rights could be different. For exam-
ple, think of Waymo driving cars in an artificial town. If Waymo offers taxi rides or if
Waymo's probability of being destroyed depends on Tesla data, then consumer sales of
such data could increase creative destruction. In this case, broader use of data might
lead firms to invest too little in generating data.



The Boundaries of Data Diffusion: Firms and Countries.           At the beginning of the
paper, we noted that both ideas and data are nonrival. Both can be expressed as bit
strings, and it is natural to wonder about the differences between them. For example,
while ideas give rise to increasing returns and people create ideas, growth theory does
not typically suggest that Luxembourg and Hong Kong should be much poorer than
Germany and China because of their relatively small size. Instead, the view is that ideas
diffuse across countries, at least eventually and in general, so that the relevant scale is
the scale of the global market of connected countries rather than that of any individual
economy.
   Data may be different. For example, it seems much easier to monitor and limit the
spread of data than to limit the spread of ideas. Perhaps this is because ideas, in order
to be useful, need to be embodied inside people in the form of human capital (which
makes it inherently hard to keep it from spreading). In contrast, data can be encrypted
and tightly controlled.
   This raises an interesting question about whether the quantity of data that an or-
ganization has access to can serve as an important productivity advantage. This could
apply to firms or even to countries. For example, the Chinese economy is large. Could
access to the inherently larger quantities of data associated with a large population
provide an advantage. Lee (2018) suggests "China has more data than the US -- way
more. Data is what makes AI go. A very good scientist with a ton of data will beat
     50                               JONES AND TONETTI



a super scientist with a modest amount of data." Similarly, a population with less
concern for privacy or a government that places a lower weight on consumer privacy
might induce more data sales, leading to a higher level of aggregate output (but perhaps
lower welfare). State-owned enterprises could be encouraged to share data with each
other. Or, in an industry context with trade, this difference could lead to firms (e.g., in
China) having a distinct productivity advantage in data-intensive products.



11        Conclusion

The economics of data raises many important questions. Privacy concerns have appro-
priately received a great deal of attention recently. Our framework supports this: when
firms own data, they may overuse it and not adequately respect consumer privacy.
     But another important consideration arises from the nonrivalry of data. Because
data is infinitely usable, there are large social gains to allocations in which the same
data is used by multiple firms simultaneously. Consider our own profession. There
are clearly substantial benefits in having data from the PSID, the CPS, and the National
Income and Product Accounts available for all to use. At the heart of these gains is
the fact that data is nonrival. It is technologically feasible for medical data to be widely
used by health researchers and for all driving data to be used by every machine learning
algorithm. Yet when firms own such data, they may be reluctant to sell it because of
concerns over creative destruction. Our numerical examples suggest that the welfare
costs arising from limits to using nonrival data can be large.
     Government restrictions that, out of a concern for privacy, outlaw selling data enti-
rely may be particularly harmful. Instead, our analysis indicates that giving data pro-
perty rights to consumers can lead to allocations that are close to optimal. Consu-
mers balance their concerns for privacy against the economic gains that come from
selling data to all interested parties. This raises interesting design problems related to
overcoming transaction costs that might overwhelm consumers. Our analysis shows
that the value of solving these problems, perhaps via intermediaries and technological
innovations, may be large.
                         NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                           51


References
Abowd, John M. and Ian M. Schmutte, "An Economic Analysis of Privacy Protection and
  Statistical Accuracy as Social Choices," American Economic Review, 2019, 2019 (1), 171­202.

Acemoglu, Daron, Ali Makhdoumi, Azarakhsh Malekian, and Asu Ozdaglar, "Too Much Data:
  Prices and Inefficiencies in Data Markets," working paper, August 2019. MIT unpublished
  manuscript.

Acquisti, Alessandro, Curtis Taylor, and Liad Wagman, "The Economics of Privacy," Journal of
  Economic Literature, June 2016, 54 (2), 442­92.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, "A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction," Econo-
  metrica, March 1992, 60 (2), 323­351.

Agrawal, Ajay, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, Prediction Machines: The simple economics of
  artificial intelligence, Harvard Business Press, 2018.

Akcigit, Ufuk and Qingmin Liu, "The Role of Information in Innovation and Competition,"
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 2016, 14 (4), 828­870.

  , Murat Alp Celik, and Jeremy Greenwood, "Buy, Keep, or Sell: Economic Growth and the
  Market for Ideas," Econometrica, 2016, 84 (3), 943­984.

Ali, S. Nageeb, Ayal Chen-Zion, and Erik Lillethun, "Reselling Information," working paper,
  2019.

  , Greg Lewis, and Shoshana Vasserman, "Voluntary Disclosure and Personalized Pricing,"
  working paper, 2018.

Arrieta Ibarra, Imanol, Leonard Goff, Diego Jimenez Hernandez, Jaron Lanier, and E. Glen Weyl,
  "Should We Treat Data as Labor? Moving Beyond "Free"," American Economic Association
  Papers and Proceedings, 2018, pp. 38­42.

Athey, Susan, Christian Catalini, and Catherine Tucker, "The Digital Privacy Paradox: Small
  Money, Small Costs, Small Talk," Working Paper 23488, National Bureau of Economic
  Research June 2017.

Azevedo, Eduardo M., Alex Deng, Jose Montiel Olea, Justin M Rao, and E Glen Weyl, "A/B Testing
  with Fat Tails," 2019. University of Pennsylvania manuscript.

Bajari, Patrick, Victor Chernozhukov, Ali Hortacsu, and Junichi Suzuki, "The Impact of Big Data
  on Firm Performance: An Empirical Investigation," Working Paper 24334, National Bureau of
  Economic Research February 2018.
   52                                   JONES AND TONETTI



Begenau, Juliane, Maryam Farboodi, and Laura Veldkamp, "Big Data in Finance and the Growth
  of Large Firms," 2017. NYU manuscript.

Benassy, Jean-Pascal, "Taste for Variety and Optimum Production Patterns in Monopolistic
  Competition," Economics Letters, 1996, 52 (1), 41­47.

Bergemann, Dirk and Alessandro Bonatti, "Markets for Information: An Introduction," Annual
  Review of Economics, 2019, 11 (1), null.

Bollard, Albert, Peter J. Klenow, and Huiyu Li, "Entry Costs Rise with Development," 2016.
  Stanford University manuscript.

Carriere-Swallow, Yan and Vikram Haksar, "The Economics and Implications of Data: An
  Integrated Perspective," June 2019. IMF unpublished manuscript.

Chari, V. V. and Larry E. Jones, "A Reconsideration of the Problem of Social Cost: Free Riders and
  Monopolists," Economic Theory, 2000, 16 (1), 1­22.

Coase, Ronald H., "The Problem of Social Cost," The Journal of Law and Economics, 1960, 3,
  1­44.

Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
  Diversity," American Economic Review, June 1977, 67, 297­308.

Dosis, Anastasios and Wilfried Sand-Zantman, "The Ownership of Data," July 2019. University
  of Toulouse, unpublished manuscript.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Edouard Schaal, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel, "Uncertainty
  Traps," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1641­1692.

Farboodi, Maryam and Laura Veldkamp, "Long Run Growth of Financial Technology," NBER
  Working Papers 23457, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc May 2017.

   and    , "A Growth Model of the Data Economy," working paper, 2019.

Goldfarb, Avi and Catherine E. Tucker, "Privacy Regulation and Online Advertising," Manage-
  ment science, 2011, 57 (1), 57­71.

Hestness, Joel, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory F. Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan
  Kianinejad, Md. Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou, "Deep Learning Scaling
  is Predictable, Empirically," CoRR, 2017, abs/1712.00409.

Hughes-Cromwick, Ellen and Julia Coronado, "The Value of US Government Data to US
  Business Decisions," Journal of Economic Perspectives, February 2019, 33 (1), 131­46.
                        NONRIVALRY AND THE ECONOMICS OF DATA                                53


Ichihashi, Shota, "Non-Competing Data Intermediaries," June 2019. Bank of Canada, unpublis-
  hed manuscript.

Joulin, Armand, Laurens van der Maaten, Allan Jabri, and Nicolas Vasilache, "Learning Visual
  Features from Large Weakly Supervised Data," CoRR, 2015, abs/1511.02251.

Lee, Kai-Fu, "Tech companies should stop pretending AI won't destroy jobs," MIT Technology
  Review, February 21 2018.

Miller, Amalia R. and Catherine Tucker, "Privacy Protection, Personalized Medicine, and
  Genetic Testing," Management Science, 2017, 64 (10), 4648­4668.

Ordonez, Guillermo, "The Asymmetric Effects of Financial Frictions," Journal of Political
  Economy, 2013, 121 (5), 844­895.

Posner, Eric A. and E. Glen Weyl, Radical Markets: Uprooting Capitalism and Democracy for a
  Just Society, Princeton University Press, 2018.

Romer, Paul M., "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, October
  1990, 98 (5), S71­S102.

Sun, Chen, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta, "Revisiting Unreasonable
  Effectiveness of Data in Deep Learning Era," CoRR, 2017, abs/1707.02968.

Varian, Hal, "Artificial Intelligence, Economics, and Industrial Organization," in Ajay K. Agrawal,
  Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, eds., The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda,
  University of Chicago Press, 2018.

Veldkamp, Laura, "Slow Boom, Sudden Crash," Journal of Economic Theory, 2005, 124 (2), 230­
  257.
