                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO ENVIRONMENTAL MARKETS IMPROVE ON OPEN ACCESS?EVIDENCE
                FROM CALIFORNIA GROUNDWATER RIGHTS

                                       Andrew B. Ayres
                                        Kyle C. Meng
                                      Andrew J. Plantinga

                                      Working Paper 26268
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26268


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2019, Revised October 2020




This paper was previously titled "Do Property Rights Alleviate the Problem of the Commons?
Evidence from California Groundwater Rights." We acknowledge helpful comments from Max
Au hammer, Spencer Banzhaf, Lint Barrage, Otavio Bartalotti, Youssef Benzarti, Chris Costello,
Robert Heilmayr, Josh Hill, Matt Kahn, Bryan Leonard, Gary Libecap, Heather Royer, Randall
Rucker, Doug Steigerwald, Walter Thurman, Gonzalo Vazquez-Bare, Randy Walsh, Paige
Weber, and participants at the NBER EEE Summer Institute, and at other seminars and
conferences. We thank Chris Free, Tracey Mangin, Gokce Sencan, and Vincent Thivierge for
assistance with data. This research was funded by a grant through the UC Office of the President:
MR-15-328650, Legal and Economic Data and Analysis of Environmental Markets and
supported in part by PERC. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Andrew B. Ayres, Kyle C. Meng, and Andrew J. Plantinga. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Environmental Markets Improve on Open Access?Evidence from California Groundwater
Rights
Andrew B. Ayres, Kyle C. Meng, and Andrew J. Plantinga
NBER Working Paper No. 26268
September 2019, Revised October 2020
JEL No. D23,P14,P48,Q15,Q25

                                          ABSTRACT

Environmental markets are widely prescribed as an alternative to open-access regimes for natural
resources. We develop a model of dynamic groundwater extraction to demonstrate how a spatial
regression discontinuity design that exploits a spatially-incomplete market for groundwater rights
recovers a lower bound on the market's net benefit. We apply this estimator to a major aquifer in
water-scarce southern California and find that a groundwater market generated substantial net
benefits, as capitalized in land values. Heterogeneity analyses reveal that gains arise in part from
rights trading, enabling more efficient water use across sectors. Additional findings suggest the
market increased groundwater levels.

Andrew B. Ayres                                  Andrew J. Plantinga
Public Policy Institute of California            Bren School of Environmental Science
500 Washington Street, Suite 600 San             and Management
Francisco, CA 94111                              University of California
andrew.ayres.225@gmail.com                       Rm 3424
                                                 Santa Barbara, CA 93106
Kyle C. Meng                                     plantinga@bren.ucsb.edu
Bren School of Environmental
Science and Management
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
4416 Bren Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
kmeng@bren.ucsb.edu
1       Introduction
For almost two centuries, scholars have recognized that common-pool resources, if left under
open-access conditions, tend to be used inefficiently (Lloyd, 1833; Coman, 1911; Gordon,
1954; Hardin, 1968; Ostrom, 1990). This issue is even more relevant today, with increasing
concern over the status of natural resources such as fresh water, fisheries, and the global
climate (Stavins, 2011).
    In many settings, this "problem of the commons" arises because a market for property
rights to the resource is missing (Coase, 1960). This insight underlies the modern framework
for environmental markets - as suggested by Crocker (1966) and Dale (1968) and formalized
by Montgomery (1972) - whereby a regulator sets a limit on total extraction, allocates
extraction rights to users equaling this total, and oversees rights trading.1 Today, some form
of environmental market covers 30% of global fisheries (Costello et al., 2016), accounts for
over $36 billion in global ecosystem service payments (Salzman et al., 2018), and governs
over 10% of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (World Bank Group, 2020).2
    The effectiveness of environmental markets, however, is predicated on a number of theo-
retical assumptions. A large literature has explored how the presence of market power (Hahn,
1984; Malueg, 1990), inadequate enforcement (Malik, 1990), transaction costs (Stavins,
1995), and other features (see Cropper and Oates (1992)) may adversely affect environ-
mental market performance. Given how pervasive these features are in practice,3 it is an
empirical question whether net benefits arise when an environmental market replaces an
open-access regime, and if so, why.
    Researchers face three empirical challenges when quantifying the net benefit of an envi-
ronmental market. First, one must track all agents that are directly affected by the regulated
environmental good. This may be difficult for goods such as air quality where the (possi-
bly unobserved) set of beneficiaries is highly dispersed. Second, one needs a measure of
the good's economic value, which in the case of a stock resource such as groundwater or
fish must reflect both current and future values. Third, environmental markets are often
adopted when a resource is in a critical state of overextraction (Shertzer and Prager, 2006;
Costello, Gaines and Lynham, 2008; Worm et al., 2009; Mangin et al., 2018). As such, simple
comparisons between resources governed by a market and under open-access conditions may
    1
      This additional structure overcomes some practical impediments to Coase's original formulation. In
particular, having a regulator set a total extraction limit and manage rights trading can avoid transactions
costs that may limit Coasian bargaining.
    2
      In fisheries, such policies are often called rights-based management or individualized tradeable quotas.
For air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, they are typically known as cap-and-trade.
    3
      Recent surveys of implemented environmental markets can be found in Tietenberg (2003), Freeman and
Kolstad (2006), Goulder (2013), and Schmalensee and Stavins (2017).



                                                      1
be confounded by differences in unobserved resource characteristics.
    This paper studies a particular market for groundwater rights in southern California's
Mojave Desert.4 We select this setting for two reasons. First, groundwater is a critical
and increasingly scarce natural resource. It provides 50% of potable and 40% of irrigation
water globally (Giordano, 2009; Aeschbach-Hertig and Gleeson, 2012), yet one-third of the
world's largest aquifers are facing declining water levels (Richey et al., 2015). Moreover,
groundwater scarcity is expected to worsen under demographic trends and anthropogenic
climate change (V¨  or¨
                      osmarty et al., 2000; Covich, 2009; McDonald et al., 2011; Prudhomme
et al., 2014; Elliott et al., 2014; Ferguson et al., 2018). Second, our setting addresses the
aforementioned empirical challenges. Land parcels within a known area possess tradeable
groundwater rights, the current and future values of which are capitalized in land values.
Importantly, this market for groundwater rights does not cover the entire aquifer, allowing us
to address endogeneity concerns by applying a spatial regression discontinuity (RD) design
across the groundwater market boundary.
    Our identification strategy leans heavily on renewable resource theory. The estimand of
interest is the parcel-averaged difference in (potential) land prices between a groundwater
market and a open-access regimes. As in any potential outcomes framework, this difference
cannot be estimated because land prices are not observed under both regimes. However,
when a groundwater market does not spatially cover the entire aquifer, an opportunity arises
for comparing land prices of parcels subject to the groundwater market with that of parcels
under open access, all within the same observed setting. We develop a model of dynamic
groundwater extraction to demonstrate that our estimand is ambiguously signed when the
market for groundwater rights is spatially incomplete. A spatial RD design comparing land
prices on either side of the groundwater market boundary remove potential endogeneity
concerns as groundwater characteristics are likely continuous across the boundary. However,
that same identifying assumption also removes changes in the water table, a potentially
important consequence of the groundwater market, such that an RD estimate deviates from
the estimand. We turn to our model to sign this bias, showing that the RD estimate yields
a weak lower bound on the local average net benefit of a spatially-incomplete groundwater
market, as well as for the population average net benefit under further assumptions.
    Our empirical setting is the Mojave Desert, the driest desert in North America and yet
a region that produces water-intensive crops. Mojave's verdant, irrigated farms in the midst
of a barren desert have long been a poster child for inefficient water use. This stark contrast
arises because underneath the Mojave Desert lies one of California's largest aquifers, which
   4
     Interest in California water use in economics dates back at least to the article by Katherine Coman in
the inaugural issue of the American Economic Review in 1911, revisited recently by Libecap (2011).



                                                    2
has historically been extracted for agricultural use under open-access conditions. Agricul-
tural irrigation led to severe groundwater depletion: between 1964 and 1990, the water table
fell by 30 feet. Following failed attempts to limit pumping by creating a groundwater market
in the 1960s and 1970s, a court process beginning in 1990 and finalized in 1996 created a
system known as "adjudication" that imposes a total limit on groundwater pumping and
allocates tradeable pumping rights to users within a particular spatial area. Importantly,
this area - jointly determined by the boundaries of a pre-existing regulatory institution and
a surface topographical feature - did not include all land parcels overlying the aquifer. This
distinct spatial feature, together with a requirement that reported land values for agricultural
parcels include the value of groundwater access, enables our RD estimator.5
     We estimate that agricultural land values on the groundwater market side of the boundary
are, on average, 250% higher than on the open access side. To validate the magnitude of
this estimate, we show that it is less than an upper bound on the policy's net benefit: the
total value of groundwater rights attached to adjudicated land parcels. We confirm that
relevant covariates do not exhibit discontinuities at the boundary. We also demonstrate
that our RD estimate is robust to alternative statistical modeling assumptions, bandwidth
choices, potential error in land value assessments, how the boundary is defined, and other
empirical concerns. Reassuringly, we do not detect RD effects using placebo boundaries
falsely set within the groundwater market and open access areas. Using earlier land value
data, we also fail to detect a statistically significant RD estimate during the 1970s and 1980s.
Point estimates from that period are roughly one-third to one-half the size of estimates after
the introduction of the groundwater market. We note that a zero effect is not necessarily
expected if an earlier failed attempt at establishing a similar groundwater market continued
to influence expectations about management.
     One potential explanation for our large RD estimate is that groundwater trading provides
agricultural landowners the opportunity to capitalize on water's market value. For the Mo-
jave aquifer, higher water values likely come from municipalities, particularly in the southern,
more urban, areas overlying the aquifer. Indeed, heterogeneity analysis reveals a substan-
tially higher RD estimate in the southern part of the aquifer compared to the north. This
suggests that the ability to trade groundwater rights enhances land values by reallocating
water away from water-intensive agriculture and towards meeting growing urban demand.6
   5
      Groundwater rights have also been introduced elsewhere in California, and in total twenty-six basins
have well-defined rights. Twenty of those basins have rights defined volumetrically, and trading is allowed
in 19 of those. These 19 systems represent 4% of California's aquifers. However, the spatially-incomplete
nature of the Mojave groundwater market, combined with rights trading, is unique in California.
    6
      While our RD design prohibits us from exactly isolating the gains from groundwater trading, a back-
of-the-envelope calculation suggests that at most 59% of the net benefit can be attributed to trading.



                                                    3
Accounting for these heterogeneous effects and further assuming that unobserved charac-
teristics are uncorrelated with distance to the boundary, we calculate that the groundwater
market produced an aggregate net benefit of $440 million (in 2015 dollars) for agricultural
parcels, or a 50% increase in aggregate land value.
    Our RD approach has two primary drawbacks. First, by measuring effects at the ground-
water market boundary, our estimate does not capture potential benefits from higher ground-
water levels under adjudication relative to the open access counterfactual. Instead, we turn
to three additional pieces of evidence, all of which point towards increased groundwater
levels: (i) we detect a positive trend break in average groundwater levels when the adjudica-
tion's pumping restrictions began for most users, (ii) we detect an RD jump in groundwater
well drilling for open access parcels beginning at that same moment, consistent with in-
creased groundwater under adjudication that spills over into open access areas, and (iii)
we document that prices for groundwater rights have been consistently positive, which our
theory shows is a sufficient condition for increased groundwater levels under adjudication
relative to open access. The second limitation of our RD approach is that we cannot apply
it to urban land parcels because they obtain water from municipal water systems, not local
groundwater pumping. We extend our theory to show how data on aggregate urban water
allocation and consumption combine to produce a back-of-the-envelope aggregate net benefit
of $72-131 million (in 2015 dollars) for urban users. Altogether, the aggregate net benefit to
agricultural and urban parcels of the groundwater market is $512-571 million. In contrast,
the initial setup cost of the groundwater market was $40 million (in 2015 dollars) (Figueroa,
2001).
    This paper contributes to a recent literature using quasi-experimental techniques to un-
derstand the consequences of environmental markets. Studies of air pollution and greenhouse
gas markets typically examine only regulatory costs (Petrick and Wagner, 2014; Calel and
Dechezlepr^ etre, 2016; Meng, 2017; Calel, 2020) or benefits (Fowlie, Holland and Mansur,
2012; Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017; Hernandez-Cortes and Meng, 2020), rarely
both. A larger literature exists for fisheries, reflecting the many instances of market-based
management in that domain. These papers have found that rights-based management tends
to reduce effort (Hsueh, 2017; Costello and Grainger, 2018; Isaksen and Richter, 2018), dis-
tribute effort more evenly across time (Birkenbach, Kaczan and Smith, 2017); and increase
resource levels (Costello, Gaines and Lynham, 2008), efficiency (Grafton et al., 2011), and
revenues (Scheld, Anderson and Uchida, 2012).7 For groundwater in particular, Drysdale
and Hendricks (2018) and McLaughlin (2020) find reduced water use and higher groundwater
   7
     In another quasi-experimental study, Kroetz, Sanchirico and Lew (2015) examine how fishing permit
prices diverge following the imposition of trading restrictions.



                                                  4
levels, respectively, following the introduction of a water market. These outcomes, however,
do not fully capture current and future net benefits of an environmental market. In our
setting, the value of groundwater access is bundled together with the value of a land parcel.
As such, we are able to follow the Ricardian tradition by studying land prices that capture
the current and future net benefit of a groundwater market.
    Another related literature in development economics and economic history employs quasi-
experimental approaches to study the consequences of stronger property rights for land,
through, for example, more secure land title (Besley, 1995; Besley and Burgess, 2000; Baner-
jee, Gertler and Ghatak, 2002; Field, 2007; Galiani and Schargrodsky, 2010), lower en-
forcement costs (Hornbeck, 2010; Libecap and Lueck, 2011), and enhanced access rights
(Iwanowsky, 2019). In these settings, land - the resource of interest - was privatized to a
certain degree prior to treatment. A test of the consequences of introducing property rights
requires a resource that was initially held in common. Our setting satisfies this requirement.8
    Finally, our study informs the increasing need for groundwater management, particu-
larly under anthropogenic climate change. For California, groundwater pumping - which
historically provides half of the state's fresh water - has long been unsustainably extracted,
with recent consequences especially acute during a prolonged drought (California Dept. of
Water Res., 2015). In response, California passed the Sustainable Groundwater Manage-
ment Act (SGMA), an unprecedented law requiring users of overextracted aquifers to adopt
stringent management plans. Groundwater markets are considered a key policy instrument
under SGMA (Aladjem and Sunding, 2015; Babbitt and Brozovic, 2017; Green Nylen and
Doremus, 2017).9
    The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides background on the Mojave aquifer
and its spatially-incomplete market for groundwater rights. Section 3 introduces a dynamic
model of groundwater extraction under open access and incomplete groundwater market
regimes, which informs our empirical strategy in Section 4. Section 5 details data sources.
Section 6 presents our main RD results, robustness checks, and heterogeneity analyses. Sec-
tion 7 quantifies the aggregate net benefit for agricultural and urban users and presents
further evidence that the market has increased groundwater levels. Section 8 concludes.
   8
      Note that in our setting landowners have rights to land, but groundwater use is still initially under open
access.
    9
      Surface water trading has also received renewed interest. Hagerty (2019) demonstrates potentially large
gains from surface water trading in California. Rafey (2020) quantifies the gains from trade from observed
surface water trading in southeastern Australia.




                                                       5
2        Background
The Mojave Desert, located northeast of Los Angeles in southern California's San Bernardino
County, is the driest desert in North America, receiving on average less than two inches of
rainfall annually. Yet, farmers in the Mojave Desert have historically produced alfalfa,
pistachios, and stone fruits, all highly water-intensive crops. This production is possible, in
part, because beneath this desert lies one of California's ten largest groundwater resources,
which has historically been extracted for agricultural use under open access conditions.10
    In recent decades, open access pumping has led to a dramatic drop in the aquifer's water
table. Figure 1 plots the average depth from surface to the water table across monitoring
wells in the Mojave Desert: between 1964 and 1990, the water table fell by 30 feet. From
1966 to 1976, there was an initial, but failed, attempt on the part of the regional water
regulator, the Mojave Water Agency, to allocate water rights through a system known as
"adjudication." Discussions about adjudication continued throughout the 1970s and 1980s,
culminating in a new adjudication lawsuit in 1990. In 1993, an agreement comprising 75%
of groundwater users was reached. In 1996, the local court sanctioned an agreement that
applied to nearly all users.
    Adjudication has two components. First, water users received individual, perpetual an-
nual groundwater pumping rights defined as their proportion of average annual pumping
during the 1986-1990 base period. To stabilize groundwater levels, the aggregate annual
allowable pumping across the aquifer ramps down over time. Each year, a perpetual right
holder is able to pump an amount equal to their right, scaled back proportionally by the
degree of aggregate rampdown. Second, users can buy or sell "paper" groundwater rights,
either through annual leases or transfers of perpetual rights. These are paper rights in the
sense that users do not transfer physical water. Instead, they exchange pumping rights with
any other user, agricultural or urban, who also overlies the groundwater resource. Transfer
of rights to users not overlying the resource would require physically transporting pumped
water outside the basin and is prohibited. The resulting water market enables users to reap
any allocative efficiency gains arising from the sale of rights to other users. This is an im-
    10
     Ostrom (2008) defines an open access resource as "a common-pool resource that anybody can enter
and/or harvest." This definition accords with use of the Mojave aquifer prior to adjudication because, in
principle, anybody could have pumped water from it. In practice, use was limited to overlying landowners
because of the high cost of pumping from locations that do not overlie the aquifer. For overlying agricultural
users, California law requires groundwater use to be "reasonable and beneficial," but these criteria allowed de
facto open access conditions as they have historically allowed unrestricted irrigation in arid regions. However,
as detailed below, urban users did have lower priority groundwater access prior to adjudication. While this
restriction for urban users means the overall regime prior to adjudication does not exactly match a textbook
definition of pure open access, we think open access is a reasonable approximation for the overall regime
governing groundwater use prior to adjudication.



                                                       6
                                          Figure 1: Depth to groundwater before and after adjudication

                                   60




                                   70
   Depth to Groundwater (in ft)




                                   80




                                   90




                                  100




                                  110
                                        1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015

                                                                               Year
Notes: Vertical axis shows average distance (in feet) to water table across monitoring wells in the Mojave
Desert. Horizontal axis indicates years. Dark blue diamonds indicate years where there is data for all
monitoring wells. Light blue squares indicate years where missing data from one or more monitoring
wells is linearly interpolated. Orange-shaded area marks the period from 1990 when the initial adjudication
lawsuit was filed to 1996 when the final adjudication court ruling was issued. Data from the U.S. Geological
Survey (USGS).


portant change from the prior open access regime, in which users do not own pumping rights
and, thus, can only pump water for own use.11
     Adjudication also brought an added benefit to urban groundwater users. Whereas agri-
cultural landowners extracted under unrestricted open access prior to adjudication and thus
were presumably at a private optimum, urban users were previously restricted as they had
"junior," or lower priority access, to groundwater which only entitled them to water in ex-
cess of agricultural demands. By redefining groundwater rights and introducing the ability
to trade, adjudication elevated the rights of cities to be on par with agricultural rights, thus
lifting restrictions and allowing for expanded pumping.
  11
     In other settings, there may be a less formal arrangement involving local management of groundwater
resources by a limited group of users, typically referred to as Groundwater Management Districts (GMDs)
(Edwards, 2016). Local resource management is common in fisheries, referred to as territorial user rights
fisheries (TURFs), and the subject of a large theoretical and empirical literature (Janmaat, 2005; Sampson
and Sanchirico, 2019).


                                                                           7
    Despite these advantages, several features of the Mojave adjudication system deviate from
a textbook optimal policy. First, it is unclear whether simply stabilizing the water level at
its pre-adjudication level corresponds to an optimal water table height. Second, in addition
to the prohibition on physical water transfers out of the basin, limits are also placed on water
right trading across space and time. Landowners can only trade groundwater rights with
overlying landowners or municipalities within the same subarea of the groundwater resource.
Depending on how much these subareas are hydraulically connected, inefficiencies may arise
from having separate groundwater markets. Likewise, water rights can only be banked one
year ahead and cannot be borrowed from the future, which limits intertemporal smoothing
of water consumption.
    The most notable feature of the Mojave adjudication that deviates from an ideal ground-
water market is that rights were not assigned over the entire spatial extent of the groundwater
resource. Figure 2 illustrates the spatial boundary of the adjudication system (shown by pur-
ple and red lines) and the subsurface extent of the entire hydraulically-connected Mojave
groundwater system (in blue shading), which we henceforth refer to simply as the Mojave
aquifer.12 Observe that the spatial footprint of the adjudication system and Mojave aquifer
areas do not perfectly overlap, so that some areas overlying the aquifer fall under adjudica-
tion (i.e., blue areas within the purple and red box) while others remain under open access
(i.e., blue areas outside the purple and red box).
    It is important to clarify how the adjudication boundary was drawn. Specifically, it is the
spatial intersection of two regions: the jurisdictional area of the pre-existing Mojave Water
Agency (shown by red line segments) and the physical surface drainage area of the Mojave
River (shown by purple line segments). The straight-line boundaries of the Mojave Water
Agency (MWA), formed in 1960 with largely unchanged boundaries since then, are based
on the regular grid lines imposed by the Public Land Survey System from the 18th century
and thus likely unrelated to subsurface groundwater characteristics. Likewise, the drainage
extent of the Mojave River, which is determined by surface topographical features, is also
plausibly exogenous to groundwater characteristics.13
    A spatially-incomplete groundwater market, coupled with knowledge of how its boundary
  12
      The key to defining the spatial extent of the relevant groundwater resource is hydraulic connectivity
such that extraction in one location can affect the water table in other locations. The blue area in Figure
2 shows the hydraulically connected groundwater resources in the study area, as confirmed by hydrologists
at the Mojave Water Agency. State and federal agencies may define multiple administrative "basins" in the
region that need not be hydraulically independent. For example, the blue area in Figure 2 consists of several
basins defined by California's Department of Water Resources that are largely hydraulically connected.
   13
      As robustness checks, we test whether potentially relevant surface topographical features vary smoothly
across the boundary. We also examine whether parcels near these two boundary definitions exhibit different
RD estimates.



                                                     8
                                     Figure 2: Groundwater market and aquifer in the Mojave Desert




9
    Notes: Blue shaded area shows the spatial extent of the hydraulically-connected Mojave groundwater system. Purple (red) line segments track the
    groundwater market area as defined by the spatial extent of the Mojave River drainage basin (Mojave Water Agency). Map inset shows the Mojave
    aquifer relative to urban areas, as defined by the Federal Highway Administration, in the broader southern California region.
was drawn, provides an opportunity to apply a spatial RD design. Before we do so, it is
instructive to explore what existing data indicate regarding the net benefit of the Mojave
adjudication system. Figure 1 shows that groundwater levels indeed began to stabilize in the
1990s. However, stabilized water levels alone do not imply positive net benefits for landown-
ers under adjudication since pumping restrictions may be costly and transaction costs large.
Furthermore, as our theory will show, stabilized water levels are also consistent with con-
tinued open access conditions that had yet to reach a steady state prior to adjudication.
Trends in agricultural activity are also inconclusive. Figure B.1 shows that agricultural rev-
enue in the Mojave Desert declined after adjudication was finalized. However, agricultural
revenue does not capture possible gains from the reallocation of water to other sectors (e.g.,
urban water use), and thus does not provide a clear indication that adjudication benefited
landowners.
    Alternatively, one can follow the Ricardian tradition and examine land prices. This is
possible in our data setting because the value of groundwater access in San Bernardino
County is bundled together with the value of a land parcel. As such, land prices reflect the
present discounted value of rental streams from both land and water assets.14 For open-access
parcels, land prices capture the value of unrestricted groundwater pumping for own use. For
parcels under adjudication, land prices reflect the cost of restricted groundwater pumping,
as well as the benefits of a higher groundwater level and the potential gains from trading
pumping rights. We now turn to a theoretical model of dynamic groundwater extraction to
formalize what drives these land prices and how they relate to our empirical strategy.


3        Theory
This section develops a model of dynamic groundwater extraction for the Mojave aquifer.
Recognizing that the Mojave adjudication regime deviates in practice along several dimen-
sions from an optimal policy, we explicitly avoid characterizing optimality and instead
consider a model that closely mirrors the policy's objective to stabilize water levels us-
ing spatially-incomplete groundwater rights.15 In particular, to replicate observed falling
groundwater water levels prior to adjudication, as shown in Figure 1, we begin with all
land parcels over the aquifer extracting groundwater under open access but without having
yet reached a steady state. We then model land prices dynamics under counterfactual and
factual regimes for the period after adjudication is introduced. In the first (counterfactual)
    14
    Land prices, however, do not capture the one-time sunk costs of setting up the adjudication system.
    15
    An optimal policy will always do at least as well as open access. To be useful for empirical testing, our
model must leave open the question of whether spatially-incomplete tradeable groundwater rights yield net
benefits.


                                                     10
regime, we model land price dynamics had open access conditions continued for all parcels
over the aquifer. In the second (factual) regime, we model land price dynamics following the
introduction of adjudication's system of spatially-incomplete tradeable groundwater rights.16
    Our theory generates several predictions that are used for interpreting our spatial RD
estimator, presented in Section 4. First, we show that the difference in land prices between
the two regimes, our estimand of interest, is of ambiguous sign. Intuitively, this is because
relative to open access, adjudication imposes the cost of restricted pumping but also gener-
ates benefits from a higher water table and the ability to trade groundwater rights. Next, we
demonstrate that a spatial RD estimator comparing parcels under adjudication and open ac-
cess at the adjudication boundary produces a lower bound for the estimand at the boundary.
This is because a spatial RD estimator, by design, omits differences in water table height,
thus excluding the benefit of a higher water table due to adjudication. Finally, because water
table levels are lower at the boundary than in the interior of the adjudication area, the RD
estimator is also a lower bound on the estimand in the interior.
    Throughout this section, we focus on agricultural parcels for which groundwater is "ap-
purtenant," or tied, to the overlying land surface. This implies that water access is deter-
mined by local groundwater levels, which facilities our spatial RD design in Section 4. In
contrast, urban parcels receive piped water from municipal water systems whose groundwa-
ter access is determined regionally and thus cannot be examined with a spatial RD approach.
We return to a discussion of net benefits for urban parcels in Section 7.1.


3.1     Setup
There are N identical agricultural landowners, each of whom has a land parcel that overlies
1/N of the area of the aquifer. Instantaneous profits are given by  (w, h) where w is the
pumping rate and h is the water table height, measured as the vertical distance from the
bottom of the aquifer to the water level.  (w, h) is assumed to be concave and singled-peaked
in w, increasing in h, and wh > 0 since raising the water table height reduces the cost of
pumping, making the marginal unit of water more profitable. The initial height of the water
table is h0 and the instantaneous rate of change in the water table height is h   (t), where t
is time. After the initial period, dynamics of h differ depending on whether the aquifer is
under full open access or incomplete tradeable groundwater rights, as we discuss below.
   16
     A comparison of land prices under the two regimes is valid only if the initial groundwater level is the same
in both cases, implying that our theory must necessarily be dynamic in order to characterize adjustments to
the steady states under open access and incomplete tradeable rights.




                                                       11
3.2     Full open access
Under full open access, profit-maximizing landowners ignore any effects of their pumping on
the water table,17 solving at each instant in time:

                                              max  (w, h)                                              (1)
                                                w

                           
The first-order condition w   = 0 defines wa (h), the pumping rate as a function of the height
                                                                                 a    wh
of the water table (the `a' indicates full open access). Using Cramer's rule, dw
                                                                               dh
                                                                                   = - ww
                                                                                          > 0,
by the concavity of the profit identity, ww < 0, and wh > 0. Pumping rates under open
access increase with the height of the water table.
    Transition and steady state. Under open access, all users pump at the same rate and
so the water table height is the same for all landowners. It evolves according to:

                                         a (t) = R - N wa (h(t))
                                        h                                                              (2)

where R is natural recharge and N wa (h(t)) is aggregate pumping.18 Consistent with Figure
1, we assume that the aquifer is out of steady state initially and that aggregate pumping
N wa (h0 ) exceeds recharge. By equation (2), this results in a declining water table. However,
the drop in the water table height causes the open-access pumping rate to fall, by Cramer's
rule. A steady state is reached when pumping is equal to recharge.19 The steady-state is
defined as h¯ a such that h   a = R - Nw¯ a = 0, where w             ¯ a ) = R/N .
                                                           ¯ a = wa (h
    The dynamics of the full open access system are illustrated in panel (a) of Figure 3. For
a given value of h, the pumping rate is wa (h). Thus, any w = wa (h) moves immediately to
the w  = 0 locus defined by wa (h). From there, the dynamics of the system are governed
by equation 2. The blue line in Figure 3 shows the transition to the steady state from the
initial height of h0 > h¯ a . When h < h
                                       ¯ a , the pumping rate and the water table height increase
until the steady state is reached. In summary, under the full open access regime, we have
h0  ha (t)  h   ¯ a and wa (h0 )  wa (ha (t))  w ¯ a for t  0.
    Land price. Under perfect competition, the price of a land parcel is equal to the present
discounted value of the infinite stream of profits. Thus, the full open access land price is
  17
      Our open access model is a limiting case of uncoordinated spatial ownership (Kaffine and Costello,
2011), where each user has exclusive access to the water beneath their property, but pumping by other
landowners gives rise to a stock externality.
   18
      The volume of the aquifer is normalized to one so that volumetric variables, R and w, are conformable
with h.
   19
      To ensure the steady state occurs at a strictly positive value of h, we assume wa (0) < R/N . This
assumption is justified for the Mojave aquifer given evidence of extremely deep aquifers in the region that
go far beyond the depth of existing wells (Kang and Jackson, 2016; Perrone and Jasechko, 2019).



                                                    12
given by:
                                                  
                                       Va =             (wa (s), ha (s))e-s ds                                            (3)
                                              0

where  is the discount rate and the time interval covers both the transition period and the
steady state.

Figure 3: Phase plane diagrams of full open access and spatially-incomplete rights regimes
                    (a) Full open access                                        (b) Spatially-incomplete rights
                w              a = 0                                        w                       ma = 0
                               h                                                                   h
       wa (h0 )                                   wa (h)          wma (h0 )                                     wma (h)



                                                     a = 0
                                                     w                                                             ma = 0
                                                                                                                  w


                                                                      wma



 R          a                                                           R
 N
     = w a (h )                                                         N




                                                                                                                      wmr
                                                                      wmr


                                 a                           h                                       ma           mr        h
             0                  h                 h0                     0                          h        h0 = h
Notes: Figures illustrate the transition to the steady state for the full open access and adjudication's
incomplete groundwater rights regimes starting from an initial water table height h0 . The directionals in
each isosector apply to the open access users and are described in the text. The blue line in panel (a) is
the transition path to the steady state at h ¯ a and wa (h
                                                         ¯ a ) for open access users under the full open access
regime. Under the adjudication regime, shown in panel (b), a representative open access parcel follows the
orange line to the steady state at h = h¯ ma and w = w ¯ ma . A representative parcel with groundwater rights
follows the red line with a constant stabilization target of h¯ mr and an exogenous pumping rate (determined
                                                          mr
by the regulator) that reaches a steady state at w = w  ¯ .




3.3        Spatially-incomplete groundwater rights
Property rights are introduced to stabilize the water table at h0 , preventing the draw down
of the aquifer that occurs under open access. If all N landowners were under the property
rights regime, the regulator would simply assign individual pumping rights equal to R/N . If
users pump their full allocation, then by equation (2), the water table remains at its initial
level h0 . In the steady state, the same volume of water is pumped as under the open access
regime, but because h0 > h  ¯ a , profits are higher than under open access (Gisser and Sanchez,
1980). The steady state is more complicated when property rights are incompletely assigned




                                                             13
over the aquifer because users can pump at different rates.20
    We examine this setting by modeling the two components of the Mojave adjudication
regime: a restriction on pumping to stabilize water levels and tradeable property rights to
pump groundwater. First, we characterize how pumping restrictions allow for stabilization
of the water table. We then show how the market value of tradeable pumping rights is
capitalized into land prices.
    Under incomplete rights, only a share of the N landowners hold property rights, with
the rest of the landowners remaining under open access. Define   [0, 1] as the share of
open access landowners. We assume that all landowners under the property rights regime
(indicated by `mr' where `m' denotes the incomplete, or mixed, regime and `r' indicates users
with rights) hold rights to an endowment of water we , whereas open access users (indicated
by `ma') are unconstrained. Open access users continue to solve the profit maximization
problem in 1, however, rights holders now solve:

                                    max  (w, h)          s.t. w  we                                     (4)
                                      w

                                                                                      
Assuming w > 0, the solution to equation (4) satisfies the first-order condition w       = mr
where mr is the shadow value on the constraint. The complementary slackness condition is
mr (w - we ) = 0, which says that at the optimum either the constraint binds or the shadow
value of water equals zero (or both). The solution to equation (4) is denoted wmr and
defined as the post-trading volume of water pumped by landowners in the adjudication area
and applied to their land. For now, we assume that the endowments we are the same for all
landowners in the adjudication area, which implies no trading among agricultural users.21 We
will relax this assumption below. Given the intent to prevent further groundwater drawdown
under open access, the constraint in equation (4) binds and, thus, wmr = we for all rights
holders.
    To simplify the analysis, we focus on two representative users, one within the adjudication
area with water table hmr and the other in the open access area with water table hma . The
dynamics of the water table are described by a variant of equation (2):22

                          ma = R + (hmr - hma ) - N wa (hma )
                         h                                                                              (5)
                          mr = (1 - )R + (hma - hmr ) - (1 - )N wmr
                         h                                                                              (6)
  20
      See Costello, Qu´
                      erou and Tomini (2015) for a comparison of open access, incomplete property rights,
and complete property rights regimes.
   21
      Because landowners are identical in all respects, shadow values are equal at the initial endowment and
there are no gains from trade.
   22
      We suppress time arguments except when it is necessary to clarify a variable's dependence on time.



                                                    14
where it is assumed that recharge occurs uniformly throughout the aquifer.23 Due to gravity,
differences in the water table height produce a flow of water, dictated by   [0, 1], from one
area to another.
    Stabilization and transition. We assume that the goal of property rights is to stabilize
                                            ¯ mr = h0 by imposing the pumping limit wmr (t).
the aquifer within the adjudication area at h
That is, the pumping limit is set in each period to achieve:

                    mr = (1 - )R + (hma (t) - h
                   h                          ¯ mr ) - (1 - )N wmr (t) = 0                           (7)

Although the water table is stabilized in the adjudication area, it continues to be drawn
down in the open access area. Consider h ma at t = 0:

                   ma = R + (h
                  h          ¯ mr - hma ) - N wa (hma ) = R - N wa (h0 )                             (8)

where h ¯ mr = hma = h0 . As under full open access, open access users under incomplete
rights pump more than recharge at h0 and h        ma < 0. The pumping rate by open access
users depends only on the water table height according to wma = wa (hma ), as in the full
open access case. The dynamics of the incomplete rights system is illustrated in panel (b)
of Figure 3, where the orange line depicts the transition to the steady state for open access
users.24 Although the same trajectory is followed as under full open access, there is a positive
flow of water to the open access area (h  ¯ mr - hma > 0 for t > 0), which slows the decline in
hma relative to the full open access case (we prove this result in this next section).
                     ¯ mr at h0 , wmr (t) must fall over time by equation 7. Solving for wmr (t)
    In order to keep h
in equation 7 and taking the time derivative yields w      mr = (1-    ma < 0. The transition
                                                                      h
                                                                   )N
path for the pumping rate in the adjudication area is depicted by the red line in panel (b)
of Figure 3. At t = 0, wmr = R/N , which is established from equation 7 and the fact that
¯ mr = hma at t = 0. The pumping limit wmr (t) declines until steady states are reach in both
h
areas, which we solve for next.
    Steady states. Setting h      ma = 0 in equation 5 and substituting h   ¯ mr , we define the
following relationship between steady-state water table heights:

                                         ¯ ma +  (N wa (h
                                  ¯ mr = h
                                  h                     ¯ ma ) - R)                                  (9)
                                                

The assumption in footnote 24 implies that for any stabilization target for the adjudication
  23
     The assumption of uniform recharge can be relaxed without changing the key insights from our theory.
  24                                                                                    ma = R + (h
     An additional assumption is needed to guarantee that a unique value of hma solves h           ¯ mr -
                                                 2 a
hma ) - N wa (hma ) = 0, as shown in panel (b): d w
                                                  dh2
                                                     (h)
                                                          0, which holds if www wh - whh ww  0.



                                                   15
     ¯ mr , there is a unique steady-state water table h
area h                                                 ¯ ma and pumping rate w           ¯ ma )
                                                                              ¯ ma = wa (h
in the open access area. We denote this mapping q : h  ¯ mr  h ¯ ma .
    The steady state for the adjudication area is found by substituting h¯ mr in equation (9)
into equation (6) and setting h  mr = 0, yielding:

                                           ¯ ma ) - (1 - )N w
                                 R - N wa (h                ¯ mr = 0                                     (10)

             ¯ ma = q (h
Substituting h         ¯ mr ) and rearranging equation (10), we obtain:

                                                                ¯ mr ))
                                                   R - N wa (q (h
                                   w
                                   ¯   mr    ¯ mr
                                            (h ) =                                                       (11)
                                                       (1 - )N
For a given stabilization target h    ¯ mr , equation (11) gives the steady-state pumping limit
w¯ mr = w      ¯ mr ) that needs to be imposed on landowners within the adjudication area. The
         ¯ mr (h
steady states are depicted in panel (b) of Figure 3.25 In summary, under the incomplete
property rights regime, we have h0  hma (t), wa (h0 )  wa (hma (t)), and wmr (0)  wmr (t) for
t  0.
    Water trading and land prices. Tradeable property rights allow right holders to
exchange water with other agricultural users or with urban users. If there are heterogeneous
endowments, incentives for trading are created.26 In particular, at the initial endowments,
differences among landowners in the shadow values of water mr imply gains from trade.
If pw is the unit price of water supported by a competitive water market, then landowners
for whom mr < pw (mr  pw ) will be sellers (buyers) of water. When gains from trade
are exhausted, mr = pw for all landowners and all landowners use the same amount of
water wmr . Thus, a landowner with a given endowment we makes net purchases from other
agricultural users and urban areas equal to wmr - we .27
    Under incomplete property rights, the land price for a given owner in the adjudication
area is:                      
                     V mr =     [ (wmr (s), h¯ mr ) - pw (s)(wmr (s) - we (s))]e-s ds      (12)
                             0

Equation (12) captures temporary annual leases as well as transfers of perpetual groundwater
rights. If a landowner sells her perpetual water rights to an urban user at a future time t,
                                                      
wmr (s) = 0 for s  t and the proceeds from the sale, t pw (s)we (s)e-(s-t) ds, are capitalized
  25
      It can be shown that w ¯ ma  w¯a  w ¯ mr and h¯ mr  h¯ ma  h ¯ a.
  26
      In practice, other sources of heterogeneity, such as differences in production technologies or depths to
groundwater, can also generate trading if endowments are homogenous.
   27
      Landowners under the Mojave adjudication are allowed to buy and sell pumping rights (i.e., "paper
trades") but not physical amounts of water. Assuming no banking or borrowing, which approximates the
Mohave institution, the amount of water bought or sold by a landowner in each period, wmr - we , must
equal the amount applied to their parcel wmr net of their endowment we .


                                                      16
into the current land price. The land price for landowners in the open access area is:
                                                   
                                      V ma =           (wma (s), hma (s))e-s ds                   (13)
                                               0


We made the simplifying assumption, above, that there are single water table heights in the
two areas. In reality, there is a declining gradient in the water table as one moves from
the adjudication to the open access area. At the boundary of the two areas, the water
table height is the same for parcels under the adjudication and open access areas. That is,
                                                       ¯ mr  hb (t)  hma (t) for t  0. This
denoting water table height at the boundary as hb (t), h
property has important implications for our RD estimator, as discussed below.


3.4     Comparing across regimes
We now compare land values between the full open access and incomplete property right
regimes that will facilitate interpretation of an RD estimate in Section 4.

                     ¯ mr  ha (t), (ii) h
Proposition 1 If (i) h                  ¯ mr  hma (t), (iii) hma (t)  ha (t), and (iv) wa (h0 ) 
wma (t)  wa (t)  wmr (t) for t  0, then

 (a) V mr - V a        0 (treatment effect has ambiguous sign)

 (b) V mr - V ma         0 (estimated effect has ambiguous sign)

 (c) (V mr (hb ) - V a ) - (V mr (hb ) - V ma (hb ))  0 (estimated effect at the boundary is a lower
     bound for treatment effect at the boundary)

 (d) (V mr - V a ) - (V mr (hb ) - V a )  0 (treatment effect at the boundary is a lower bound
     for treatment effect in the interior)
       d
 (e)   dt
          (V mr (hb ) - V ma (hb ))     0 (the change over time in the estimated effect at the boundary
       has ambiguous sign)

     Proof. We establish conditions (i)-(iv) here and prove Proposition 1(a) -1(e) in Appendix
A.1-A.5. It was shown in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 that h0  ha (t) and h0  hma (t) for t  0,
respectively. Conditions (i) and (ii) follow from the definition h  ¯ mr = h0 . To prove condition
                    a  h
(iii), we show that h      ma at any h0  h  h      ¯ a . Condition (iii) then follows from ha (0) =
hma (0) = h0 . As shown in Section 3.2, wa (h ¯ a ) = R/N . For any h  h     ¯ a , wa (h)  R/N by
dw a
 dh
      > 0. Using equations 2 and 5, we write:

                            ma - h
                           h      a = (h
                                       ¯ mr - h) + (1 - )(N wa (h) - R)                           (14)

                                                           17
                                 ¯ mr = h0 and wa (h)  R/N , which establishes condition (iii).
This difference is positive from h
                                                        a
It follows immediately from conditions (i)-(iii) and dw
                                                      dh
                                                          > 0 that wa (h0 )  wma (t)  wa (t)
for t  0. It remains to show that wa (t)  wmr (t) for t  0. In Section 3.3, we showed that
wmr (0) = R/N and w     mr  0, which implies wmr (t)  R/N for t  0. We showed earlier
that wa (t)  R/N for t  0 and so condition (iv) is established.


4     Empirical strategy
This section draws on the theoretical results from Section 3 to inform our empirical strategy.
We first introduce our estimand of interest. We then propose a spatial RD estimator that
exploits the spatially-incomplete nature of groundwater rights over the Mojave aquifer. The-
oretical predictions from Section 3 inform the relationship between the spatial RD estimate
and the estimand, what drives the RD estimate, and whether the RD estimate varies over
time.


4.1    Causal estimand
We are interested in whether the Mojave adjudication regime led to net benefits for landown-
ers relative to a full open access counterfactual. For the population of parcels under adju-
dication, this is the difference in potential outcomes V mr (see equation (12)) and V a (see
equation (3)). Our estimand of interest is the population average treatment effect:

                                       = E[Vimr - Via ]                                   (15)
                                           i

                                                    0


 is the average net benefit of adjudication relative to the full open access counterfactual.
By Proposition 1(a),  is of unknown sign. The reason is that relative to a full open access
regime, parcels under adjudication benefit from a higher water table and the ability to trade
groundwater rights, but also bear the cost of restricted pumping. Unfortunately,  cannot
be directly estimated since Vimr and Via are potential outcomes under counterfactual states
and thus are not simultaneously observed (Holland, 1986).


4.2    Spatial regression discontinuity estimator
Instead, we consider a spatial RD estimator that exploits the boundary of the Mojave adjudi-
cation regime. Define di as parcel i's distance to the adjudication boundary. di is normalized



                                               18
so that a parcel is under adjudication when di  0 (i.e., blue area inside the red and purple-
lined box in Figure 2) and under open access when di < 0 (i.e., blue area outside the red
and purple-lined box in Figure 2). Our spatial RD estimator is:

                                     ^RD = E [V mr ] - E [V ma ]
                                               i           i
                                              di 0                di 0

                                          = E           [Vimr    - Vima ]                             (16)
                                              i:di =0

                                                             0


where the first equality defines our spatial RD estimator at the adjudication boundary. The
second equality uses the RD identifying assumption that expected land price under open
access is continuous at the boundary, di = 0.28 In particular, it implies that the water
table height hi (di ) and other unobserved characteristics are continuous at di = 0. While
^RD removes the effect of the water table, the remaining opposing influences of gains from

groundwater rights trading and losses from pumping restrictions imply that     ^RD remains of
unknown sign, as indicated by Proposition 1(b).
    How does    ^RD relate to  ? There are both internal and external validity considerations.
Turning first to internal validity, let us denote the local  for parcels at the boundary as
i:di =0 . The difference between i:di =0 and ^RD is:


                        i:di =0 - ^RD = E [(V mr - V a ) - (V mr - V ma )]
                                             i      i        i      i
                                           i:di =0

                                                                    0


which is weakly positive by Proposition 1(c). The RD estimator serves as a weak lower
bound for the treatment effect at the boundary because it omits the benefit of a higher
water table.29 This lower bound argument can also be interpreted from the perspective of
spillover effects. As our theory shows, in a spatially-incomplete groundwater rights regime,
water from the adjudicated area spills into the open access area, raising land prices for
remaining open access parcels. Because this spillover benefit to open access parcels under
adjudication would not occur under a full open access regime, the RD estimator produces a
lower value than our estimand.30
  28
      Specifically, following Hahn, Todd and Van der Klaauw (2001), the identifying assumption states that
E [Vima ] is continuous in di at di = 0.
   29
      Furthermore, it can be shown that an estimand defined as the average difference in land value between
a spatially incomplete groundwater rights and open access regimes will be lower than that for a spatially
complete groundwater rights regime. This is because there are no groundwater spillovers to open access
areas when rights are complete. Thus our RD estimate is also a weak lower bound on the net benefit of a
spatially complete groundwater rights regime.
   30
      Using the same argument, Section 7.2 shows RD evidence of groundwater well drilling in open access


                                                        19
    The external validity of our RD estimate depends on the spatial structure of other land
parcel characteristics. Water levels increase as one moves into the adjudication area away
from the boundary. If other land parcel characteristics are uncorrelated with distance to
the boundary, then by Proposition 1(d), the treatment effect at the boundary serves as a
further lower bound for the treatment effect in the interior of the adjudication area. Thus,
this orthogonality assumption, together with Propositions 1(c) and 1(d) jointly imply that
the spatial RD estimate is a lower bound for the population average net benefit:      ^RD <  .
    Our theory also informs the various components of our spatial RD estimate. Specifically,
                                                                                        mr
using equations (12) and (13) and further allowing heterogeneity in water use (wi          ) and
                e                                               ma
endowments (wi    ) for adjudicated parcels, and in water use (wi  ) for open access parcels, we
can explicitly decompose    ^ into the following components (see Appendix A.6 for details):
                             RD


                        
 ^RD = E
                               e
                           [ (wi                   ma
                                 (s), hi (s)) -  (wi  (s), hi (s))]e-s ds
          i:di =0   0
                                     0 restriction cost
                        
       + E                     mr
                           [ (wi                    e
                                  (s), hi (s)) -  (wi (s), hi (s)) - pw (s)(wi
                                                                             mr        e
                                                                                (s) - wi (s))]e-s ds      (17)
          i:di =0   0
                                                    0 gains from trade


 ^RD is positive when the gains from groundwater rights trading offset the cost of restricted
pumping.31 In particular, for our RD sample of agricultural parcels, gains from trade would
increase in parts of the aquifer with, among other features, expanding urban areas, whose
demand for water drives up groundwater rights prices, allowing agricultural parcels to be
net sellers of rights.
    Finally, Section 3 defines land prices at the start of the program, when t = 0 or in 1997.
In this case,  ^RD indicates whether landowners received a positive stream of discounted net
benefits when the adjudication system was finalized. One may also be interested in whether
continuation of the regime since 1997 has been economically justified. Our theory is agnostic
on this matter: Proposition 1(e) shows that the time derivative of the estimate effect at the
boundary is of ambiguous sign. To test this, we use land prices for later periods to estimate
an average RD effect over time, as well as separate RD effects across different time periods.
areas near the boundary following the introduction of adjudication, consistent with increased groundwater
under adjudication that spills over into open access areas.
   31
      For simplicity, our theory in Section 3 ignores the small annual fee paid by landowners to administer the
adjudication regime, set at around $5 per acre-foot. Such fees provide another reason for why       ^RD serves
as a lower bound.




                                                          20
5        Data
Based on Section 3, the ideal outcome variable is parcel price, which bundles together the
present discounted value of a parcel's land and water assets. Two measures for parcel price
are available in San Bernardino County: sales value and assessed value. Unfortunately, sales
records in San Bernardino are not required to include adjudicated water rights when such
rights are jointly transferred with a land parcel, nor are they required to indicate whether or
not a sale includes groundwater rights. This limitation rules out the use of sales data for our
analysis. By contrast, land assessments in San Bernardino include the value of adjudicated
water rights held on a parcel.32 For our primary dataset, we use 2015 data on a parcel's
assessed land value, size, location, and most recent year it was sold, provided to us by the
San Bernardino County Assessor. Additionally, we webscraped a panel of annual assessed
land values from 1976 to 2014 (but missing 1977) from an online data portal maintained by
San Bernardino County. These data, however, do not include parcel covariates (such as size
and year of most recent sales) and are thus used only in examining how RD effects evolve
over time.
    In years when a parcel is not transacted, land assessors determine the value of groundwa-
ter rights using market information from comparable sales. While this determination does
not follow a prescribed, mechanistic formula,33 it is potentially subject to errors that arise
in determining which sales are comparable. A unique feature of assessed land values in Cal-
ifornia helps to mitigate this problem. Since 1978, Proposition 13 has limited property tax
increases across California by capping the annual appreciation rate of assessed land value
at 2% following a property sale. Strong housing demand in southern California over recent
decades means that this 2% limit has regularly constrained increases in assessed value. This
implies that, in any given year, the assessed land value of a previously transacted parcel
likely captures its market price at the time of last sale, with a 2% annual adjustment. Using
our panel dataset of land values, we calculate that between 1997 and 2015, Proposition 13's
2% annual cap was binding for 91% of parcel-year observations in our sample.
    There are three consequences of Proposition 13 that are germane to our analysis. First,
Proposition 13, when binding, removes assessor discretion from the calculation of assessed
land values, reducing unobserved assessment error. Second, for parcels whose most recent
transaction year equals the year of assessment, assessed land value equals sales value, a
    32
      Specifically, San Bernardino County requires the land assessor to be in contact with the Mojave Water
Agency regarding water rights ownership and transfers. The assessor, however, does not separately report
the value of water rights, only the total value of water and land assets.
   33
      See Sections 501 and 542 of the California Assessor's Handbook. Available here: http://www.boe.ca.
gov/proptaxes/ahcont.htm



                                                    21
sample restriction that we apply as a robustness check. Third, when Proposition 13 binds
(and there is no jump in year of last sale at the boundary), an RD estimate based on 2015
assessed values will reflect the average treatment effect over a period of years, rather than
just the 2015 treatment effect. For example, if the sample includes parcels last sold since
1997, we obtain the average treatment effect over the 1997-2015 period.
    We impose several sample restrictions on our primary dataset. First, we restrict our
sample to land parcels that were most recently transacted since 1997, after adjudication was
confirmed by the county court and thus applied to all parcels within the boundary. Next, our
RD design requires land parcels with access to local groundwater underlying the parcel. This
requires excluding parcels that do not overlie the aquifer. We further exclude urban parcels
because their water comes from municipal water systems, not local groundwater pumping.
As such, the value of urban land parcels does not reflect local groundwater access.
    We collect data from various additional sources. The USGS digital elevation map pro-
vides parcel-level average slope and aspect (compass direction).34 California's Department
of Water Resources's well completion reports provide a parcel-level measure of proximity to
a private groundwater well and are used to examine the timing of well drilling around the
adjudication boundary.35 USGS monitoring well data is used to examine trend breaks in
average Mojave groundwater levels. Lastly, we collect data on groundwater rights endow-
ments, trading volumes and prices from the Mojave Water Agency for various additional
analyses.36
    Table C.1 shows summary statistics for variables in our primary dataset. It includes
parcels near the adjudication boundary used in our RD estimation as well as more distant
parcels.


6        Results
This section presents our main RD result, robustness checks, and heterogeneity analyses.
    34
     Available here: https://viewer.nationalmap.gov/basic/
    35
     Available here: https://data.ca.gov/dataset/well-completion-reports.
  36
     Available here: http://www.mojavewater.org/annual_report.html and http://www.mojavewater.
org/water_transfer_reports.html




                                             22
6.1       Specification
To estimate our RD coefficient, ^RD , from Section 4.2, we follow Hahn, Todd and Van der
Klaauw (2001) and model log land value for parcel i using a local polynomial regression

                                    lnVi =  RD Ri + f (di ) +  Xi + i ,                   (18)

where, as in Section 4.2, di is normalized distance to the adjudication boundary. Ri =
1{di  0} is an indicator variable equaling 1 when parcel i is in the adjudication area and
0 otherwise. f (di ) is a flexible local polynomial function that is fully interacted with Ri ,
allowing for different parameters on either side of the boundary. For example, under a linear
specification f (di ) = 1 + 2 di + 3 di Ri .
    In some models, we include a vector of covariates, Xi , detailed below. For our baseline
specification, standard errors are clustered at the zip code level to allow for arbitrary forms
of heteroscedasticity and spatial autocorrelation among land parcels within the same zip
code. To address the bias-precision trade-off inherent in RD designs, our baseline model
uses a mean squared error (MSE) optimal RD bandwidth that is common across both sides
of the threshold following Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik (2014) and Calonico et al. (2019).
Observations within the bandwidth are uniformly weighted in our baseline model. Robust-
ness checks consider alternative bandwidths, error structures (including a zip code-level wild
bootstrap procedure), and other estimation choices.


6.2       Covariate smoothness
To assess the validity of our RD estimator, we begin by examining whether relevant covariates
exhibit discontinuities at the adjudication boundary. In particular, our set of covariates
indirectly tests our identifying assumption and informs how we interpret our RD effect on
land values.
    Our RD identifying assumption, introduced in Section 4.2, requires that land prices
under open access be continuous at the adjudication boundary. In some places, however,
the boundary is defined according to the surface water drainage area of the Mojave River.
Because the boundaries of a drainage area typically corresponds to a local elevation peak,
surface topological features may vary systematically across the boundary. For example, the
slope of the land may change at the boundary. Likewise, the aspect of the land, or its compass
direction and thus sunlight exposure, may also vary systematically at the boundary.37 Both
slope and aspect can influence a parcel's land value. Our identifying assumption also implies
  37
       We thank Jeff Vincent for this insight.



                                                    23
that groundwater levels be continuous at the boundary, which data limitations unfortunately
prevent us from directly testing. Instead, we examine whether the presence of a privately-
drilled groundwater well within one mile of a parcel, which we view as an imperfect proxy
for groundwater availability and possibly irrigation, jumps at the boundary.38
    We also examine covariates that inform the interpretation of our main RD effect on land
values. Proposition 13 limits the annual growth rate of assessed land value at 2% in years
after a parcel's sale. If Proposition 13 binds for all sample land parcels, then showing there
is no jump in the year of last sale implies that an RD estimator applied to 2015 assessed
land values captures the time-averaged RD effect since 1997. In our case, where Proposition
13 binds in 91% of cases, our RD estimate still has a time-averaged RD effect interpretation
provided there is no jump in the percentage change in land value since last sale.39 Finally,
to ensure that our RD effect is not capturing differences in land value due to different parcel
sizes, we also examine whether there is a discontinuity in land parcel size across the boundary.
    Table 1 shows    ^RD for each covariate, displayed across columns. Specifically, we esti-
mate separate versions of equation (18), where each covariate in Xi serves as the dependent
variable. Each model uses a local linear function for f (di ) and excludes other covariates as
regressors. We do not detect statistically precise RD effects across these six covariates. In
particular, absence of a discontinuity in the last year of sale and in the percentage change
in land value since that year shown in columns 4 and 5 imply that our RD estimate on 2015
assessed land value reflects the average RD effect across the 1997-2015 period.
   38
      Monitoring wells, which are specifically designed to measure groundwater levels, are spatially sparse
in this part of California. For example, the calculation for average groundwater level in 2015 shown in
Figure 1 was based on only nine monitoring wells. Spatial interpolations with such a small number of
point measurements would generate imputed maps of groundwater levels that likely spatially vary more
smoothly than the actual groundwater table, and thus would be uninformative of groundwater levels at
the boundary. Alternatively, California's Department of Water Resources well completion reports document
privately-drilled wells, which are far more spatially dense than monitoring wells. However, depth to well water
for privately-drilled wells varies with well characteristics and may not correspond to the true groundwater
level. Furthermore, depth to well water is only recorded at the moment of initial drilling and not during
the period when we observe land values. While we cannot use the well completion reports to measure
groundwater levels, we use these data to determine whether a parcel is within one mile of a privately drilled
well, which serves as a proxy measure for groundwater availability and possibly the presence of irrigation.
We note, however, that the use of distance to construct this measure will necessarily impose some spatial
continuity.
   39
      Formally, for parcel i, denote log land value in 2015 as lnVi,2015 and log land value in the year of its last
sale, 2015 - i , as lnVi,2015-i , where i is years since last sale. If we further define ri as the average annual
land value growth rate between years 2015 - i and 2015, we can write

                                         lnVi,2015 = lnVi,2015-i + ri i

If Proposition 13 always binds, ri = 0.02 for all i, and the time-averaged effect interpretation of our main
RD estimate on log land value requires only continuity in i at the boundary. If Proposition 13 does not
always bind, a time-averaged effect interpretation requires that the percentage change in land value since
last sale, ri i , is continuous at the boundary.


                                                        24
                            Table 1: Examining covariate smoothness

                             (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)               (5)              (6)
                                                              Last sales    Pct. change since
                            Slope     Aspect    Near well?      year            last sales         Size

 ^RD
                            1.699     -2.309       -0.036        -1.175           38.008         10.074
                           (1.292)   (25.991)     (0.101)       (0.885)          (80.009)        (7.525)

 Mean covariate value       1.614    169.638       0.818       2007.421          179.386          15.422
 Observations               3060      3060         3060          3060             3047             3060
 Zip codes                   27        27           27            27               27               27
 Notes: Estimates of  RD from equation (18) with each covariate as outcome. Specification includes a
 local linear model for f (di ) and excludes Xi . Estimating bandwidth from benchmark log land value model
 in column 1 of Table 2. Observations uniformly weighted within the bandwidth. Covariates indicated
 across columns rows. Column 1 is average slope measured in degrees relative to level surface. Column 2 is
 average aspect measured in compass direction between 0 and 360. Column 3 examines a dummy variable
 equaling one if a parcel is within 1 mile of a well. Column 4 examines the most recent year in which the
 parcel was sold. Column 5 examines the a parcel's percentage change in value since its last sale. Column
 6 examines parcel size in acres. Mean control value is the mean covariate value for open access parcels
 within 2km of the boundary. Standard errors clustered at the zip code level in parentheses. *** p<0.01,
 ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


    Figure B.2 plots binned averaged covariate values as a function of distance to the bound-
ary to visualize the magnitudes of the RD effects in Table 1 relative to covariate means in
the open access area near the boundary. The only covariate whose noisy RD effect may
have meaningful magnitude is parcel slope. A potential discontinuity in slope is consistent
with the surface water drainage basin defining a portion of the boundary as land slopes need
not be equal at the dividing line between two basins. However, the sign and magnitude of
this jump in parcel slope should mitigate identification concerns. Prior hedonic studies find
measures of greater slope tend to lower agricultural land values, possibly through increased
risk of soil erosion (Palmquist and Danielson, 1989; Schlenker, Hanemann and Fisher, 2005)
but that the effect, when measured in degrees, tends to be small (Bigelow et al., 2017).40
Thus, an RD effect on slope of 1.7 degrees implies that our RD estimate is biased downwards
but that the magnitude of this bias is likely small. In a robustness check, we include land
slope and other covariates as controls in our RD estimate on land values.




                                                    25
                                               Figure 4: Graphical RD effect

                        10




                        9.5
       Log land value




                         9




                        8.5




                         8
                                          Open access area                       Adjudication area


                              -12   -10   -8     -6     -4   -2     0     2      4      6        8   10   12

                                               Distance from adjudication boundary (in km)
Notes: Vertical axes shows log land value. Horizontal axes shows normalized distance in kilometers, di , to
adjudication boundary with di  0 indicating the adjudication area and di < 0 indicating the open access
area. Circles indicate average outcome for the average distance within a 2 km-wide distance bin. Solid
(dashed) line shows linear (quadratic) fit over unbinned data separately on each side of the boundary.



6.3                Main RD estimate and robustness checks
We first present our main RD result graphically. Figure 4 plots log land value, our main
outcome of interest, against distance to the adjudication boundary, di . Log land value is
shown as local averages for the average distance within 2 km-wide bins (circles) as well as
separate linear (solid line) and quadratic (dashed line) fits on distance over the unbinned data
on each side of the boundary. Two features of Figure 4 are worth noting. First, there is a
clear jump in land values at the discontinuity. Second, we find that land values are generally
increasing from left to right in Figure 4. This is consistent with our theoretical prediction
that groundwater levels rise as one moves from the open access area into the interior of the
adjudication area. We conduct a continuity test provided by Cattaneo, Jansson and Ma
(2019), an alternative to the McCrary (2008) procedure that avoids prebinning data, and do
  40
     Palmquist and Danielson (1989); Schlenker, Hanemann and Fisher (2005) use proxy measures for land
slope, whereas we measure slope by degrees. Using the estimate from Bigelow et al. (2017), a 1.7 degree
increase in slope lowers agricultural land value by a statistically imprecise 1.7%. By contrast, our benchmark
RD effect on land values is 250%.

                                                              26
not detect a discontinuity in the density of the distance variable at the threshold.41

                                       Table 2: Main RD results

                                               (1)         (2)          (3)                (4)
                                                      Outcome is log land value

              ^RD
                                            1.264**         1.384**       1.259***      1.424**
                                            (0.539)         (0.643)        (0.478)      (0.663)

              Percentage effect (%)            254            299            252           315

              Polynomial order                 1               2             1              1
              Covariates                      No              No            Yes            No
              Last sales year              1997-2015       1997-2015     1997-2015        2015
              Bandwidth                      2.774           4.715         3.125          3.073
              Observations                   3060            5341          3535            206
              Zip codes                       28              30            28             24
             Notes: Estimates of  RD from equation (18) with log land value as outcome.
             Column 1 uses a local linear function for f (di ), excludes covariates, and includes
             all parcels that were last sold between 1997-2015. Column 2 uses a local quadratic
             function for f (di ). Column 3 includes a land parcel's average slope, average aspect,
             size, most recent transaction year, and a dummy for whether the parcel is within
             one mile of a groundwater well as covariates. Column 4 restricts sample to only
             parcels last sold in 2015. Estimating sample based on a common MSE-optimal
             bandwidth across both sides of the threshold (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik,
             2014). Observations uniformly weighted within the bandwidth. Percentage effects
                       ^RD
             are 100(e - 1). Standard errors clustered at the zip code level in parentheses.
             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


    We now turn to estimates of  RD from equation (18), shown in Table 2. For our bench-
mark model, column 1 uses a local linear function for f (di ), excludes covariates, and includes
all parcels that was last sold in the period 1997-2015. The statistically precise RD estimate
of 1.264 translates to a 254% increase in land value.42 With mean land value for open access
parcels within 2 km of the boundary at $14,300, this implies a land value increase of $36,300
(in 2015 dollars). To independently verify the magnitude of this effect, we compare this
  41
      We further note that traditional RD sorting concerns are lessened in our context. First, land parcels
are fixed in space. Second, although there could be unobserved preference heterogeneity among landowners
(e.g., some landowners may strongly prefer parcels with secure rights to water), competition in the land
market implies that the value of an individual parcel's attributes is determined by the aggregate distribution
of preferences across the market and not by individual preferences of that parcel's buyer and seller (Rosen,
1974).
   42
      This local RD estimate corresponds visually to the RD jump for the global quadratic model and the
binned outcome averages in Figure 4, both of which better account for local values around the discontinuity
than the global linear model in Figure 4. The 95% confidence interval for the percentage increase in land
value at the boundary is [23%, 918%].


                                                      27
average land value increase to the average value of perpetual groundwater rights held by
landowners in our RD sample, which equation (17) indicates is an upper bound on our RD
estimate. In 2015, this value was $148,700.43
    Column 2 models f (di ) using a local quadratic model. To address remaining concerns
about potentially large, though imprecise, jumps in the covariates examined in Table 1,
column 3 augments our benchmark specification by including these covariates.44 Lastly,
despite Proposition 13, it may still be the case that the assessed value of a parcel transacted
in an earlier year captures errors made by the land assessor. To isolate parcels whose assessed
value equal sales value, column 4 restricts our sample to parcels transacted in 2015. All three
robustness checks detect positive and statistically significant RD effects that are similar in
magnitude to our benchmark result in column 1.

                           Table 3: Robustness: alternative bandwidths

                       (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)       (5)                (6)           (7)
                                                Outcome is log land value

  ^RD
                     1.264**     1.459***     1.144***      0.864**     1.210**     1.328***     1.078***
                     (0.539)      (0.261)      (0.301)      (0.349)     (0.583)      (0.494)      (0.411)

  Bandwidth           2.774        1.000        1.500        2.000       4.000        5.000         6.000
  Observations        3060         1054         1571         2110        4545         5606          6566
  Zip codes             28          23            25           26          27           27           29
 Notes: Estimates of  RD from equation (18) with log land value as outcome. All models use a local linear
 model for f (di ), exclude covariates, and uniformly weights observations. Column 1 replicates baseline
 model in column 1 of Table 2 with sample restriction based on a common MSE-optimal bandwidth across
 both sides of the threshold (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik, 2014). Column 2-7 use narrower and wider
 bandwidths, imposing the same value for both the main and bias bandwidths. Standard errors clustered
 at the zip code level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


    We next consider several additional robustness checks to the baseline result in column
1 of Table 2. Table 3 presents RD estimates using bandwidths smaller than one-half and
larger than twice that of the baseline MSE-optimal bandwidth, showing also the number of
  43
      Specifically, from equation (17), note that a component of our RD estimate is the average net present
discounted value of endowed groundwater rights, which is weakly positive and weakly larger than the RD
                                              ^RD . In practice, water users are granted perpetual rights, we ,
estimate: Ei:di =0 [ 0 pw (s)wie
                                 (s)e-s ds]                                                                  i
                                                                                       e        e -t
which are scaled each year s by the aquifer-wide rampdown rate  such that wi             (t) = wi e   . Using
data from the Mojave Water Agency, we calculate this value as the product of the number of perpetual
                                                    e
groundwater rights a sample landowner holds, wi       , and the traded price of that perpetual right, equaling
   w          -( + )s
 0
    p  ( s ) e        ds .
   44
      Column 3 of Table 2 includes all covariates shown in Table 1 except for the percentage change in land
value since last sales because that variable is constructed using assessed 2015 land value, our outcome of
interest in Table 2.



                                                      28
parcels at different bandwidths around the boundary. Our RD result is not sensitive to these
different bandwidth sizes.
     Table C.2 considers alternative variance estimators. Our main RD sample uses zip code
clustered standard errors with 28 zip codes. To address potential issues with having few
clusters (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2008), column 2 conducts a zip code-level wild
bootstrap procedure specific for RD designs following He and Bartalotti (2020). This has
little influence on the precision of our RD estimate. We further show in columns 3-5 that
our RD result is insensitive to whether variance estimation is undertaken using zip code-level
clustering, nearest neighbor matching, or both. Column 7 shows that our RD result also
holds when applying a local randomization method that allows for exact inference in finite
samples, but requires the additional assumption that potential outcomes are non-random
(Cattaneo, Frandsen and Titiunik, 2015; Cattaneo, Titiunik and Vazquez-Bare, 2016).
     In Table C.3, we re-estimate the RD coefficient allowing the MSE-optimal bandwidth to
differ on both sides of the discontinuity and consider bandwidths that are coverage error-
rate (CER) optimal (Calonico, Cattaneo and Farrell, 2019). We also alternatively weight
observations using a triangular, rather than a uniform, kernel. Our RD estimate is relatively
stable across these estimation choices.
                                  Table 4: Placebo boundary tests

                                         (1)         (2)    (3)        (4)      (5)                 (6)
                                                       Outcome is log land value

  ^RD
                                       -0.212      -0.094      -0.003      -0.231      0.072       -0.100
                                      (0.452)     (0.554)     (0.842)     (0.337)     (0.233)     (0.304)

  Dist. to true boundary km               -9         -6          -3          3           6           9
  Bandwidth                             2.273      2.410       6.171       3.746       3.231       3.490
  Observations                           218        449        4170        6584        6352        6516
  Zip codes                              10         22           23         33          31          32
Notes: Estimates of  RD from equation (18) with log land value as outcome. All models use a local linear
model for f (di ), exclude covariates, restrict sample based on a common MSE-optimal bandwidth across
both sides of the threshold (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik, 2014), and uniformly weight observations.
Columns use placebo boundaries set 9, 6, and 3 kilometers within the open access (i.e., di < 0) and
adjudication areas (i.e., di  0). Standard errors clustered at the zip code level in parentheses. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


    Finally, Table 4 conducts placebo tests by estimating RD effects using alternative loca-
tions for the boundary. Because there is no actual spatial discontinuity between adjudication
and open access regimes across these placebo boundaries, we should not detect any RD ef-
fects. For models in columns 1-3, we create false boundaries that are 9, 6, and 3 kilometers,

                                                     29
respectively, within the open access area relative to the real boundary. In columns 4-6, we
create similarly spaced false boundaries within the adjudication area. We do not detect RD
effects using any of these false boundaries.


6.4     Heterogeneity
We now turn to heterogeneity analyses, across time and space. Our main RD estimate using
2015 assessed land values pools land parcels that were most recently transacted within the
1997-2015 period. The presence of Proposition 13 together with columns 5 and 6 of Table 1
showing no boundary discontinuity in the last year of sale and change in land value since last
sale, suggest that our main RD estimate reflects the average RD effect over the 1997-2015
period, rather than the effect for only 2015. A natural question, then, is whether the net
benefit of adjudication has changed since the program was introduced, which Proposition
1(e) indicates is ambiguously signed. Another related question is: what is the magnitude of
the RD effect before 1997?

                                  Table 5: Heterogeneity across time

                        (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)              (7)        (8)
                                                    Outcome is log land value

  ^RD
                      0.632      0.664      0.884      1.937**    1.703* 1.860***         1.471**    1.546**
                     (0.567)    (0.407)    (0.913)     (0.937)    (0.926) (0.651)         (0.730)    (0.653)

  Sample period       76-79      80-84      85-89       90-94      95-99       00-04       05-09       10-14
  Bandwidth           2.632      1.529      2.380       2.511      2.053       2.274       2.024       3.048
  Observations         537        864        660         554        261         474         368         561
  Zip codes            20         21         20          19          20          19         20          20
 Notes: Estimates of  RD from equation (18) with log land value as outcome from a panel of assessed
 land values between 1976-2014 (missing 1977). Each model estimated over 5-year intervals. All models
 use a local linear model for f (di ), exclude covariates, restrict sample based on a common MSE-optimal
 bandwidth across both sides of the threshold (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik, 2014), and uniformly
 weight observations. Standard errors clustered at the zip code level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
 p<0.05, * p<0.1.


   To shed light on these questions, we turn to our panel of annual assessed land values
covering the 1976-2014 period. Table 5 reports RD estimates from equation (18) estimated
separately across five-year periods, with coefficients also plotted in Figure B.3.45 Three
   45
      We are interested in the time-evolution of land values since 1976. However, because of Proposition 13,
land values of parcels not sold in a given assessment year is likely to capture its value during the year of last
sale and not the value during the year of assessment. Including parcels sold prior to the assessment year
would result in an artificially-smoothed RD estimate over time. Unlike our main dataset of 2015 land values
obtained from the land assessor, we are unable to explicitly drop parcels from our webscraped panel dataset


                                                       30
results from Table 5 are worth noting. First, the RD estimate has changed very little
since the introduction of adjudication.46 That our estimates remain positive across time
suggests that the continuation of adjudication has been economically justified. Second, we
detect a statistically precise RD effect in the early 1990s. Because a subset of users already
faced adjudication starting in 1993, these effects reflect a combination of implemented and
anticipated RD effects. Third, as columns 1-3 show, in the 1976-1989 period before the
adjudication process began, the RD effect was one-third to one-half the size of the post-
adjudication RD effect and not statistically significant (see Figure B.4 for the graphical RD
presentation). We do not necessarily expect RD effects prior to 1990 to be precise zeros
as there was an earlier failed attempt at adjudication during 1966-1976 and discussions
over future adjudication continued throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Because those earlier
proposals also foresaw management by the Mojave Water Agency, whose spatial boundaries
are largely unchanged since 1960, any anticipated effects from an eventual adjudication could
be capitalized in pre-1990 land values. Thus, it is possible that the smaller pre-1990 RD
effects detected in columns 1-3 reflect anticipatory beliefs about future adjudication.
    Section 4.2 discusses how our spatial RD estimate depends on the market value of water.
When this outside value is high, tradeable groundwater rights allow agricultural landowners
to gain from selling rights to other users overlying the aquifer. For groundwater in the
Mojave, this higher-value use is likely strongest in the more urban southern part of the
region (see inset map in Figure 2).
    To test whether urban water demand creates larger net benefits, Table 6 examines hetero-
geneity in the RD coefficient for the southern and northern subareas. Because rights trading
can only occur within a particular subarea, one would expect the RD effect to be larger in
the more urbanized southern subareas, all else held equal. Column 1 replicates our baseline
results. The model in column 2 restricts the sample to parcels in the southern subareas,
while only northern subareas parcels are used to produce estimates in column 3. The RD
coefficient for the southern subareas is almost six times larger than for the northern subareas,
though statistical inference is complicated by the limited number of zip code clusters. As
an alternative approach to modeling this heterogeneity, we interact Ri and f (di ) from our
baseline model of equation (18) with a parcel's latitude. Figure B.5 plots how     ^RD varies as

that were transacted earlier because this dataset does not explicitly contain information on year of last sale.
To address this, the estimating samples in Table 5 attempt to detect parcels sold during the assessment year
by including only parcels for which there is an owner change that year and for which Proposition 13's 2%
limit does not bind. For further noise reduction, we drop observations for which the land value more than
doubled that year.
   46
      Following footnote 45, because we need to infer when parcels were sold in our panel dataset, the
estimating sample (and thus RD estimates) in columns 5-8 of Table 5 differs from our that of our main RD
estimate in Table 2 using 2015 assessed land values for which we observe year of last sales.



                                                      31
                                 Table 6: Heterogeneity across space

                              (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)           (5)                    (6)
                                                     Outcome is log land value

  ^RD
                           1.264**     1.941** 0.329            1.145           0.121           1.462***
                           (0.539)     (0.853) (0.482)         (0.803)         (0.676)           (0.537)

  Area                        All       South      North       South          North         Drop along LA
  Boundary definition         All         All       All      River basin    River basin          All
  Bandwidth                  2.774      2.774      2.774        2.774          2.774            2.774
  Observations               3060        2260       800          150            467             1772
  Zip codes                   28          17        14            4              9               28
 Notes: Estimates of  RD from equation (18) with log land value as outcome. All models use a local linear
 model for f (di ), exclude covariates, restrict sample based on a common MSE-optimal bandwidth across
 both sides of the threshold (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik, 2014), and uniformly weight observations.
 Column 1 replicates baseline model in column 1 of Table 2. Columns 2 and 3 restrict the sample to land
 parcels in southern and northern subareas, respectively. Columns 4 and 5 further restrict the southern
 and northern subarea sample, respectively, by including only parcels whose nearest boundary is defined
 by the Mojave River drainage basin. Standard errors clustered at the zip code level in parentheses. ***
 p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


one moves northward over the aquifer, showing a statistically significant decline. For parcels
that are farthest north, the RD effect becomes negative, which is possible when the gain
from trading rights is small.47
    How much does the tradeability of groundwater rights contribute to the net benefit of
the Mojave adjudication regime? Columns 1-3 of Table 6 merely show that gains from rights
trading contribute to the net benefit, but not by how much. Note also that by controlling
for groundwater level differences, our RD approach cannot definitively isolate the gains from
groundwater trading. To conduct a back-of-the-envelope calculation, we assume that the
benefit of a higher groundwater table can be identified using land value differences farther
away from the boundary and that the gains from rights trading in the northern subareas
is small. With these assumptions, we calculate that rights trading contributes to at most
59% of the net benefit of the Mojave adjudication regime, though this estimate is highly
uncertain.48
   47
      While the largest RD estimates occur in subareas with more urban parcels, we also observe transaction
of rights between agricultural users, as represented by our theory in Section 3. In particular, of all perpetual
rights transactions between 1997-2015, 23% were between agricultural and urban users and 77% were between
agricultural users. During that same period, of all transactions of annual leases to rights, 48% were between
agricultural and urban users, 45% were between agricultural users, and 7% were between urban users.
   48
      To obtain 59%, we divide the difference between RD estimates in columns 1 and 3 in Table 6 (i.e.,
1.26-.33), which isolates the gains from rights trading, by the difference in average land values at the edge
of the support shown in Figure 4 (i.e., 9.93-8.35), which incorporates the water table gradient. This is an
upper bound on the contribution of rights trading because gains from trading in the northern subareas, while
smaller, are still positive (i.e., the true numerator is smaller) and because the true water table difference is


                                                      32
    Table 6 also shows two final robustness checks. The RD effect may be heterogeneous
depending on how the boundary is defined. The model in column 4 of Table 6 further
restricts the sample of southern subarea parcels to those whose nearest boundary is defined
by the spatial extent of the Mojave River drainage basin (shown by purple line segments in
Figure 2) and not by the Mojave Water Agency (shown by red line segments in Figure 2).
Column 5 uses a similar sample restriction for the northern subareas. Our RD effect does
not differ greatly by how the boundary is defined.49 Finally, column 6 shows that our RD
effect is robust to dropping parcels that are in the subarea directly adjacent to Los Angeles
County.50


7     Aggregate net benefit of adjudication
We now turn to quantifying the aggregate net benefit of adjudication. We first use RD
estimates from Section 6 to quantify the aggregate net benefit to agricultural parcels and
then provide a back-of-the-envelope calculation for the aggregate net benefit to urban parcels.
Both values are potential lower bounds because they hold groundwater levels fixed. To
explore whether adjudication led to more groundwater, we present three additional pieces of
evidence, all of which imply that Mojave groundwater levels increased as a consequence of
adjudication.
likely larger (i.e., the true denominator is larger). Monte Carlo simulations based on estimated uncertainties
for each parameter, however, produce a 95% confidence interval of [-31%, 172%]. This large uncertainty
suggests that this back-of-the-envelope calculation should be interpreted with caution.
   49
      Figure 2 shows that boundary segments defined by the Mojave River drainage basin (shown by purple
line segments) are better represented in the northern parts of the adjudication area. Thus, an RD estimate
using all parcels near the Mojave River drainage basin boundary would have more northern subarea parcels
and would not be comparable to an RD estimate using all parcels near the Mojave Water Agency boundary.
Table 6 addresses this by examining whether RD estimates differ by boundary definition separately for
northern and southern subsamples. Alternatively, we also follow Gerardino, Litschig and Pomeranz (2017)
by running an RD subsample test that weights all parcels by their latitude and do not find RD estimates
that differ by boundary definition.
   50
      Furthermore, within our RD sample there are no open access parcels that fall under the jurisdiction of
a different water agency. This implies that for parcels near the Mojave Water Agency boundary, those that
were adjudicated were under Mojave Water Agency jurisdiction while open access parcels were not part of
any local water agency. Because the primary benefit of the Mojave Water Agency is groundwater access,
we do not anticipate that this institutional difference results in discontinuities in non-adjudication Mojave
Water Agency benefits at the boundary. However, because Mojave Water Agency parcels have to pay an
annual fee of 16.75 cents per $100 of assessed land value to the Mojave Water Agency for services aside from
of adjudication, the presence of this fee may bias our RD estimate downwards. We believe the magnitude of
this bias is small as this fee amounts to $23.95 for the average adjudicated land parcel in our sample, which
would slightly lower the land value difference across the boundary.




                                                     33
7.1     Quantifying a (lower bound) aggregate net benefit
We first quantify the aggregate net benefit of the Mojave adjudication regime for agricultural
parcels. Proposition 1(c) notes that our RD estimate is a lower bound on the local average
treatment effect for agricultural parcels at the boundary. If one further assumes that other
characteristics are uncorrelated with distance to the boundary, Proposition 1(d) states that
the local average treatment effect at the boundary is itself a lower bound for the popula-
tion average treatment effect across all agricultural parcels. This orthogonality assumption,
together with the south-north heterogeneity in the RD coefficient, enables a lower bound
calculation for the aggregate net benefit of adjudication across agricultural parcels.
    To that end, we multiply the heterogeneous RD effect separately for agricultural parcels
in southern (i.e., column 2 of Table 6) and northern (i.e., column 3 of Table 6) subareas
with each parcel's land value. We then sum this product across all adjudicated agricultural
parcels. This results in a value of $440 million (in 2015 dollars), or a 50% increase in total
land value.51
    Water access for urban parcels is not tied to underlying groundwater but rather comes
from municipal water systems. While this means we are unable to apply our spatial RD
estimator to urban parcels, Appendix A.7 details how an extension of our theory along with
data on aggregate urban water allocation and trade combine to quantify the aggregate net
benefit to urban parcels. Our calculation is based on the following argument: Unlike agricul-
tural parcels, urban parcels held lower priority access to groundwater prior to adjudication
and were likely pumping below their private optimum. If, following adjudication, one ob-
served an increase in aggregate urban water consumption, the gain from increased water use
must exceed the cost of purchasing groundwater rights from agricultural parcels, implying a
positive aggregate urban net benefit. In Appendix A.7, we calculate for a range of demand
elasticities found in the literature that adjudication resulted in an aggregate net benefit
between $72-131 million (in 2015 dollars) for urban parcels. Altogether, the aggregate net
benefit to agricultural and urban parcels of the groundwater market is $512-571 million. By
comparison, the initial administrative and legal cost to set up the adjudication system was
$40 million (in 2015 dollars) (Figueroa, 2001).
   51
      Unlike the 254% average RD sample increase calculated in column 1 of Table 2, this aggregate percentage
increase takes into account heterogeneity in RD estimates between northern and southern subareas and the
number of parcels and their values in each region. Because there are many more parcels in the northern
subareas where the RD effect is lower, the aggregate effect is weighted towards the northern RD effect.




                                                     34
7.2     Did adjudication increase groundwater levels?
The aggregate net benefit estimates in Section 7.1 omit any benefits of a higher groundwater
table. If groundwater levels increased under the adjudication, these values are a strict lower
bound on the net private and social benefits of the policy. If groundwater levels did not
change, then adjudication had no social net benefits but rather only generated private net
benefits by enabling a more efficient allocation of groundwater through rights trading. We
turn to three pieces of evidence beyond our main RD result to examine whether adjudication
increased groundwater levels relative to the open access counterfactual.

                                                Figure 5: Trend breaks in average Mojave groundwater levels

                                           2
         Linear trend break coefficient




                                          1.5




                                           1




                                           .5




                                           0
                                                1985        1990         1995        2000         2005        2010
                                                             Year
Notes: Figure shows the trend break coefficient 2 and its 95% confidence interval from the model:
ht = 1 t + 2 t1{t  t ¯} + 3 1{t  t  ¯} + µt , where t is year, ht is average Mojave groundwater levels (plotted
in Figure 1), and µt is an error term that is robust to serial correlation and heteroscedasticity with optimal
bandwidth following (Newey and West, 1987). t         ¯ is the imposed trend break which varies across years
1985-2010, shown in the x-axis. Sample period is 1980-2015, the years with continuously available average
Mojave groundwater levels.


   First, we return to the time series of average Mojave groundwater levels depicted in
Figure 1, which shows groundwater levels stabilizing in recent decades. To examine the
timing of this trend break in groundwater levels, Figure 5 plots trend break coefficients from
separate regression models in which the timing of the imposed linear trend break varies
across years between 1985 and 2010. We detect the largest trend break in average Mojave
groundwater levels around 1993, the year in which 75% of groundwater users first adopted


                                                                                35
pumping restrictions. One concern with interpreting this trend break as causal evidence
is that, as the theory in Section 3.2 details, groundwater levels would have also eventually
stabilized had the prior open access regime continued. It is possible that stabilization under
open access also would have occurred in 1993.52

                       Figure 6: RD plot on whether a groundwater well was drilled since 1993

                                   .6
                                                                                            CCT RD coefficient: -0.243 (0.151)
        Well drilled since 1993?




                                   .4




                                   .2




                                                    Open access area                        Adjudication area
                                   0
                                        -12   -10   -8     -6     -4    -2        0   2     4       6       8       10      12

                                                          Distance from adjudication boundary (in km)

Notes: Vertical axis shows a dummy variable for whether a groundwater well was built since 1993. Hor-
izontal axes shows normalized distance in kilometers, di , to adjudication boundary with di  0 indicating
the adjudication area and di < 0 indicating the open access area. Circles indicate average outcome for
the average distance within a 2 km-wide distance bin. Solid (dashed) line shows linear (quadratic) fit over
unbinned data separately on each side of the boundary. MSE-optimal RD coefficient with county-clustered
standard error shown following Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik (2014).


   To rule out this possibility, for our second piece of evidence we return to our spatial
RD setting and look at the timing of when wells were drilled. If adjudication did not
result in more groundwater compared with the open access counterfactual, one would not
observe changes in efforts to access water following the introduction of adjudication. Figure
6, which mirrors our main RD plot in Figure 4, examines a dummy variable for whether a
groundwater well was drilled during or after 1993, the year when most groundwater users
  52
     A second concern may be that the Mojave Water Agency began recharging the aquifer with water
imported from California's State Water Project in 1990. While this does not invalidate our RD design,
which excludes changes in groundwater levels, it may prohibit one from drawing causal conclusions from the
time break analysis in Figure 5. However, as Figure B.6 shows, there is no clear trend break in State Water
Project imports in 1993.


                                                                             36
first adopted pumping restrictions. On average, there are more wells drilled since 1993 just
inside the open access area than just inside the adjudication area. More wells since 1993 on
the open access side is consistent with the pumping restrictions imposed by the adjudication
increasing groundwater spillovers into the open access area, lowering the cost of pumping,
and increasing the returns to drilling a well on unrestricted open access parcels.53 One
concern with this evidence is that the CCT-optimal RD estimate for new wells since 1993
has a p-value of 0.11, just above the conventional threshold for statistical significance.
     Our final argument turns to the price of groundwater rights. Figure B.7 plots the average
traded prices of perpetual rights and annual leases under the Mojave adjudication regime
during the 1997-2015 period, showing consistent trading at positive prices. As discussed in
Section 3.3, heterogeneous endowments produce initial differences among landowners in the
shadow value of water mr . These differences imply gains from trade, which are exhausted
when mr is equal across all landowners and equal to the competitive price for a water right.
Thus, a positive price for water implies a positive shadow value for all landowners and water
                        
use wmr that satisfies w   = mr = pw > 0. The properties of  - concave and single-peaked
                                                                  
in w - imply w    > 0 if and only if wmr < wa since wa satisfies w   = 0. The same argument
holds for the price of a perpetual groundwater right. In sum, positive water prices are a
sufficient condition for the adjudication to have reduced pumping relative to open access
and, thereby, increased groundwater levels.
     These three additional pieces of evidence all suggest that adjudication resulted in more
groundwater than would have occurred under the open access counterfactual. As such, it
is likely that adjudication resulted in social benefits by reducing the externality associated
with groundwater pumping. Furthermore, this implies that the aggregate net benefit of
adjudication calculated in Section 7.1, which omits the benefit from more groundwater, is
understated.


8        Conclusion
This paper applies a spatial regression discontinuity design to quantify the net benefit of
using an environmental market to manage a groundwater aquifer in southern California.
We estimate that agricultural land values on the groundwater market side of the boundary
    53
      The only way for more open access wells after adjudication to not increased groundwater levels is if
adjudication required adjudicated parcels to pump more than they would have under open access. Under
this circumstance, one can construct a scenario whereby groundwater levels are lower in the adjudicated area
and higher in the open access area following adjudication such that there is no change in total groundwater
compared to full open access. We think this is highly unlikely, particularly since agricultural users were
already pumping at their private optimum prior to adjudication such that any mandate to pump more
would have led to private losses for all adjudicated users.


                                                    37
are, on average, 250% higher than on the open access side. Using a model of dynamic
groundwater extraction, we show that our RD estimate corresponds to a weak lower bound
on the net benefit of the program for agricultural parcels. Heterogeneity analyses suggest
that a component of these benefits comes from the tradeability of these rights, which enable
a more efficient allocation of water away from water-intensive agriculture toward urban use.
Furthermore, additional evidence suggests that the groundwater market led to increased
groundwater levels.
    Our findings can inform efforts to address overextraction of other common-pool resources,
such as fisheries, forests, and the global climate. For groundwater in particular, California
recently passed the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act, an unprecedented policy
requiring users of overextracted aquifers to adopt sustainable management plans. While
it remains contentious which management tools should be employed, this paper's findings
suggest that a market for groundwater rights can lead to substantial net benefits. Users
and regulators alike may reference these benefits in future efforts to establish environmental
markets for groundwater and common-pool resources more generally.


References
Aeschbach-Hertig, W., and Tom Gleeson. 2012. "Regional strategies for the accelerating
  global problem of groundwater depletion." Nature Geoscience, 5: 853­861.
Aladjem, David, and David Sunding. 2015. "Marketing the Sustainable Groundwater Man-
  agement Act: Applying economics to solve California's groundwater problems." Nat. Re-
  sources & Env't, 30: 28.
Babbitt, C., Hall M. Hayden A. Briones A.L.G. Young R., and N. Brozovic. 2017. "Ground-
  water Trading as a Tool or Implementing California's Sustainable Groundwater Manage-
  ment Act."
Baerenklau, Kenneth A, Kurt A Schwabe, and Ariel Dinar. 2014. "The residential water
  demand effect of increasing block rate water budgets." Land Economics, 90(4): 683­699.
Banerjee, Abhijit V, Paul J Gertler, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2002. "Empowerment and effi-
  ciency: Tenancy reform in West Bengal." Journal of Political Economy, 110(2): 239­280.
Besley, Timothy. 1995. "Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence
  from Ghana." Journal of Political Economy, 103(5): 903­937.
Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess. 2000. "Land Reform, Poverty Reduction, and Growth:
  Evidence from India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2): 389­430.
Bigelow, Daniel P, Andrew J Plantinga, David J Lewis, and Christian Langpap. 2017. "How
  does urbanization affect water withdrawals? Insights from an econometric-based landscape
  simulation." Land economics, 93(3): 413­436.

                                             38
Birkenbach, Anna M, David J Kaczan, and Martin D Smith. 2017. "Catch shares slow the
  race to fish." Nature, 544(7649): 223­226.

Calel, Raphael. 2020. "Adopt or Innovate: Understanding Technological Responses to Cap-
  and-Trade." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 12(3): 170­201.

Calel, Raphael, and Antoine Dechezlepr^
                                      etre. 2016. "Environmental policy and directed tech-
  nological change: evidence from the European carbon market." Review of economics and
  statistics, 98(1): 173­191.

California Dept. of Water Res. 2015. "California's Groundwater Update 2013: A Compilation
  of Enhanced Content for California Water Plan Update 2013."

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, and Max H. Farrell. 2019. "Coverage Error Optimal
  Confidence Intervals for Local Polynomial Regression." mimeo.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik. 2014. "Robust nonparametric
  confidence intervals for regression-discontinuity designs." Econometrica, 82(6): 2295­2326.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, Max H. Farrell, and Roc´   io Titiunik. 2019. "Re-
  gression Discontinuity Designs Using Covariates." The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  forthcoming.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2008. "Bootstrap-Based Im-
  provements for Inference with Clustered Errors." The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  90(3): 414­427.

Cattaneo, Matias D, Brigham R Frandsen, and Rocio Titiunik. 2015. "Randomization infer-
  ence in the regression discontinuity design: An application to party advantages in the US
  Senate." Journal of Causal Inference, 3(1): 1­24.

Cattaneo, Matias D., Michael Jansson, and Xinwei Ma. 2019. "Simple Local Polynomial
  Density Estimators." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 0(0): 1­7.

Cattaneo, Matias D, Rocio Titiunik, and Gonzalo Vazquez-Bare. 2016. "Inference in regres-
  sion discontinuity designs under local randomization." The Stata Journal, 16(2): 331­367.

Coase, R. H. 1960. "The Problem of Social Cost." Journal of Law and Economics, 3: pp.
  1­44.

Coman, Katharine. 1911. "Some Unsettled Problems of Irrigation." The American Economic
  Review, 1(1): 1­19.

Costello, Christopher, and Corbett A Grainger. 2018. "Property rights, regulatory capture,
  and exploitation of natural resources." Journal of the Association of Environmental and
  Resource Economists, 5(2): 441­479.




                                             39
Costello, Christopher, Daniel Ovando, Tyler Clavelle, C. Kent Strauss, Ray Hilborn,
  Michael C. Melnychuk, Trevor A. Branch, Steven D. Gaines, Cody S. Szuwalski, Reniel B.
  Cabral, Douglas N. Rader, and Amanda Leland. 2016. "Global Fishery Prospects under
  Contrasting Management Regimes." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  113(18): 5125­5129.

Costello, Christopher, Nicolas Qu´
                                 erou, and Agnes Tomini. 2015. "Partial enclosure of the
  commons." Journal of Public Economics, 121: 69­78.

Costello, Christopher, Steven D. Gaines, and John Lynham. 2008. "Can Catch Shares Pre-
  vent Fisheries Collapse?" Science, 321(5896): 1678­1681.

Covich, Alan P. 2009. "Emerging Climate Change Impacts on Freshwater Resources: A
  Perspective on Transformed Watersheds."

Crocker, T. 1966. "The structuring of atmospheric pollution control systems. The economics
  of air pollution." The economics of air pollution. New York, WW Norton & Co, 61­86.

Cropper, Maureen L., and Wallace E. Oates. 1992. "Environmental Economics: A Survey."
  Journal of Economic Literature, 30(2): pp. 675­740.

Dale, John H. 1968. "Pollution, Property, and Prices: An Essay in Policy-Making."

Dalhuisen, Jasper M, Raymond JGM Florax, Henri LF De Groot, and Peter Nijkamp. 2003.
 "Price and income elasticities of residential water demand: a meta-analysis." Land eco-
 nomics, 79(2): 292­308.

Deschenes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S Shapiro. 2017. "Defensive investments
  and the demand for air quality: Evidence from the NOx budget program." American
  Economic Review, 107(10): 2958­89.

Drysdale, Krystal M., and Nathan P. Hendricks. 2018. "Adaptation to an irrigation water
  restriction imposed through local governance." Journal of Environmental Economics and
  Management, 91: 150 ­ 165.

Edwards, Eric C. 2016. "What lies beneath? Aquifer heterogeneity and the economics of
  groundwater management." Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
  Economists, 3(2): 453­491.

Elliott, Joshua, Delphine Deryng, Christoph M¨  uller, Katja Frieler, Markus Konzmann, Di-
  eter Gerten, Michael Glotter, Martina Fl¨orke, Yoshihide Wada, Neil Best, Stephanie Eis-
  ner, Bal´azs M. Fekete, Christian Folberth, Ian Foster, Simon N. Gosling, Ingjerd Hadde-
  land, Nikolay Khabarov, Fulco Ludwig, Yoshimitsu Masaki, Stefan Olin, Cynthia Rosen-
  zweig, Alex C. Ruane, Yusuke Satoh, Erwin Schmid, Tobias Stacke, Qiuhong Tang, and
  Dominik Wisser. 2014. "Constraints and potentials of future irrigation water availability
  on agricultural production under climate change." Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 111(9): 3239­3244.



                                            40
Espey, Molly, James Espey, and W Douglass Shaw. 1997. "Price elasticity of residential
  demand for water: a meta-analysis." Water resources research, 33(6): 1369­1374.

Ferguson, Grant, Jennifer C McIntosh, Debra Perrone, and Scott Jasechko. 2018. "Competi-
  tion for shrinking window of low salinity groundwater." Environmental Research Letters,
  13(11): 114013.

Field, Erica. 2007. "Entitled to Work: Urban Property Rights and Labor Supply in Peru."
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1561­1602.

Figueroa, Teri. 2001. "Water agreement endangered: Move by Baldy Mesa Water District
  could lead to costly legal battles." Desert Dispatch.

Fowlie, Meredith, Stephen P Holland, and Erin T Mansur. 2012. "What do emissions mar-
  kets deliver and to whom? Evidence from Southern California's NOx trading program."
  American Economic Review, 102(2): 965­93.

Freeman, Jody, and Charles D Kolstad. 2006. Moving to markets in environmental regulation:
  Lessons from twenty years of experience. Oxford University Press.

Galiani, Sebastian, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2010. "Property rights for the poor: Effects
 of land titling." Journal of Public Economics, 94(9): 700 ­ 729.

Gerardino, Maria Paula, Stephan Litschig, and Dina Pomeranz. 2017. "Can Audits Backfire?
 Evidence from Public Procurement in Chile." National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper 23978.

Giordano, Mark. 2009. "Global Groundwater? Issues and Solutions." Annual Review of
  Environment and Resources, 34(1): 153­178.

Gisser, Micha, and David Sanchez. 1980. "Competition versus optimal control in groundwater
  pumping." Water Resources Research, 16(4): 638­642.

Gordon, H Scott. 1954. "The Economic Theory of a Common-Property Resource: The Fish-
 ery." The Journal of Political Economy, 124­142.

Goulder, Lawrence H. 2013. "Markets for pollution allowances: what are the (new) lessons?"
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1): 87­102.

Grafton, R. Quentin, Gary Libecap, Samuel McGlennon, Clay Landry, and Bob O'Brien.
  2011. "An Integrated Assessment of Water Markets: A Cross-Country Comparison." Re-
  view of Environmental Economics and Policy, 5(2): 219­239.

Green Nylen, N., Kiparsky M. Archer K. Schnier K., and H. Doremus. 2017. "Trading Sus-
  tainably: Critical Considerations for Local Groundwater Markets Under the Sustainable
  Groundwater Management Act."

Hagerty, Nick. 2019. "Liquid Constrained in California: Estimating the Potential Gains from
  Water Markets." mimeo.

                                            41
Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. 2001. "Identification and Es-
  timation of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design." Econometrica,
  69(1): pp. 201­209.
Hahn, Robert W. 1984. "Market Power and Transferable Property Rights." The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 99(4): pp. 753­765.
Hardin, Garrett. 1968. "The Tragedy of the Commons." Science, 162(3859): 1243­1248.
He, Yang, and Otavio Bartalotti. 2020. "Wild bootstrap for fuzzy regression discontinuity
  designs: obtaining robust bias-corrected confidence intervals." The Econometrics Journal.
  utaa002.
Hernandez-Cortes, Danae, and Kyle C Meng. 2020. "Do Environmental Markets Cause En-
  vironmental Injustice? Evidence from California's Carbon Market." National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 27205.
Holland, Paul W. 1986. "Statistics and Causal Inference." Journal of the American Statistical
  Association, 81(396): 945­960.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2010. "Barbed wire: Property rights and agricultural development." The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2): 767­810.
Hsueh, Lily. 2017. "Quasi-Experimental Evidence on the "Rights to Fish": The Effects of
  Catch Shares on Fishermen's Days at Sea." Journal of the Association of Environmental
  and Resource Economists, 4(2): 407­445.
Isaksen, Elisabeth Thuestad, and Andries Richter. 2018. "Tragedy, property rights, and the
  commons: investigating the causal relationship from institutions to ecosystem collapse."
  Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economics.
Iwanowsky, Mathias. 2019. "Property Rights, Resources, and Wealth: The Public Grazing
  Solution in the United States." mimeo.
Janmaat, Johannus A. 2005. "Sharing clams: tragedy of an incomplete commons." Journal
  of Environmental Economics and Management, 49(1): 26­51.
Kaffine, Daniel T, and Christopher Costello. 2011. "Unitization of spatially connected re-
 newable resources." The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 11(1).
Kang, Mary, and Robert B Jackson. 2016. "Salinity of deep groundwater in California:
 Water quantity, quality, and protection." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 113(28): 7768­7773.
Kroetz, Kailin, James N. Sanchirico, and Daniel K. Lew. 2015. "Efficiency Costs of Social
  Objectives in Tradable Permit Programs." Journal of the Association of Environmental
  and Resource Economists, 2(3): 339­366.
Libecap, Gary D. 2011. "Institutional Path Dependence in Climate Adaptation: Coman's
  "Some Unsettled Problems of Irrigation"." American Economic Review, 101(1): 64­80.

                                             42
Libecap, Gary D., and Dean Lueck. 2011. "The Demarcation of Land and the Role of Coor-
  dinating Property Institutions." Journal of Political Economy, 119(3): 426­467.

Lloyd, William Forster. 1833. Two Lectures on the Checks to Population. Oxford University
  Press.

Malik, Arun S. 1990. "Markets for pollution control when firms are noncompliant." Journal
 of Environmental Economics and management, 18(2): 97­106.

Malueg, David A. 1990. "Welfare consequences of emission credit trading programs." Journal
 of Environmental Economics and management, 18(1): 66­77.
                       ´
Mangin, Tracey, Miguel Angel Cisneros-Mata, Jennifer Bone, Christopher Costello, Steven D
 Gaines, Gavin McDonald, Laura Rodriguez, C Kent Strauss, and Pedro Zapata. 2018.
 "The cost of management delay: The case for reforming Mexican fisheries sooner rather
 than later." Marine Policy, 88: 1­10.

McCrary, Justin. 2008. "Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
 design: A density test." Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 698­714.

McDonald, Robert I., Pamela Green, Deborah Balk, Balazs M. Fekete, Carmen Revenga,
 Megan Todd, and Mark Montgomery. 2011. "Urban growth, climate change, and freshwa-
 ter availability." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(15): 6312­6317.

McLaughlin, David. 2020. "Well-defined property rights: Do groundwater adjudications
 work? Evidence from California." mimeo.

Meng, Kyle C. 2017. "Using a free permit rule to forecast the marginal abatement cost of
 proposed climate policy." American Economic Review, 107(3): 748­84.

Montgomery, W. David. 1972. "Markets in Licenses and Efficient Pollution Control Pro-
 grams." Journal of Economic Theory, 5(3): 395 ­ 418.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West. 1987. "A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
  Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix." Econometrica,
  55(3): 703­708.

Olmstead, Sheila M. 2010. "The economics of managing scarce water resources." Review of
  Environmental Economics and Policy, 4(2): 179­198.

Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the commons. Cambridge university press.

Ostrom, Elinor. 2008. "The challenge of common-pool resources." Environment: Science and
  Policy for Sustainable Development, 50(4): 8­21.

Palmquist, Raymond B., and Leon E. Danielson. 1989. "A Hedonic Study of the Effects
  of Erosion Control and Drainage on Farmland Values." American Journal of Agricultural
  Economics, 71(1): 55­62.



                                            43
Perrone, Debra, and Scott Jasechko. 2019. "Deeper well drilling an unsustainable stopgap
  to groundwater depletion." Nature Sustainability, 2(8): 773­782.

Petrick, Sebastian, and Ulrich J Wagner. 2014. "The impact of carbon trading on industry:
  Evidence from German manufacturing firms." Available at SSRN 2389800.

Prudhomme, Christel, Ignazio Giuntoli, Emma L. Robinson, Douglas B. Clark, Nigel W. Ar-
  nell, Rutger Dankers, Bal´
                           azs M. Fekete, Wietse Franssen, Dieter Gerten, Simon N. Gosling,
  Stefan Hagemann, David M. Hannah, Hyungjun Kim, Yoshimitsu Masaki, Yusuke Satoh,
  Tobias Stacke, Yoshihide Wada, and Dominik Wisser. 2014. "Hydrological droughts in the
  21st century, hotspots and uncertainties from a global multimodel ensemble experiment."
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(9): 3262­3267.

Rafey, Will. 2020. "Droughts, deluges, and (river) diversions: Valuing market-based water
  reallocation." mimeo.

Richey, Alexandra S., Brian F. Thomas, Min-Hui Lo, John T. Reager, James S. Famigli-
  etti, Katalyn Voss, Sean Swenson, and Matthew Rodell. 2015. "Quantifying renewable
  groundwater stress with GRACE." Water Resources Research, 51(7): 5217­5238.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. "Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation in pure
  competition." Journal of Political Economy, 82(1): 34­55.

Salzman, James, Genevieve Bennett, Nathaniel Carroll, Allie Goldstein, and Michael Jenk-
  ins. 2018. "The Global Status and Trends of Payments for Ecosystem Services." Nature
  Sustainability, 1(3): 136­144.

Sampson, Gabriel S, and James N Sanchirico. 2019. "Exploitation of a mobile resource with
  costly cooperation." Environmental and Resource Economics, 73(4): 1135­1163.

Scheld, Andrew M., Christopher M. Anderson, and Hirotsugu Uchida. 2012. "The Economic
  Effects of Catch Share Management: The Rhode Island Fluke Sector Pilot Program."
  Marine Resource Economics, 27(3): 203­228.

Schlenker, Wolfram, W. Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher. 2005. "Will U.S. Agri-
  culture Really Benefit from Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the Hedonic
  Approach." American Economic Review, 95(1): 395­406.

Schmalensee, Richard, and Robert N Stavins. 2017. "The design of environmental markets:
  What have we learned from experience with cap and trade?" Oxford Review of Economic
  Policy, 33(4): 572­588.

Shertzer, Kyle W, and Michael H Prager. 2006. "Delay in fishery management: diminished
  yield, longer rebuilding, and increased probability of stock collapse." ICES Journal of
  Marine Science, 64(1): 149­159.

Stavins, Robert N. 1995. "Transaction Costs and Tradeable Permits." Journal of Environ-
  mental Economics and Management, 29(2): 133­148.


                                            44
Stavins, Robert N. 2011. "The problem of the commons: still unsettled after 100 years."
  American Economic Review, 101(1): 81­108.

Tietenberg, Tom. 2003. "The Tradable-Permits Approach to Protecting the Commons:
  Lessons for Climate Change." Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 19(3): 400­419.

V¨
 or¨
   osmarty, Charles J., Pamela Green, Joseph Salisbury, and Richard B. Lammers. 2000.
  "Global Water Resources: Vulnerability from Climate Change and Population Growth."
  Science, 289(5477): 284­288.

World Bank Group. 2020. "State and Trends of Carbon Pricing."

Worm, Boris, Ray Hilborn, Julia K. Baum, Trevor A. Branch, Jeremy S. Collie, Christopher
 Costello, Michael J. Fogarty, Elizabeth A. Fulton, Jeffrey A. Hutchings, Simon Jennings,
 Olaf P. Jensen, Heike K. Lotze, Pamela M. Mace, Tim R. McClanahan, C´        oil´
                                                                                 in Minto,
 Stephen R. Palumbi, Ana M. Parma, Daniel Ricard, Andrew A. Rosenberg, Reg Watson,
 and Dirk Zeller. 2009. "Rebuilding Global Fisheries." Science, 325(5940): 578­585.




                                           45
                     Appendix ­ For Online Publication

A     Theory appendix
Sections A.1-A.5 derives Proposition 1(a)-1(e). Section A.6 decomposes our main RD effect.
Section A.7 details a back-of-the-envelope calculation for the aggregate urban net benefit.

A.1     Proposition 1(a): V mr - V a                               0
Using equations (3) and (12), define
                         
  V mr - V a =                           ¯ mr ) - pw (s)(wmr (s) - we (s))]e-s ds
                             [ (wmr (s), h
                     0
                                 
                 -                   (wa (s), ha (s))e-s ds
                             0
                                    
                                 
                 =                             ¯ mr ) -  (wa (s), h
                                     (wmr (s), h                  ¯ mr ) +  (wa (s), h
                                                                                     ¯ mr ) -  (wa (s), ha (s))
                             0
                                                      0                                     0
                                                       

                 - pw (s)(wmr (s) - we (s)) e-s ds                                                          (A.1)
                                           

                                              0


where the first term in equation (A.1) is weakly negative because wa (t)  wmr (t) for t  0
and w > 0. The second term in equation (A.1) is weakly positive because h      ¯ mr  ha (t) for
t  0 and h > 0. The third bracketed term in equation (A.1) can have either sign depending
on whether the landowner is a net buyer or seller of groundwater rights. V mr - V a 0 follows
from summing the terms in equation (A.1).

A.2     Proposition 1(b): V mr - V ma                                  0
Using equations (12) and (13), define
                     
V mr - V ma =                        ¯ mr ) - pw (s)(wmr (s) - we (s))]e-s ds
                         [ (wmr (s), h
                 0
                             
                -                 (wma (s), hma (s))e-s ds
                         0
                                 
                             
                =                           ¯ mr ) -  (wma (s), h
                                  (wmr (s), h                                       ¯ mr ) -  (wma (s), hma (s))
                                                                ¯ mr ) +  (wma (s), h
                         0
                                                     0                                          0
                                                      

                - pw (s)(wmr (s) - we (s)) e-s ds                                                           (A.2)
                                          

                                          0



                                                              46
where the first term in equation (A.2) is weakly negative because wma  wmr for t  0 and
w > 0. The second term in equation (A.2) is weakly positive because h ¯ mr  hma (t) for t  0
and h > 0. The third bracketed term in equation (A.2) can have either sign depending on
whether the landowner is a net buyer or seller of groundwater rights. V mr - V ma 0 follows
from summing the terms in equation (A.2).

A.3      Proposition 1(c): (V mr (hb ) - V a ) - (V mr (hb ) - V ma (hb )  0
Using equations (3) and (13), define


 (V mr (hb ) - V a ) - (V mr (hb ) - V ma (hb ) = V ma (hb ) - V a
                                                          
                                                  =           (wma (s), hb (s)) -  (wa (s), ha (s)) e-s ds
                                                      0
                                                             
                                                          
                                                  =           (wma (s), hb (s)) -  (wa (s), hb (s))
                                                      0
                                                                               0
                                                                                           

                                                 +  (wa (s), hb (s)) -  (wa (s), ha (s)) e-s ds        (A.3)
                                                                        0


where the first term in equation (A.3) is weakly positive because wma  wa for t  0 and
w > 0. The second term in equation (A.3) is weakly positive because hb (t)  ha (t) since
hma (t)  ha (t) and hb (t)  hma (t) for t  0 and h > 0.

A.4      Proposition 1(d): (V mr - V a ) - (V mr (hb ) - V a )  0
Using equation (12), define

(V mr - V a ) - (V mr (hb ) - V a ) = V mr - V mr (hb )
                                           
                                   =                  ¯ mr , s), h
                                              [ (wmr (h          ¯ mr ) - pw (s)(wmr (h
                                                                                      ¯ mr , s) - we (s))]e-s ds
                                       0
                                        
                                   -          [ (wmr (hb (s), s), hb (s)) - pw (s)(wmr (hb (s), s) - we (s))]e-s ds
                                       0
                                           
                                   =                  ¯ mr , s), h
                                              [ (wmr (h          ¯ mr ) -  (wmr (hb (s), s), hb (s))] e-s ds
                                       0
                                                                         0
                                           
                                   -                      ¯ mr , s) - wmr (hb (s), s)) e-s ds
                                              pw (s)(wmr (h                                            (A.4)
                                       0
                                                                   0


where wmr (h¯ mr , s) and wmr (hb (s), s) are the solutions to (4) given h
                                                                         ¯ mr and hb (s), respectively,
and a common endowment we (s). The two terms in (A.4) are weakly positive because
¯ mr  hb (t) for t  0, h > 0, dwmr > 0 by Cramer's rule, w > 0, and pw (s)  0. To show
h                                   dh



                                                      47
that the difference in the two terms,

                      0 =  (wmr (h¯ mr , s), h
                                             ¯ mr ) -  (wmr (hb (s), s), hb (s))
                        - pw (s)(wmr (h¯ mr , s) - wmr (hb (s), s)),                                   (A.5)
                                                  ¯ mr , s), h
is weakly positive, we note that pw (s) = w (wmr (h          ¯ mr ), and show that the following
expression is weakly positive:
                       ¯ mr , s), h
                 (wmr (h          ¯ mr ) -  (wmr (hb (s), s), h
                                                              ¯ mr )
          1 =                                                                  ¯ mr , s), h
                                                                     - w (wmr (h          ¯ mr )
                        wmr (h ¯ mr , s) - wmr (hb (s), s)
                                                               0

                     (w   mr     b         ¯ mr ) -  (wmr (hb (s), s), hb (s))
                               (h (s), s), h
                +                       ¯ mr , s) - wmr (hb (s), s)                                    (A.6)
                                  wmr (h
                                                    0

The first term is weakly positive from the concavity of  and the second term is weakly
                 ¯ mr  hb (t) for t  0, h > 0, and dwmr > 0. By inspection, 0  0 
positive because h                                     dh
1  0. Therefore, (V mr - V a ) - (V mr (hb ) - V a )  0.

                                         d
A.5     Proposition 1(e):                dt
                                            (V mr (hb )        - V ma (hb ))        0
Applying Liebnitz's Rule to equations (12) and (13) evaluated at hb , we obtain

   d mr b
      (V (h ) - V ma (hb )) =  [V mr (hb ) - V ma (hb )]
   dt
                            + [ (wma (t), hb (t)) -  (wmr (t), hb (t)) + pw (t)(wmr (t) - we (t))]

The second bracketed term is ambiguously signed.  (wma (t), hb (t)) -  (wmr (t), hb (t)) 
0 because wma (t)  wmr (t) for t  0 and w > 0. However, pw (t)(wmr (t) - we (t)) is
unconstrained in sign. The first bracketed term is
                                              
          V mr (hb ) - V ma (hb ) =              [ (wmr (s), hb (s)) -  (wma (s), hb (s))]e-(s-t) ds
                                          t
                                                                    0
                                              
                                     -           [pw (s)(wmr (s) - we (s))]e-(s-t) ds
                                         t
                                                               0


This term is ambiguously signed since our model imposes no constraints on the sign of
                                d
pw (s)(wmr (s) - we (s)). Thus, dt (V mr (hb ) - V ma (hb )) 0.




                                                          48
A.6     Decomposing ^RD
Our RD estimator from equation 16 can be written as
  ^RD = E [V mr - V ma ]
            i      i
          i:di =0
                           
       = E                        mr
                              [ (wi  (s), hi (s)) - pw (s)(wi
                                                            mr        e
                                                               (s) - wi           ma
                                                                        (s)) -  (wi  (s), hi (s))]e-s ds
          i:di =0      0
                                                                           
                           
       = E                        e
                              [ (wi                   ma
                                    (s), hi (s)) -  (wi  (s), hi (s))]e-s ds
          i:di =0      0
                                                0
                                                                                                      
                           
       + E                        mr
                              [ (wi                    e
                                     (s), hi (s)) -  (wi (s), hi (s)) - pw (s)(wi
                                                                                mr        e
                                                                                   (s) - wi (s))]e-s ds
          i:di =0      0
                                                             0
                                                                                                      (A.7)

where the first equality applies equations (12) and (13) for parcels at the boundary. The
second equality adds and subtracts profit under initial water endowment for parcels with
                         e
property rights, or  (wi   (s), hi (s)). The first bracketed term, which captures the restriction
cost, is weakly negative because for hi (t),  (w, hi (t)) is maximized at wma (hi (t)).
   We examine the second bracketed term, reflecting the gains from groundwater permit
trading, separately for net permit buyers and sellers, and for each time period, thus dropping
the time subscript. Observe that profit maximization under adjudication implies w = pw .
                                    mr     e
For a net permit buyer with wi          wi   , note that
                                                                       mr             e
     mr             e                                                (wi  , hi ) -  (wi , hi )
   (wi  , hi ) -  (wi , hi ) - pw (s)(wi
                                       mr    e
                                          - wi )  0                         mr      e
                                                                                                    mr
                                                                                                w (wi  )
                                                                         wi - wi
                                                                               mr   e
This inequality holds because  is concave in w. For a net permit seller, with wi   wi
                                                                       mr             e
     mr             e                                                (wi  , hi ) -  (wi , hi )
   (wi  , hi ) -  (wi , hi ) - pw (s)(wi
                                       mr    e
                                          - wi )  0                         mr      e
                                                                                                    mr
                                                                                                w (wi  )
                                                                         wi - wi

which holds again because  is concave in w.

A.7     Calculating the aggregate net benefit for urban parcels
Water for urban parcels is not extracted on site but rather available through municipal water
systems. As such, we are unable to apply our spatial RD approach for adjudicated urban
parcels. In this section, we extend our theory to inform a back-of-the-envelope calculation
on the aggregate net benefit of adjudication to urban parcels.
    To do so, we make two simplifying assumptions. First, as with our RD design on agri-
cultural parcels, we omit increases in groundwater levels as a consequence of adjudication,
implying, as with our RD estimate, that this calculation is a weak lower bound on the true
effect. Second, we assume that under adjudication the system has reached a steady state
where urban pumping, w , and the annual price of groundwater, p    ¯w , are constant over time.

                                                        49
Let w (w) be the instantaneous aggregate urban groundwater demand.54 Unlike agricultural
users, who under open access pumped until the marginal value of water is zero, urban users
faced constraints on pumping prior to adjudication because they had groundwater access
that was "junior" to agricultural users. As a consequence, urban users were likely pumping
below their private optimum prior to adjudication. If aggregate urban consumption increases
following adjudication, there would be an aggregate urban net benefit provided that the gain
from increased water use offsets the cost of purchasing groundwater rights to enable that
increased consumption.
    Let wa denotes the steady state pumping under the open access counterfactual. we is
the steady state groundwater endowment under adjudication. we < wa in order to stabilize
groundwater levels. The pumping restriction under adjudication imposes a loss in perpetuity
to urban users given by:
                                                       wa
                                                            1
                                            L=                w (w)dw
                                                      we    
where  is the discount rate. Adjudication also made it possible for cities to buy and sell
water rights. In the case where a city buys perpetual rights to consume more water, its gain
is:
                                     w
                                       1
                            G=           w (w)dw - r (w - we )
                                   w e 
where w is the post-trade consumption of water in perpetuity defined by w (w ) = p ¯w and
                                                   1    
r is the value of a perpetual right defined by r =  w (w ). If urban users decrease water
consumption following adjudication, w < wa , then they are unambiguously worse off since
                                                wa
                                                     1
                            G-L=-                      w (w)dw - r (w - we ) < 0
                                            w        
However, if urban users increase water consumption following adjudication, w > wa , the
net benefit from adjudication can be negative or positive
                                            w
                                                 1
                             G-L=                  w (w)dw - r (w - we )          0                        (A.8)
                                           wa    
Table A.1 calculates the aggregate net benefit to urban parcels in 2015. From the Mojave
Water Agency, we obtain aggregate endowment of groundwater rights for urban parcels
(we ) and aggregate urban groundwater consumption (w ) as the sum of endowments and
net transfers. For aggregate urban groundwater use under the counterfactual open access
regime (wa ), we conservatively assume that aggregate average annual urban groundwater use
in 1986-1990, prior to adjudication, would be maintained by 2015 had adjudication not been
established.55 Using a range of instantaneous residential demand elasticities of -0.4 to -0.7
    54
       The urban profit function (·) is analogous to an agricultural user's profits,  (·) from Section 3, but
differs in that profit is not defined per unit area of land, but rather for the aggregate population of households
and businesses served by municipal water systems.
    55
       In practice, the true counterfactual wa should be lower as groundwater levels deplete under open access
conditions, implying a larger gain from rights trading.


                                                            50
obtained from the literature (Espey, Espey and Shaw, 1997; Dalhuisen et al., 2003; Olmstead,
2010; Baerenklau, Schwabe and Dinar, 2014), we calculate an aggregate net benefit to urban
users of $72-131 million (in 2015 dollars).

                 Table A.1: Calculating the aggregate urban net benefit

                     we        wa       w         r     Inst. demand elasticity:
                    60191    64327    83927     1725    -0.4    -0.6       -0.7
                       Aggregate urban net benefit (in mil. 2015 $USD)
                                                        71.8   111.3      131.0
                Notes: Aggregate urban endowment of groundwater rights (we ),
                groundwater consumption (w ), and average price of a perpetual right
                (r) for 2015. Restricted aggregate urban water use under open access
                counterfactual (wa ) assumed equal to average 1986-1990 aggregate ur-
                ban groundwater use. Instantaneous elasticities for residential urban
                demand of -0.4 and -.06 from Espey, Espey and Shaw (1997); Dalhuisen
                et al. (2003); Olmstead (2010). Elasticity of -0.7 from Baerenklau,
                Schwabe and Dinar (2014). Discount rate set at r = 0.02.




                                                 51
B     Appendix Figures

                                                         Figure B.1: Agricultural revenue before and after adjudication

                                                         70
            Agricultural revenue (in million real USD)




                                                         60



                                                         50



                                                         40



                                                         30



                                                         20



                                                         10
                                                              1960   1970      1980        1990    2000      2010         2020
                                                                                           Year
Notes: Plot shows agricultural revenue (in real million USD) for the Mojave Desert from 1960-2017. Data
takes the sum of revenue from the North and South Desert regions of San Bernardino county, obtained from
the San Bernardino county Annual Crop Reports. Orange-shaded area marks the period from 1990 when
the initial adjudication lawsuit was filed to 1996 when the final adjudication court ruling was issued.




                                                                                      52
                                                                                                              Figure B.2: Graphical RD: covariates

                                                4                                                                                                                                   250




                                                                                                                                                       Aspect (compass direction)
                                                                                                                                                                                    200
                                                3
  Slope (degrees)




                                                                                                                                                                                    150

                                                2


                                                                                                                                                                                    100



                                                1
                                                                       Open access area                            Adjudication area                                                                       Open access area                           Adjudication area
                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                     -12       -10     -8        -6     -4     -2     0        2   4       6       8    10   12                                            -12     -10     -8        -6     -4    -2     0       2    4       6       8   10   12

                                                                                 Distance from adjudication boundary (in km)                                                                                        Distance from adjudication boundary (in km)


                                                1.2                                                                                                                                 2010




                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                    2009
  Near well dummy




                                                                                                                                                       Last sales year




                                                    .8


                                                                                                                                                                                    2008
                                                    .6




                                                    .4                                                                                                                              2007




                                                    .2                  Open access area                            Adjudication area
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Open access area                       Adjudication area
                                                                                                                                                                                    2006
                                                         -12    -10     -8        -6      -4    -2    0        2   4       6        8   10   12                                             -12     -10        -8     -6     -4    -2        0   2    4       6       8   10   12

                                                                                 Distance from adjudication boundary (in km)                                                                                         Distance from adjudication boundary (in km)


                                                250                                                                                                                                 25
  Land value change since last last sales (%)




                                                200                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                       Size (acres)




                                                150                                                                                                                                 15




                                                100                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                            Open access area                        Adjudication area                                                                     Open access area                            Adjudication area
                                                    50                                                                                                                               5
                                                         -12     -10        -8     -6     -4    -2        0    2    4       6       8   10   12                                           -12     -10     -8         -6    -4     -2     0       2    4      6        8   10   12

                                                                                  Distance from adjudication boundary (in km)                                                                                       Distance from adjudication boundary (in km)


Notes: Vertical axes shows covariate value. Horizontal axes shows normalized distance in kilometers, di ,
to property rights boundary with di  0 indicating the adjudication area and di < 0 indicating the open
access area. Circles indicate average covariate values for the average distance within a 2 km-wide distance
bin. Solid (dashed) line shows linear (quadratic) fit over unbinned data separately on each side of the
boundary.




                                                                                                                                                  53
                                                  Figure B.3: RD effects over time
                     4




                     3
    RD coefficient




                     2




                     1




                     0




                     -1
                          1975-1979   1980-1984    1985-1989   1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014
                                                                        Year
                                       RD
Notes: Estimates of         from equation (18) with log land value as outcome from a panel of assessed
land values between 1976-2014, but missing 1977 (see historic land value data details in footnote 45).
Estimates correpond to those shown in Table 5. Each model estimated over 5-year intervals. All models
use a local linear model for f (di ), exclude covariates, restrict sample based on a common MSE-optimal
bandwidth across both sides of the threshold (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik, 2014), and uniformly
weight observations. Standard errors clustered at the zip code level in parentheses.




                                                                   54
                     Figure B.4: Graphical RD: land value before adjudication (1975-1989)
                                                        8


                     Log land value (1975-1989)

                                                    7.5




                                                        7




                                                    6.5




                                                        6                  Open access area                           Adjudication area

                                                            -12    -10     -8        -6    -4     -2     0     2      4      6        8         10   12

                                                                                    Distance from adjudication boundary (in km)
Notes: Vertical axes shows log land value during 1975-1989, the period with available data prior to the
initial adjudication lawsuit (see historic land value data details in footnote 45). Horizontal axes shows
normalized distance in kilometers, di , to property rights boundary with di  0 indicating property rights
area and di < 0 indicating open access area. Log land value is shown as local averages for the average
distance within 2 km-wide bins (circles) as well as separate linear (solid line) and quadratic (dashed line)
fits on distance over the unbinned data on each side of the discontinuity.
                                                                      Figure B.5: Heterogeneity: south to north
                                              3.5

                                                   3

                                              2.5

                                                   2

                                              1.5
         RD effect




                                                   1

                                                  .5

                                                   0

                                                  -.5

                                                  -1
                                                             slope=-0.019 (0.011)
                                      -1.5


                                                            30             50              70            90           110                 130             150
                                   Latitude distance relative to Los Angeles (km)
Notes: Plot shows heterogeneity in   ^RD as a function of a parcel's latitude, relative to the centroid of
Los Angeles. Point estimate and standard error on slope shown. Horizontal red dashed line shows baseline
uninteracted RD effect from column 1 of Table 2. 95% confidence intervals shown.
                                                                                                   55
   Figure B.6: Annual transfers from the State Water Project into the Mojave Aquifer


          State Water Project transfers into Majoave (acre ft.)
                                                                  40000




                                                                  30000




                                                                  20000




                                                                  10000




                                                                         0
                                                                             1990              1995            2000             2005           2010                2015
                                                                                                                        Year
Notes: Figure shows annual transfers from the State Water Project to the Mojave Aquifer. Data from the
Mojave Water Agency.



   Figure B.7: Average price and total trading volume of annual groundwater permits

                                                                  3000                                                                                       250
                                                                                    Perpetual permit
          Average price of perpetual permit ($/acre ft.)




                                                                                    Annual lease



                                                                                                                                                                   Average price of annual lease ($/acre ft.)
                                                                  2500
                                                                                                                                                             200


                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                                                             150

                                                                  1500

                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                  1000


                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                   500



                                                                     0                                                                                       0
                                                                         1997        1999     2001     2003   2005    2007     2009    2011   2013    2015
                                                                                                                 Year
Notes: Average price of a perpetual permit and annual lease between 1997-2015. Data from the Mojave
Water Agency.



                                                                                                                 56
C     Appendix Tables

                                 Table C.1: Summary statistics

                                                    Obs      Mean       Std dev      p(1)      p(99)

Land value (in 2015 USD)                  22462             31983.7     64549.4     612.0 278694.0
Dist. from prop. rights boundary (in km) 22462                12.0        11.0      -14.2   37.6
Avg. slope (in degrees)                   22462                1.9         2.7        0.1   15.2
Avg. aspect (in compass direction)        22446              166.4        93.8       12.8   345.0
Dummy whether near 1 mile of well         22462                0.9         0.3        0.0    1.0
Parcel size (in acres)                    22462               13.7        39.9        0.2   160.0
Last sales year                           22462             2007.2         4.6     1997.0 2015.0
Land value change since last sales (in %) 22430              217.6       3827.6     -84.6  1973.2
Notes: Number of observations, mean, standard deviation, 1st percentile and 99th percentile of variables
in primary dataset (see Section 5). Sample includes land parcels close to the adjudication boundary used
in RD estimation and those further away.




                                                  57
                                               Table C.2: Robustness: alternative variance estimators

                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)            (4)                   (5)                 (6)              (7)
                                                                                 Outcome is log land value

      ^RD
                                    1.264**              1.300              1.170***          1.144***           1.126***            1.296***          1.161
                                     (0.539)                                 (0.155)           (0.157)            (0.157)             (0.437)         {0.000}
                                 [0.207, 2.320]      [0.442, 2.263]      [0.866, 1.474]    [0.837, 1.451]     [0.819, 1.434]      [0.440, 2.152]

      Std. error/inference          zip code       wild bootstrap             50                 100               200              200 NN/           random-
58




                                     cluster       zip code cluster           NN                 NN                NN           zip code cluster       ization
      Bandwidth                       2.774             2.774                2.748              2.676             2.653               3.417             2.774
      Observations                    3060               3060                3013               2903              2874                3877              3060
     Notes: Estimates of  RD from equation (18) with log land value as outcome. All models use a local linear model for f (di ), exclude covariates, restrict
     sample based on a common MSE-optimal bandwidth across both sides of the threshold (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik, 2014), and uniformly weights
     observations. Column 1 replicates column 1 of Table 2 using standard errors clustered at the zip code level. Column 2 uses a block wild bootstrap
     procedure at the zip code level following He and Bartalotti (2020). Columns 3, 4, and 5 use a nearest neighbor variance estimator with 50, 100
     and 200 minimum nearest neighbors (NN). Column 6 uses a zip code cluster-robust, nearest neighbor variance estimator with 200 minimum nearest
     neighbors. Column 7 uses local randomization inference following Cattaneo, Frandsen and Titiunik (2015) and Cattaneo, Titiunik and Vazquez-Bare
     (2016). Standard errors in parentheses; p-values in curly brackets; 95% confidence interval in square brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                     Table C.3: Robustness: optimal bandwidth selector

                                       (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)                  (5)
                                                        Outcome is log land value

^RD
                                    1.264**        1.246**        0.983*        1.182**         1.210**
                                    (0.539)        (0.550)        (0.577)       (0.526)         (0.516)

Optimal bandwidth selector          MSE-1           MSE-2    CER-1      CER-2      MSE-1
Kernel                              uniform        uniform   uniform   uniform   triangular
Bandwidth                            2.774       2.488/5.066  2.319  2.080/4.235    3.330
Observations                         3060            5093     2457       4267       3773
Zip codes                             28              30        28        30         29
Notes: Estimates of  RD from equation (18) with log land value as outcome. All models use a local
linear model for f (di ) and exclude covariates. Columns 1-4 uniformly weight observations. Column 1
replicates baseline model in column 1 of Table 2 with sample restriction based on a common MSE-optimal
bandwidth across both sides of the threshold (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik, 2014) Column 2 allows
the MSE-optimal bandwidth to differ on both sides. Column 3 uses a common coverage error-rate (CER)
optimal bandwidth (Calonico, Cattaneo and Farrell, 2019). Column 4 allows the CER-optimal bandwidth
to differ on both sides. Column 5 uses a common MSE-optimal bandwidth but weights observations using
a triangular kernel. Standard errors clustered at the zip code level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.




                                                    59
