                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          COLLUSIVE INVESTMENTS IN TECHNOLOGICAL COMPATIBILITY:
           LESSONS FROM U.S. RAILROADS IN THE LATE 19TH CENTURY

                                        Daniel P. Gross

                                      Working Paper 26261
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26261


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




I thank the Berkeley Economic History Lab and the Harvard Business School Division of
Research and Faculty Development for financial support. This research began during graduate
studies and was conducted in part with the support of NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Grant
No. DGE-1106400 and an EHA Graduate Fellowship. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Daniel P. Gross. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Collusive Investments in Technological Compatibility: Lessons from U.S. Railroads in the
Late 19th Century
Daniel P. Gross
NBER Working Paper No. 26261
September 2019
JEL No. F14,F15,L15,L41,L92,N71

                                           ABSTRACT

Collusion is widely condemned for its negative effects on consumer welfare and market
efficiency. In this paper, I show that collusion may also in some cases facilitate the creation of
unexpected new sources of value. I bring this possibility into focus through the lens of a historical
episode from the 19th century, when colluding railroads in the U.S. South converted 13,000 miles
of railroad track to standard gauge over the course of two days in 1886, integrating the South into
the national transportation network. Route-level freight traffic data reveal that the gauge change
caused a large shift in market share from steamships to railroads, but did not affect total
shipments or prices on these routes. Guided by these results, I develop a model of compatibility
choice in a collusive market and argue that collusion may have enabled the gauge change to take
place as it did, while also tempering the effects on prices and total shipments.


Daniel P. Gross
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dgross@hbs.edu
In the early morning hours of Monday, May 31, 1886, railroads across the U.S. South simultaneously
stopped running their trains, and over the next 36 hours teams of workers manually narrowed 13,000
miles of railroad track from a 5' 0'' to 4' 9'' gauge (track width) to be compatible with the standard
being used throughout most of the rest of the country. Today, the gauge change is celebrated as a
remarkable feat of engineering and coordination and is referenced in research and popular press as
an example of standardization (e.g., Shapiro and Varian 1999). However, when the story is told, a
typically forgotten detail is that these railroads were also running a cartel.

Collusion has been illegal in the U.S. since the Sherman Act of 1890, out of concern for consumer
welfare and market efficiency ­ and railroads were one of its original targets. But often overlooked
is the possibility that in some settings, collusion may also contribute to the creation of unexpected
new sources of value, such as standardization. This value creation might in principle even change
predictions for the effects of market power on total surplus. In this paper, I bring these issues into
focus by way of this historical example: the gauge change instantly integrated the South into the
national transportation network, making it possible for goods and passengers to move effortlessly
into and out of the region without costs and delays of interchange.

Using historical data from the Southern railroad and steamship cartel, this paper first chronicles
the gauge change and shows that it triggered a redistribution of freight traffic into the South from
steamships to railroads but did not affect total shipments on sampled routes through 1890. Over
the same period, records show that the cartel maintained its prices, implying that railroads did not
pass through any of the cost savings achieved by the conversion. Guided by this evidence, I then
develop a simplified model of the market for North-South freight shipment and show that the cartel
may have both facilitated the conversion to standard gauge, by providing a venue for coordination
and a means of recouping the investment, and concurrently softened its effects on prices and total
shipments, by limiting pass-through of carriers' resultant cost savings. Complementing the evidence
from cartel data, evidence from railroads' stock returns around the time of the event indicates that
investors perceived large financial returns to standardization. The effects of the gauge change were
thus large, yet potentially defined by the industry's collusive conduct.

The earliest U.S. railroads were constructed as local and regional enterprises to serve local needs.
At the time, opinion over the optimal gauge varied, and without the vision of a national network,
distinct gauges were adopted around the country. As the national network began to emerge, these
incompatibilities became increasingly costly, and railroads gradually converged on a common gauge
via conversion and new construction, such that by the 1880s, nearly all U.S. railroads were on a
4' 8.5'' "standard" gauge ­ except for those in the South. Data from the Poor's Manual of Railroads


                                                  1
confirm that whereas other regions had 95% or more of their track in standard gauge, 75% of that
in the South was on an incompatible, 5' 0'' "Southern" gauge (even more if excluding Virginia and
North Carolina), and accounts indicate that the available adapter technologies were a substantial
and costly second-best to a fully integrated network. In early 1886, members of the Southern
Railway & Steamship Association (SRSA) cartel, which together comprised a majority of mileage
in the South, agreed to convert all track to a standard-compatible 4' 9'' gauge en masse over the
two days of May 31 and June 1, 1886, with traffic halting on May 30 and resuming by the evening
of June 1, effortlessly traversing the former breaks in gauge. The conversion was carefully planned,
seamlessly executed, and well-documented by contemporaries.

The cartel's primary purpose was to support noncompetitive pricing by Southern carriers through
the creation and administration of a traffic pool. To implement the pooling arrangement, the SRSA
compiled monthly records of freight traffic borne by individual carriers to and from Southern cities
where two or more members operated, which were later reported to cartel members for key routes.
I use these data to estimate the effects of the gauge change on merchandise shipments from the
North into the South. In a variant on a triple-differences design, I compare within-route traffic
borne by rail versus steamship, before and after the gauge change, allowing the effects to vary with
route length: because breaks in gauge imposed a fixed cost of interchange on through shipments,
the unit costs on each route will vary with distance. Steamships are a natural comparison group for
all-rail traffic, as seaborne freight circumvented the breaks in gauge and was therefore operationally
unaffected by the conversion to a standard-compatible gauge.

The cartel records yield a balanced panel of 52 routes with inbound merchandise shipments data
pre- and post-standardization. Within this sample, I find that the gauge change caused a sharp
increase in all-rail traffic relative to steamship traffic, with the effect strongest on shorter routes
and dissipating after roughly 700 to 750 miles. When split across the two all-rail pathways into the
South, I find relatively larger increases for the less-trafficked routing. The results are robust to a
variety of fixed effects, as well as within assorted subsamples.

Market share models return similar results, indicating a redistribution of traffic from steamships
to railroads, with effects dissipating at similar distances. However, I find no differential growth in
total shipments on shorter versus longer routes through 1890: the effects are limited to substitution
across modes. One possible explanation is that adjustment on the aggregate margin took several
years, and the panel is too short for these effects to appear in the data; another is that the choice
of mode was more sensitive to breaks in gauge than shipment overall. However, the presence of the
cartel is a distinctive feature of the setting, and its potential importance is accentuated by evidence


                                                  2
that cartel prices did not decline following the gauge change.

To evaluate the cartel's role in facilitating the gauge change and whether collusive pricing might
have constrained total shipments, I turn to theory. I develop a simplified model of the market for
freight transport on a North-South route, first using it to show how the existence of the cartel
may have facilitated standardization by providing incentives for undertaking the costly investment
and a venue for coordinating the regional shift to a different common-gauge equilibrium, and then
demonstrating how collusion could have shaped the effects on prices, quantities, and market shares.
Although traffic will shift from steamships to all-rail in any market structure, collusion reduces the
pass-through of railroads' cost savings to prices and in turn the growth in total shipments, relative
to a counterfactual in which railroads and steamships set prices competitively ­ and if cartel price
adjustments are even moderately costly (e.g., due to internal re-negotiation costs), prices and total
shipments may not change at all. As it were, stock returns to U.S. railroads at the time of the
conversion indicate that investors believed it would generate a windfall for Southern railroads,
particularly those where the gauge breaks were once located.

This episode offers an example of an unconventional dividend from collusion: the standardization
of Southern railway gauge.1 The enabling role of the cartel was to make it possible for firms to
internalize the externalities of their technology choices, and to provide an opportunity to coordinate
on decentralized changes such as the conversion of 13,000 miles of railroad track and recover the fixed
cost of conversion. This paper thus contributes to the literature on compatibility in interconnecting
networks by pointing out the ways in which collusion supported standardization, whereas previous
research has largely focused on how market competition shapes compatibility choices and compared
markets to standards-setting committees.2 The results also suggest a regulatory tension in settings
with large strategic complementarities (such as from technological compatibility), as collusion (or
consolidation) can enable value creation but also harm consumers.

The historical example is also striking because it reverses the direction of the conventional relation-
ship between standards and collusion. Standards-setting organizations (SSOs) have long attracted
regulatory scrutiny, especially regarding the market power conveyed to owners of standards-essential
1
  History offers other such examples. For example, in the 1920s, seven major international light bulb manufacturers
  colluded to divide national markets and limit the working life of light bulbs, increasing both sales and margins at
  the expense of consumers. But the so-called "Phoebus cartel" also served as a venue for manufacturers to exchange
  technical know-how and implement standards. One by-product of the cartel, for example, was the standardization
  of screw-in light bulbs and sockets, which persists to this day (IEEE 2014).
2
  Seminal contributions include Farrell and Saloner (1985, 1986, 1988, 1992); Katz and Shapiro (1985, 1986); Matutes
  and Regibeau (1988, 1992); and Economides (1989). See David and Greenstein (1990), Katz and Shapiro (1994),
  and Besen and Farrell (1994) for early reviews. Subsequent research has studied interconnection and compatibility
  in a wide range of settings, including electric power supply (David and Bunn 1988), U.S. telephone service (e.g.,
  Mueller 1997), ATM networks (e.g., Knittel and Stango 2008), and more.


                                                         3
patents and the countervailing collective bargaining efforts by the SSO to negotiate licensing terms
(e.g., U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission 2007). But researchers and poli-
cymakers have also voiced concern that SSOs may be a breeding ground for price-fixing, as it offers
a venue for firms to coordinate their product market decisions with a lower risk of detection, under
the cover of standards setting (U.S. DOJ and FTC 2007). In the setting of this paper, however, it
was instead collusion that facilitated standards adoption.

Finally, the results bring new evidence to bear on the question of how compatibility affects market
outcomes. Despite a rich theoretical literature, empirical progress has historically been challenged
by the difficulty of linking compatibility to observable outcomes and a lack of standards-adoption
events large enough to have measurable effects. This paper contributes to the growing body of
work studying the impacts of compatibility and compatibility-dependent technologies directly (e.g.,
Knittel and Stango 2008, Li 2019, Basker and Simcoe 2019), showing that compatibility can have
large effects on market shares of newly-integrated firms in settings where traffic is exchanged across
connected networks, such as in communications or transportation.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 reviews U.S. railroad history and the natural experiment at
the heart of the paper. Section 2 introduces the data and the empirical strategy. Section 3 estimates
the effects of the gauge change on route-level shipments and market shares, identifies the empirical
puzzle, and discusses potential explanations, emphasizing the role of the cartel. Section 4 provides
the theoretical argument for how the cartel may have both enabled the gauge change to take place
but also tempered its effects on prices and shipments, with a view towards rationalizing the patterns
in the data. Section 5 then shows what happened to stock prices following the gauge change. Section
6 discusses the key lessons, particularly as related to (i) the benefits of interoperability and (ii) the
interaction with product market competition, and concludes.



1    History of U.S. Railroads and Gauge Standards

Diversity in gauge characterized U.S. railroads for most of the 19th century. The first railroads were
built with a local or at most regional scope, and "there was little expectation that [they] would one
day form an independent, interconnected" network (Puffert 2009), obviating any perceived benefits
of coordinating on a common gauge. Gauges were instead chosen by each railroad's chief engineer,
and without clear evidence of an optimal gauge standard, diversity proliferated. As Puffert (2009)
recounts, the first wave of construction in the 1830s used four distinct gauges (4' 8.5'', 4' 9'', 4' 10'',
and 5' 0''), a second wave in the 1840s added three broader gauges to the mix (5' 4'', 5' 6'', 6' 0''),

                                                    4
and a "third wave of experimentation" in the second half of the century introduced several narrow
gauges, the most common of which were 3' 0'' and 3' 6''. Amongst this set, only 4' 8.5'' and 4' 9''
were mutually compatible and allowed for a seamless exchange of traffic.3

The industry nevertheless recognized the advantages of interoperability, as subsequent construction
typically adopted the gauge of neighboring railroads. By the 1860s, a national network had begun
to emerge, but it was plagued by breaks in gauge as well as minor gaps in the physical network ­
such that there were nine distinct "gauge regions" in the U.S. during the Civil War, and a tenth in
Canada, each predominantly using a different gauge than neighboring regions. Panel (A) of Figure
1 shows the state of U.S. railroads east of the Mississippi River at this time, identifying lines with
4' 8.5'' ("standard" gauge), 5' 0'' ("Southern" gauge), and other track widths.


                                                  [Figure 1 about here]


In the 1850s, each break in gauge imposed a full-day delay on through shipments and necessitated
significant labor and capital for transshipment, which at the time was performed manually, aided by
cranes (Poor 1851, Taylor and Neu 1956). Diversity also required railroads to preserve a large fleet
of idle rolling stock at each break for transferring freight. By the 1870s, several adapter technologies
had developed to reduce these costs, the most common of which was bogie exchange, whereby each
rail car was raised by a steam-powered hoist, and its chassis ("bogie" or "truck") replaced with one
of a different gauge. Bogie exchange required not only steam hoists and extra labor for switching
trucks, but also rail yards full of empty trucks of both gauges, side tracks, extra buildings, and
extra clerical workers, and although changing a single rail car took only a few minutes, a full train
could take much longer and might have to wait for exchange facilities to become available. Bogie
exchange also yielded a mismatched car and bogie, which damaged tracks, had to run at reduced
speeds, and were at risk of tipping on curves. The true cost of incompatibility was thus considerably
higher than the physical act of interchange alone (McHenry 1875).

After the Civil War (1861-1865), several pressures coincided to induce private efforts towards stan-
dardization, including growing demand for interregional shipment, growing trade in time-sensitive
perishable goods, competition (within routes), and consolidation (across routes). Despite known
technical shortcomings (Puffert 2009), 4' 8.5'' became the standard to which railroads conformed:
not only did standard gauge comprise a majority of U.S. mileage in every decade since the first
3
    See Puffert (2009) for a comprehensive discussion of the origins of U.S. railroad gauge. To this day, experts' opinion
    over the optimal gauge varies, though the choice is (i) understood to vary with operating conditions, and (ii) involves
    tradeoffs, such that there is no dominating standard. Even so, experts tend to agree that wider gauge is preferable
    to the modern standard (4' 8.5'') for its speed, stability, and carrying capacity (Puffert 2009).


                                                              5
railroads were built, but it was also the principal gauge in the Northeast and Midwest, the loci of
trade in manufactured and agricultural goods. By the early 1880s, the common-gauge regions using
4' 10'', 5' 6'', and 6' 0'' had all converted to standard gauge, effectively leaving only two gauges in
widespread use: 5' 0'' in the South, and 4' 8.5'' in the rest of the country.4


1.1    The Southern Railway & Steamship Association

Concurrent with (but independent of) these trends, Southern freight carriers had organized into
the SRSA cartel in 1875, following a series of price wars. The cartel's express purpose was price
maintenance: the cartel agreement states an intention of achieving "a proper correlation of rates,"
to protect its members and consumers from "irregular and fluctuating" prices (SRSA 1875). Mem-
bership was open to all railroads and steamships operating south of the Potomac and Ohio Rivers
and east of the Mississippi and included nearly all major carriers in the region. Despite a rocky
start, and no clear model to follow, by the 1880s the SRSA was sophisticated, successful, and "one
of the most powerful and disciplined" traffic pools in the country (White 1993) ­ one documented
several times over (e.g., Hudson 1890, Joubert 1949, Argue 1990).5

The cartel had its own full-time administration, which had the responsibility of carrying out the
terms of the cartel agreement, making new rules as necessary, and settling internal disputes. The
mechanism used to ensure that members adhered to the prices set by the cartel's rate committee
was apportionment: carriers serving a competed route were allotted a fixed proportion of traffic,
determined by "the average amount of freight hauled in past years" (Joubert 1949). In the cartel's
early years, carriers who exceeded their allotment were required to submit the excess revenue for
redistribution to other members, less a one-cent (later half-cent) per ton-mile allowance for the cost
of carriage. This plan quickly unraveled when members reneged ex-post, and the agreement was
amended to require members to deposit 20% of revenue with the cartel at the time of shipment,
out of which these transfers would be made. To enforce the agreement, the cartel installed agents
at stations to record carriers' daily traffic and revenue, appointed inspectors to ensure that freight
was being properly weighed and classified, and regularly audited members' accounting records. For


4
  Over this same period, physical gaps in the network were also being closed by cross-town connections between depots
  (e.g., Richmond in 1867) and bridges over the major rivers (e.g., the Ohio River at Louisville in 1868 and Cincinnati
  in 1877), such that differences in gauge were the primary obstacle to a physically integrated network.
5
  The SRSA both preceded and was the model for future railroad cartels, including the Joint Executive Committee,
  which governed railroads running between the Midwest and East Coast and has been widely studied in the economics
  literature (e.g., Ulen 1979, Porter 1983, Ellison 1994, and others). Though the SRSA has received less attention,
  contemporaries claimed that it "came nearer to fulfilling the purposes for which it was intended than any other
  association ever formed for the regulation of competition in this country" (Haines 1905).


                                                          6
a select set of routes, the cartel also compiled these data into monthly traffic reports, which it then
circulated to cartel members and which have since been preserved.

The amended mechanism proved so effective that in 1887, the cartel reported that "since 1878, all
balances have been paid and rates thoroughly maintained," excepting one month in 1878 (Hudson
1890) ­ a sharp contrast to frequent pre-cartel rate wars. There are several reasons why the cartel
was successful, beginning with the mechanism itself, which muted carriers' incentives to cut prices
to capture a greater share of traffic. Railroads that refused to join the cartel were denied through
traffic, which effectively amounted to a boycott. The SRSA also demonstrated early on that when
competing carriers (members or not) deviated from cartel prices, it would act quickly and decisively
by setting destructively low rates until cartel pricing was restored.

The passage of the Interstate Commerce Act (ICA) in February 1887 presented a new threat to the
cartel. The ICA prohibited traffic pooling, making the cartel's apportionment mechanism illegal,
but the act "by no means put an end to the power of the Association" (Hudson 1890).6 The SRSA
responded by transitioning to a system of fines for price deviations, with mileage-based deposits,
and it continued collecting and disseminating members' traffic and revenue. The SRSA continued
to operate in this way until 1890, when the Sherman Act delivered the lethal blow by prohibiting
combinations in restraint of trade. At this point, the cartel stopped circulating traffic data. Though
it took several years for the courts to resolve initial ambiguities over whether the SRSA met the
statute's definition, by 1897 the cartel had dissolved.


1.2       The Gauge Change

As trade between the South and other regions accelerated after the Civil War, incompatibilities
became increasingly costly: by the 1880s, "not a prominent point could be found on the border [of
the South] without its hoist and acres of extra trucks" (Hudson 1887), and the total cost of delays
were growing one-for-one with volume. The first cracks in the 5' 0'' network developed in 1881 and
1885, when two major lines linking the Midwest to the South (the Illinois Central and the Mobile &
Ohio) converted their tracks to standard gauge, increasing pressure on their Southern competitors
and connections to follow suit, and providing a template for execution.

At the cartel's annual convention in July 1885, representatives of member railroads discussed the
severity of the compatibility problem and concluded they would convert to standard gauge in the
6
    The act had little impact in its early years, and if anything may have empowered carriers and helped stabilized
    prices (Prager 1989, Blonigen and Cristea 2013), consistent with the revisionist interpretation of Kolko (1965), who
    notes that railroads welcomed the regulation. Other sources suggest that the content of the ICA, and the Interstate
    Commerce Commission it created, were subject to near-total regulatory capture.


                                                            7
following year, and at a follow-on meeting on February 2-3, 1886, these railroads committed to and
began preparing a mass conversion to a 4' 9'', standard-compatible gauge on May 31 and June 1 of
that year.7 The gauge change was carefully planned and seamlessly executed: in the weeks leading
up to the event, railroads removed the ties on their tracks and took a subset of their rolling stock
(rail cars, locomotives) out of service to adjust its gauge; then, on the evening of May 30, all traffic
halted, and teams of hired labor worked up and down each line, removing remaining ties, shifting
one rail 3'' inwards, resetting ties, and moving to the next segment. By midday on June 1, 13,000
miles of track had been converted to 4' 9'', and traffic had resumed, with freight now moving freely
across Southern borders in a physically integrated railroad network.8

To verify the scale of the conversion, I collect individual railroads' gauges and mileage from Poor's
Manual of Railroads (1882-1890), an annual publication listing the universe of railroads in North
America. Table 1 shows the fraction of railroad track in standard-compatible gauge by region and
year throughout the 1880s. Whereas other regions generally had 95% of their track in standard or
standard-compatible gauge by 1881, nearly 70% of Southern railroad mileage began the decade in
5' 0'' gauge. The discrepancy remained until the year of the gauge change: between 1885 and 1887,
the total in 5' 0'' gauge declined by 13,006 miles, and the fraction of Southern railroad in standard
or standard-compatible gauge discretely jumped from 29% to 92%. Panels (B) and (C) of Figure 1
show the updated gauge of the 1861 railroad network as of 1881 and 1891, respectively (omitting
new construction), illustrating the geographic scope of the conversion.


                                               [Table 1 about here]


The historical record suggests that network externalities were important in propelling the gauge
change and were recognized by contemporaries. The returns to adopting a compatible gauge were
low for railroads on the periphery if interior neighbors did not follow ­ the effect would be to
shift the break from the top to the bottom of the line, with no benefits to through traffic ­ and
negative for interior railroads acting alone. But the gains were higher in a coordinated, regional
7
  The 4' 9'' gauge was chosen to match that of the Pennsylvania Railroad, an important connection in the Mid-Atlantic,
  and because it was thought that the smaller adjustment would reduce the cost of converting rolling stock (Puffert
  2009), but it was understood to be compatible with the 4' 8.5'' standard (Puffert 2009); as Taylor and Neu (1956)
  write, "such a deviation was not considered a serious obstacle to through shipment."
8
  The execution of the gauge change is covered in greater depth by several other sources (e.g., Hudson 1887, Taylor
  and Neu 1956, and Puffert 2009). Extrapolating from the costs of converting the Louisville & Nashville (detailed
  in its 1886 annual report) to all 5' 0'' mileage, the total cost of the gauge change was likely at least $1.2 million
  in 1886, equivalent to $31 million today ­ but another, smaller Southern railroad (the Cincinnati, New Orleans, &
  Texas Pacific) spent nearly twice as much per mile. To put the cost in perspective, the L&N's expenditure on the
  gauge change was 30% of its construction expense in 1886 and 37% of net income, and the CNO&TP's expenditure
  was roughly 1.6 times the previous annual direct cost of its breaks in gauge.


                                                          8
conversion. The cartel thus appears to have supported the gauge change in several ways. First, it
provided an institutional venue for coordinating on a common gauge and organizing the conversion
event itself. But equally importantly, collusion internalized the externalities of compatibility, and
non-competitive pricing ensured that railroads could recoup the cost of the conversion. Without
either collusion or consolidation, it is possible the gauge change itself might not have occurred at
this time or scale ­ a question which I explore further in Section 4.



2     Data and Empirical Design

I use SRSA records of freight traffic into and out of the South by railroad and steamship to
study the effects of the gauge change.9 I restrict attention to annual merchandise shipments from
Northern port cities to cities in the interior South, as merchandise comprised the largest fraction of
tonnage in the South at this time and an even greater fraction of value (U.S. Department of Interior
1883).10 The sample throughout the paper is a balanced panel of 52 North-South routes (4 origins
x 13 destinations) with merchandise shipments apportioned, monitored, and reported by the cartel
before and after the gauge change, observed over the 1883-84 to 1889-90 fiscal years. Appendix
Figure A.2 maps the origins and destinations in this sample. The gauge change coincides precisely
with the end of the SRSA's 1885-86 fiscal year on May 31.

Due to the diffuse ownership of the network, shipments to the interior South necessarily traversed
multiple railroads, or a steamship and a railroad, to reach their destination. The SRSA tables
report traffic and revenue by routing (see Appendix A), which I aggregate up to mode: all-rail
versus steamship. I include separate observations for the two all-rail paths into the South, the
Atlantic Coast Line (ACL) and the Piedmont Air Line (PAL), each of whose constituent railroads
shared a common owner, and which are explicitly denoted in the SRSA tables. The primary sample
thus has 1,092 (= 52 · 3 · 7) observations at the route-mode-year level.11

The analysis begins with a simple comparison of all-rail and steamship traffic within individual
9
 Route-level traffic data (both freight and passenger) from this period are rare. Data on the routes in this paper
 are available only because they were compiled into tables which were circulated to SRSA members, by order of
 the cartel's commissioner, and later bound and preserved. Despite an extended effort, I have been unable to find
 comparable data for other routes to supplement those studied below, nor to find data to study earlier conversions,
 such as those by the Illinois Central or Mobile & Ohio, which were not members of the cartel.
10
   Cotton shipments in the reverse direction comprise a smaller sample, were dwindling over the period due to growth
   in Southern textile production, and could potentially be influenced by fluctuations in foreign demand, and are
   thus excluded. Shipments of merchandise and commodities from the Midwest are also excluded, as they grew
   rapidly over the decade and only became part of the collusive agreement (and thus, had their traffic monitored and
   recorded) beginning in 1887, subsequent to the gauge change (Hudson 1890).
11
   To simplify the exposition, the specifications below are presented as if the ACL and PAL were aggregated into a
   single observation, but the tables in Section 3 include them as separate observations.


                                                         9
routes before and after the gauge change. Because they bypassed breaks in gauge, steamships were
not directly affected by the gauge change and accordingly provide a comparison group for all-rail
shipments. However, breaks in gauge imposed a fixed cost on through shipments, such that they
were a larger proportion of total costs on short routes relative to long routes. I therefore relax
the effects to vary with distance ­ with this approach, the longer, less-affected routes then serve
as a triple-difference control group against the shorter and more intensively-treated ones. These
specifications are thus estimated in a triple-difference form:

                   ln (Qmrt ) = 0 + 1 Railm + 2 P ostt + 3 Distr

                                 + 4 Railm P ostt + 5 Railm Distr + 6 P ostt Distr

                                 + 7 Railm P ostt Distr + Xmrt  + mrt ,                               (1)

where Qmrt is pounds of traffic carried by mode m, on route r, in year t; Railm is an indicator
for the all-rail mode (ACL and PAL); P ostt indicates the post-period; and Distr is the distance
from origin to destination (in hundreds of miles). Throughout the analysis, I measure straight-line
distance, rather than traveled distance, which is not observed for either mode and unobservable for
seaborne shipments (contemporary sources in Appendix A indicate straight-line and rail network
distance are in fixed proportion for the sampled routes). The Xmrt term includes an assortment of
fixed effects. In all specifications, I cluster standard errors by route, though the results are robust to
allowing spatial correlation in the error term that declines linearly in the distance between Southern
destinations up to 20-, 50-, 100-, and 200-mile cutoffs (Conley 1999).

It is important to note that although the above specification will determine whether all-rail and
steamship traffic diverged following the gauge change, and is useful for evaluating the robustness
of the results to an assortment of fixed effects or controls, it does not precisely identify the effects
of standardization on the level of all-rail shipments, as steamships may have simultaneously lost
traffic to railroads. For a different view of the data not subject to this qualification, I estimate a
simple logit demand model on market shares, rather than quantities, which can account for this
interdependence. Suppose mode shares are generated by discrete consumer choices, for which mode
m on route r in year t has latent utility that is a function of the mode and period (all-rail versus
steamship, before versus after the gauge change), the interaction with distance, and other fixed
route-mode and route-year specific characteristics mr and rt :

                      uimrt = 0 Railm + 1 Railm P ostt + 2 Railm P ostt Distr

                                + mr + rt + mrt + imrt  µmrt + imrt ,


                                                   10
where imrt is an error term distributed type-I extreme value. The market share for each mode
                   exp(µmrt )
is then smrt =         exp(µ    rt )
                                       , which is jointly determined with that of the other mode. Indexing
                  =1,2

railroads as m = 1 and steamships as m = 2, we can reduce to:

                         ln(s1rt ) - ln(s2rt ) = µ1rt - µ2rt

                                        = ~0 + ~1 P ostt + ~2 P ostt Distr + r + rt ,                  (2)

Finally, to evaluate the effects of the gauge change on combined traffic, I collapse the sample to
route-years and estimate a regression for route-level shipments:

                          ln (Qrt ) = 0 + 1 P ostt + 2 P ostt Distr + r + rt                           (3)

To the extent that the gauge change differentially impacted shorter versus longer routes, the effects
on route-level shipments should emerge in the interaction.



3     Standardization and Freight Shipments

In this section, I examine the first-order effects of the gauge change, showing that the standardiza-
tion of Southern gauge triggered a redistribution of traffic from steamships to railroads but does not
appear to have affected total shipments on these routes. It may be helpful to provide a roadmap to
these results in advance. I first present descriptive statistics for the sampled routes, pre- and post-
gauge change, which foreshadow the results that follow. I then estimate the effects of the gauge
change on all-rail versus steamship traffic, as well as on overall shipments, where the empirical
puzzle emerges. At the end of the section, I discuss possible explanations for the results, focusing
especially on the ways in which cartel pricing may have limited the growth in total shipments and
(implicitly) the consumer welfare gains from standardization.


3.1   Descriptive Statistics

Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the sampled routes, comparing shorter and longer routes
(<25th and >75th percentiles, respectively), pre- versus post-gauge change. The table shows means
and standard errors of tonnage, revenue, and all-rail shares. The shorter routes in the sample had
less traffic than longer routes throughout the sample period but carried more of this traffic by rail.
Total shipments grew at similar rates for the shorter and longer routes over the sample period.
However, following the gauge change, the all-rail share of traffic on shorter routes jumped from


                                                         11
an average of 40% to an average of 56%, an increase significant beyond the one percent level. In
contrast, the all-rail share on longer routes declined from 23% to 19%, not a statistically significant
difference. These results provide the first hints of the puzzle that will emerge below: the gauge
change was important enough to prompt substitution across modes, but evidently not enough to
increase aggregate shipments in the short- to medium-run.


                                                 [Table 2 about here]


3.2       Effects of the Gauge Change

3.2.1       Distributional Effects

Table 3 estimates the specification in Equation (1), with a slight transformation to estimate mode-
specific constants instead of shared constants (for purposes of presentation). Column (1) estimates
this model as specified, and Columns (2) through (6) add an assortment of fixed effects for routes,
years, route-modes, and route-years. Only the focal, post-period parameters are shown in the table,
which measure within-mode changes over time (Columns 1 to 4), or alternatively, when comparisons
are within route-years, the mode difference-in-differences (Columns 5 and 6).12


                                                 [Table 3 about here]


This first cut indicates that after the gauge change, all-rail traffic increased and steamship traffic
declined on the (more intensively-treated) shorter routes in the data, with these effects diminishing
with route length (indeed, in the data, the pattern inverts for the longest routes, with steamship
traffic growing and all-rail traffic falling on these routes, which serve as a comparison group; see
Table 2). To put the magnitudes in perspective, the estimates imply a 50% increase in all-rail
traffic and 30% decrease in steamship traffic on the shortest route in the sample (500 miles), and
inverted patterns on routes longer than 700 to 800 miles.

In Table 4, I split the all-rail estimates by carrier, to both (i) confirm that effects are present for
each of the two all-rail paths into South (the ACL and PAL) and (ii) explore any heterogeneity
in their magnitude. We see effects for both paths, with the initially less-trafficked one (the ACL)
seeing a larger percent increase in traffic (off of its lower base). I also find that the effects dissipate
to zero at similar distances for the two routings (roughly 700 miles).
12
     In Columns (5) and (6), all residual variation is between modes, and the steamship coefficients drop out of the
     regression (being absorbed by the fixed effects). The all-rail coefficients in these columns are comparable to the
     difference between all-rail and steamship coefficients in the previous columns.


                                                           12
                                         [Table 4 about here]


As previously discussed, a specification in quantities can establish whether all-rail and steamship
traffic diverged following the gauge change, and whether the results are robust to controls. However,
steamships are a problematic control group, due to the interdependence of all-rail and steamship
traffic with imperfect competition: steamships may have also been affected by the gauge change
if they lost traffic to railroads, and as a result, they do not provide a clean counterfactual to the
railroads. For an alternative approach, in Table 5 I estimate a simple logit demand model that
accounts for this interdependence (Equation 2), in which the outcome variable is the log difference
in all-rail and steamship shares of traffic in the given route-year. In taking this difference, most
of the fixed effects from the previous table are eliminated, such that Table 5 contains only two
variants of the regression: without and with route fixed effects.


                                         [Table 5 about here]


The results continue to show positive effects on all-rail shares that decline with distance, significant
beyond the one percent level. The estimates are similar across the two specifications, and the effect
of the gauge change is estimated to dissipate at roughly 720 miles, statistically and economically
comparable to the previous tables. When these effects are split out for the ACL and PAL, they are
again larger for the less-trafficked ACL, consistent with previous results.

In Appendix D, I test the sensitivity of these results to dropping individual origins, destinations,
and years from the cartel sample. Given the limited number of routes (52) and the somewhat short
panel (3 years pre-gauge change, 4 years post), these checks are necessary to establish that the
results are not driven by outliers or subsamples (for example, by routes originating in Baltimore,
the origin nearest to the South). I find consistent results throughout. I also run similar regressions
for revenue, which is provided alongside the traffic statistics in the SRSA tables, and find identical
effects of the gauge change in sign and magnitude. This result is a natural consequence of the high
correlation between quantities and revenues in the data ( = 0.99).


3.2.2   Aggregate Effects

The results thus far show that the gauge change caused growth in all-rail market share, but leave
ambiguous to what degree this effect is strictly substitution across modes versus new activity in
the market. Table 6 addresses this question, collapsing the data to the route level and examining


                                                  13
the effects on total traffic and revenue (Equation 3). The even-numbered columns include route
fixed effects. Across all specifications, we see no evidence that shorter routes (where previous
tables showed the gauge change had the strongest effects on market shares) grew more quickly than
longer routes following the gauge change: the variation in the post-gauge change growth in traffic
for routes of different length is a true, and precisely-estimated, zero.13

                                                 [Table 6 about here]


3.2.3       Other Views of the Data

We can also break these regressions out into annual effects, to test for pre-trends and to explore how
the response to the gauge change varied over time. A priori it is unclear whether the effects would
be immediate or would phase in: on the one hand, the change was immediate and comprehensive,
and improved service available from the first day after the conversion; on the other hand, it may
have taken time for information to spread, or for shippers to adjust. I estimate Equations 1 and
3 with route fixed effects for (i) all-rail versus steamship traffic and (ii) combined traffic, allowing
the coefficients to vary by year. The estimates are plotted in Figure 2.

                                                 [Figure 2 about here]

Relative to the omitted year of 1884, differences between all-rail and steamship traffic did not vary
in a statistically significant way in the years leading up to the gauge change (Panel A). However,
beginning in 1887 (the first year post-gauge change), we see a growing divergence through the end
of the panel, leveling out by around 1890. As in the regression tables, these effects are strongest for
short routes and tempered by distance. Total shipments, however, are relatively stable throughout
the period for both short and long routes (Panel B).


3.3       Explaining the Results

The evidence that the gauge change shifted traffic from steamships to railroads is sensible, albeit
non-obvious, given contemporary use of adapter technologies. But juxtaposed against this result,
13
     In unreported analysis, I also verify that the estimates in Table 3 are consistent with on average a net zero effect
     on total shipments, and one that does not vary with route length. To do so, I begin with the true (observed) log
     shipments for each route-mode-year in the pre-gauge change sample, apply the estimates from Column (1) of Table
     3 to calculate (linearly-projected) counterfactual log quantities with standardized gauge, exponentiate to levels,
     aggregate up to observed and counterfactual total quantities for route-years, and calculate the difference between
     them, as a measure of the implied "aggregate effect" of the gauge change at the route level. The average difference
     is 0.5% of observed values (25th percentile -5.4%, 75th percentile 7.0%), and more importantly, consistent with the
     results in Table 6, this difference is uncorrelated with route length ( = 0.07).


                                                            14
the lack of an effect on total shipments poses an empirical puzzle. An additional piece of evidence
to be considered is what happened to cartel prices: the SRSA's Circular Letters periodically include
rate tables, which list current cartel freight rates on different routes, by class of merchandise. These
tables show the prices that all carriers on the given route were committed to charging shippers,
and they make it possible to track route-level price changes over time.

Figure 3 shows the distribution of rate changes on the routes in these circulars that are also in the
sample for this paper (total of 36 routes, out of the 52 routes with traffic data). Panels A to D show
a histogram of changes in class-level freight rates between July 1883, April 1884, February 1885,
July 1885, and March 1886, a few months prior to the gauge change. Panel E shows the equivalent
histogram for March 1886 to July 1887, one year after the gauge change. Each observation is a
route-class, and with 36 routes and 13 freight rate classes, there are 468 observations per panel.
An overwhelming fraction of routes do not see any price changes after April 1884, and the handful
of price changes after the gauge change were (small) increases, rather than decreases, and limited
to two routes: Philadelphia-Montgomery and Philadelphia-Selma.14


                                                 [Figure 3 about here]


Theoretical predictions for prices are ambiguous, as the quality of all-rail service increased at the
same time as the cost of providing that service declined. For example, if the gauge change caused
all-rail demand to shift out and marginal costs to decline on short routes, equilibrium prices could
in principle be unchanged ­ although in a classical supply-and-demand framework, total quantities
would then necessarily increase, so the puzzle remains. But there are other reasons why prices may
have been rigid. For example, cartel freight rates applied uniformly to all carriers on a route to
avoid perceptions that individual members were favored, and steamship companies in the cartel
were unlikely to agree to rate reductions, as were interior railroads ­ neither of which saw direct
cost savings as a result of the gauge change. A closer reading of SRSA documents reveals that the
rate-setting process was contentious, and in the event of disagreement, rate-setting escalated to the
cartel's board of arbitrators, which in practice was often the rate-setting body. Given the absence
of price changes, either the matter was never raised for discussion or the board of arbitrators did
not view a rate reduction as the appropriate action. In effect, it appears that the cartel believed
prices were sufficiently close to profit-maximizing to leave them unchanged.
14
     Cartel prices were not always this stable: until the early 1880s, prices were reduced regularly, under pressures of
     competition from alternative routing outside the scope of the cartel. Multiple sources have documented this decline,
     while also observing that price reductions ended in the early- to mid-1880s (e.g., Hudson (1890) documents prices
     from Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore to Atlanta from 1875 onward, and shows that rate reductions
     occurred every 1-2 years until 1884, after which rates went unchanged).


                                                            15
That this price rigidity explains the empirical puzzle is merely one possibility. Another possibility
is that the market for final goods needed more time to adjust, and the panel is too short to see the
aggregate effects materialize. It might also be that on the demand side, the choice over mode was
simply more elastic to the gauge change than the decision to ship at all. However, the presence of
a well-functioning cartel is a conspicuous feature of the setting which likely contributed to these
outcomes. In the next section, I use theory to explore how the gauge change and its observed effects
might relate to collusion. Proofs are provided in Appendix E.



4     Compatibility and Collusion

4.1   Incentives for standardization

Suppose that to get from a Northern origin on the 4' 8.5'' network to a Southern destination on
the 5' 0'' network, a shipment may traverse up to two connecting Southern railroads, R1 and R2.
Shipments from the North to D1 (at the endpoint of R1) and D2 (at the endpoint of R2) incur a
fixed cost of  per ton for interchange at the border, as illustrated in the inset below:


                           North                  R1              R2
                          (4' 8.5'')            (5' 0'')        (5' 0'')
                                                           D1              D2
                                            



Annual shipments (e.g., tonnage) to destination d can be written Q(Pd ) = Md - aPd , where Md
is the market size, Pd is the freight tariff (per ton), and a > 0 (to simplify the task of illustrating
basic principles, I invoke linear demand throughout this section). We will assume D1 is a waypoint
and D2 is a larger market (or collection of markets) further downstream, with M2 > 2M1 , which is
broadly consistent with the historical setting. Suppose R1's segment is length    1   and R2's is   2,   and
let cd denote the per-ton shipment cost to d incurred independent of any breaks in gauge (the cost
of carriage), which is proportional to route length. Shipment revenue and costs are in turn divided
among the carriers involved, as they appear to have been historically (for example, for shipments
to D1 , R1 retains all revenue but also bears all of the costs, whereas for shipments to D2 , R1 and
R2 divide costs and revenues proportionally; see Appendix B). Let the railroads' cost of converting
to standard gauge be C1 and C2 , also proportional to route length.

To simplify the exposition, I will further assume that R1 and R2 are equal length, and that breaks
in gauge create an interchange cost but do not directly enter demand, though these assumptions

                                                  16
are not essential to the results and can be relaxed, as the latter will be in the next section. Because
 1    =   2,   we can define c  c1 be the cost of carriage to D1 , such that 2c is the cost to D2 , and let
C  C 1 = C2 be each railroad's cost of standardizing its gauge.

In this setting, each firm's returns to standardization depends on the other's choice. If R1 converts
alone, a gauge break is eliminated for shipments to D1 but remains for those to D2 , as the break
moves down the line. If R2 converts alone, a second break would be introduced for shipments to
D2 . And if R1 and R2 both adopt standard gauge, breaks are removed entirely, eliminating the
cost of interchange. Prices may decline as well, insofar as the cost savings are passed through to
prices. To allow for this possibility, we must specify the railroads' profit maximization problem.
R1 and R2 thus set prices {Pd } to each destination d to maximize:


                                         d (Pd ) = (Pd - cd )Qd - (Bd Qd )


where d are the profits on shipments to destination d, and Bd denotes the number of gauge breaks
en route to destination d (each incurring a cost of ). Taking into account the division of profits by
R1 and R2, firm-specific profits are R1 = 1 + 1            1
                                              2 2 and R2 = 2 2 , respectively. This construction
leads to the following lemma characterizing the payoffs to standardization, where the superscripts
in the notation indicate the choices of R1 and R2, respectively.

Lemma 1. Standardization can generate the following payoffs to R1 and R2 relative to the status
quo, before accounting for the fixed cost of conversion C :
                               10 > 0,  10 = 0
      a. If R1 converts alone: R 1     R2

                               01 < 0,  01 < 0
      b. If R2 converts alone: R 1     R2

                                       11 >  10 ,  11 > 0
      c. If R1 and R2 convert jointly: R 1  R1    R2


                                                                 10 < C <  11 , such that
In view of this lemma, we will make one more assumption: suppose R 1      R2

this cost is at least as large as the direct savings that R1 would realize if it converted to standard
gauge alone (otherwise R1 would have already done so), but not so large that it R2 would never
find it profitable to standardize its gauge.15 As long as this is the case, the following proposition
establishes that there are two equilibria of the simultaneous-move game in the adoption of standard
gauge: joint conversion and the status quo (no change).
15                                                         10       11
     The size of the downstream market ensures that R       1 < R2 (see Appendix E). The independent conversions
     of the Illinois Central and the Mobile & Ohio can be explained in this model as a violation of this assumption,
                10
     where R     1 > C ­ meaning that it was profitable to convert to standard gauge alone. This can be the case if, for
     example, the markets which these lines directly served were sufficiently large.


                                                            17
                                                       10 < C <  11 , there are two equilibria
Proposition 1. In the absence of competition, provided R 1      R2

for standardization: either both firms convert to standard gauge, or neither firm converts (the status
quo). Unilateral conversion to standard gauge is never an equilibrium.

Standardization is thus an equilibrium (and the Pareto-efficient) outcome in this model, but given
that the status quo is also an equilibrium, conversion requires coordinated decision-making. This
coordinated effort was supported by the existence of the cartel, beginning with the discussion at
the cartel's annual convention in July 1885 where members agreed to convert their tracks, and the
meeting half a year later where they finalized the date of the conversion, selected the new gauge,
and planned the technical details of how to execute the change.16

To see the importance of collusive pricing to standardization, now suppose service is competed. We
can add symmetric railroads R3 and R4, which compete against R1 and R2 to provide service to
D2 , through a different intermediate point D3 as illustrated below:

                                                                D1
                                                      R1                   R2
                            North
                                                              (5' 0'')                  Destination
                           (4' 8.5'')
                                                      R3                   R4      D2
                                                
                                                                D3


Consider shipments to D2 (the only route on which the carriers compete), and let QR12 and QR34
be the quantity (in tons) carried by R1-R2 and R3-R4, but now let:


                               Qi (P, B ) = M - Bi - aPi                 for i, j  {R12 , R34 }


where Bi indicates the presence of a gauge break on i,  is the direct effect of breaks on demand,
and the other parameters are defined as before. As long as they are on the same gauge, shipment to
via R1-R2 and R3-R4 is undifferentiated, demand will go to the lower-priced routing, and prices will
be competed to marginal cost (as they often were throughout this era in the absence of collusion,
e.g. Chandler 1977, Kolko 1965). If both R1-R2 and R3-R4 standardize, the per-ton cost savings
() will be passed through, leaving the firms with no means of recovering the fixed cost of changing
the gauge (C ). As a result, collective standardization is not an equilibrium outcome. If instead the
16
     It is worth noting that this proposition is in part a function of the static nature of the game. With multiple periods
     and sufficiently patient players, one party might be able to standardize at a short-run cost but realize long-run
     profits if its neighbors are then incentivized to follow. Indeed, the history (of other railroads) in Section 1 suggests
     that standardization of Southern railroads' gauge might have nevertheless eventually taken place in the absence of
     collusion, albeit perhaps not as early, as quickly, or at the same scale.


                                                              18
carriers collude and set prices jointly, the Proposition 2 establishes that collective standardization
can be an equilibrium outcome with mild regularity conditions.

Proposition 2. Collective standardization is only an equilibrium outcome with collusion.


4.2   Effects of standardization under collusion

The results thus far have demonstrated two ways in which collusion may have facilitated the gauge
change, via coordination and incentives. However, collusion may have also tempered the effects on
prices and total shipments if it limited pass-through, relative to what the effects would have been in
a competitive environment. Even if the gauge change would have been less likely in a competitive
market, this counterfactual offers a comparative benchmark. Can we explain the absence of a
significant effect on prices or total quantities in the data with collusion?

To explore this question, we can continue to focus on a single route between an arbitrary Northern
origin and Southern destination, as above, but enrich the model and now assume that rather than
being served by two railroads, it is served by a railroad and a steamship (these can be interpreted
as vertically-integrated all-rail versus steamship-to-rail, and are differentiated). Let QR and QS
represent the quantity carried by railroad and by steamship, with:


               Qi (P, B) = M - Bi + Bj - aPi + bPj            for i, j  {R, S }, i = j


where Bi indicates the presence of a break on mode i (breaks in gauge for all-rail / intermediate
ports requiring transshipment for steamships);  is the direct effect of these breaks on demand,
and can be interpreted as a quality parameter; a and b are own- and cross-price effects on demand,
with a > b > 0; and M is the market size, which henceforth will be normalized to M = 1. Each
mode's demand is thus a function of own price and quality and the other mode's price and quality.
As written, breaks in gauge have offsetting direct effects on demand (±), such that market shares
are sensitive to service quality, but total shipments are not ­ a feature which is necessary but not
sufficient in explaining the earlier empirical patterns, as prices will also be endogenous to breaks
in gauge and can shift aggregate demand independently of quality.

Suppose both modes have common per-ton marginal costs c, and an incremental per-ton cost of
 incurred at breaks, where transshipment or interchange is required. If the two carriers collude,
they set a single price P which applies to both carriers to maximize joint profits, whereas if they
compete, they set prices PR and PS to maximize individual profits. With this simple model, we can


                                                  19
explore the potential effects of the gauge change on prices and shipments with competition versus
collusion. We begin by comparing collusive prices and quantities pre-gauge change (BR = BS = 1)
versus post-gauge change (BR = 0, BS = 1). Joint profits under collusion are:


                        (P, B) = (P - c)(QR + QS ) - (BR QR + BS QS )


Proposition 3 establishes that in this setting, standardization should generate a reduction in the
collusive price of a relatively low (but nonzero) fraction of the cost savings, modestly increase
total shipments, and shift market share to the all-rail carrier. An immediate corollary is that
there are two conditions under which prices and total shipments may not be affected by the gauge
change, even as market share shifts across the two modes: (i) if  = 0, such that transshipment
and interchange were actually costless, or (ii) if there is a transaction cost to cartel price changes,
and this cost exceeds the incremental profits that the carriers would realize by adjusting prices
after standardizing the gauge. In the first case, breaks in gauge enter demand but not supply
costs. The elimination of the gauge break will increase demand for all-rail shipping and generate
an offsetting reduction in demand for steamships, and these effects in turn offset in the price-setting
problem, such that the profit-maximizing cartel price is unchanged. In the latter case, small price
adjustments may be too costly to justify, due to uncertainty or disagreement among cartel members
over such changes and the previously-discussed difficulty of re-negotiation.

Proposition 3. Effects of standardization on collusive price and quantities
                                                                 1
Eliminating the break in gauge reduces the collusive price by    4 ,   redistributes market share from
steamships to all-rail, and increases total shipments by 1
                                                         2  (a - b).


Corollary 3.1. Conditions under which prices and total quantity may not change
(i) If  = 0, the collusive price and total shipments are unaffected by removing the break in gauge.
(ii) If  > 0, and collusive prices and quantities do not adjust after removing the break in gauge,
the cost of price adjustments must be greater than the foregone profits, 1 2
                                                                         8  (a - b).



4.3   Effects of standardization in differentiated oligopoly

For comparison, we can evaluate the effects of the gauge change on prices, market shares, and total
shipments when the two carriers compete on prices. We will consider the same route, but we now
permit that the two carriers set their respective prices PR and PS individually and competitively




                                                  20
in equilibrium. Each carrier's profits are thus:


                          i (P, B) = (Pi - c)Qi - Bi Qi      for i  {R, S }


In this setting, the conversion to standard gauge has an ambiguous effect on the all-rail price,
with upward pressure from increased demand and downward pressure from the reduction in costs.
Steamship prices, however, unambiguously decline, due to their relative drop in demand. Substitu-
tion across modes still takes place, as in the collusive scenario, but more notably, total shipments
will increase by more than they do in the collusive environment.

Proposition 4. Effects of standardization in a competitive market
Eliminating the break in gauge has an ambiguous effect on the all-rail price, depending on the size
of a demand effect, which puts upward pressure on the all-rail price, and the pass-through of cost
savings, which puts downward pressure. Steamship prices strictly decline, market share shifts from
                                                          a(a-b)
steamships to all-rail, and total shipments increase by    2a-b .

Corollary 4.1. Comparing the effects by market structure
Standardization generates a larger increase in total shipments under competition than collusion.


4.4   Discussion

This simple model can explain both the effect of the gauge change on mode shares and the absence
of an effect on prices and total shipments, while demonstrating that price competition may have
increased pass-through but would have also made the gauge change less likely. However, the two
explanations proposed for why cartel prices might not adjust ­ that adjustments were costly, and
that breaks in gauge were not actually costly ­ warrant further attention.

Ample evidence from cartel records ­ especially minutes from rate committee meetings ­ suggests
that price changes were relatively difficult: rate-setting was contentious, requiring unanimous agree-
ment of representatives from cartel members who almost always deadlocked. When rate cases then
escalated to the cartel's internal board of arbitrators, which could issue a ruling by simple majority,
these arbitrators often declined changes too (see Section 3).

Likewise, the historical evidence suggests that transshipment and interchange were also costly. The
most reliable measures of railroads' direct costs from breaks in gauge are accounting costs, which
can be obtained from annual reports. For example, the Cincinnati, New Orleans, & Texas Pacific
(CNO&TP, which was an SRSA member and participated in the gauge change) reported its direct

                                                   21
expense for breaks in gauge to be $32,365 in 1884 and $33,355 in 1885, or 350% and 21% of the
railroad's net income in each of these years ($9,210 and $159,011, respectively), with roughly half
this cost attributed to the operation of steam hoists, and the other half to the payroll of transfer
clerks and laborers. The CNO&TP's annual reports further note that these figures do not include
the indirect costs of "extra switching engines, extra yard crews, and no allowance is made for the
loss... from delay to business" or for the opportunity cost of "freight thereby diverted" because its
tracks are "blocked with loaded cars waiting their turn," nor do they account for the other ancillary
costs discussed in Section 1 ­ such that the accounting cost is understated. Transshipment at port
was similarly costly: although data from the 1880s are not available, in 1908, the transfer expense
for freight transshipped from coastal steamships to the Georgia Railway (a former SRSA member)
at Savannah, Georgia was 8 cents per hundred pounds for merchandise and 5 cents for commodities
­ which is on the order of 10-20% of the lowest merchandise and commodity rates for the routes in
this paper ­ and rates for other Southern ports and other Southern railroads connecting to them
were "practically the same" (U.S. Department of Commerce 1910).

Collectively, the evidence thus supports attributing the price rigidity seen in Section 3 to a com-
bination of collusion (which dampened pass-through) and costly price adjustment (which impeded
any residual changes), rather than to breaks in gauge not actually having been a material cost to
carriers, which is further contradicted by their revealed preference for standardizing the gauge. In
the absence of prices changes, total shipments were also unaffected.



5    The View from Wall Street

Taken together, the results in Sections 3 and 4 suggest the gauge change might have generated a
windfall for Southern railroads (which reduced costs and gained share), at the expense of steamship
operators (which lost share), with only limited benefits to consumers (as prices and total shipments
were evidently unaffected). Although data for studying the impact of the gauge change on con-
sumers is constrained to what is available in cartel records, our understanding of the impact on
carriers can be rounded out by studying their stock prices.

To do so, I collect daily New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) closing prices from historical editions
of the New York Times for January 1 to October 31, 1886. The vast majority of traded securities
at this time were issued by railroads (146 of 177, including preferred stock), and a dozen Southern
railroads were traded during this period. Using these data, we can perform an event study on



                                                 22
railroad stock prices around the gauge change.17 Although some information about the impending
conversion was provided in annual reports, Southern newspapers, and specialized railroad journals
(see Appendix C), the event itself was uncertain until the date drew closer, and its effects could
only be known ex-post. The gauge change appears to have not been a focus of the financial press
until May 29, when the Commercial and Financial Chronicle (CFC) published a lengthy article
notifying readers of the imminent event and explaining its importance.

I define an event window of two months around the gauge change (May 1, 1886 to June 30),
estimate a standard market returns model on the preceding four months of railroad stock returns
(through April 30, 1886), predict returns through the event window, and compute cumulative
abnormal returns for each of the Southern railroads. Throughout the exercise, I restrict the sample
to securities with at least 50 trading days in the estimation window and 100 trading days in the
full sample to ensure that all estimates and tests are sufficiently-powered, although the results are
not sensitive to the precise restriction imposed.

The gauge change coincides with large, positive abnormal returns to the Southern railroads that
were most directly affected. Figure 4 shows the cumulative abnormal returns to the Louisville &
Nashville (L&N), the largest railroad in the South by mileage and one of two that directly connected
the South to other regions and were listed on the NYSE. The L&N's cumulative abnormal returns
are near zero and roughly constant until May 29 ­ the date that the CFC article is published ­
when it realized a 4 percentage point positive abnormal return. Between May 29 and the end of
the event window, the cumulative abnormal returns grew to 17 percentage points, as the impacts
of the gauge change began to materialize. I find similar (albeit slightly higher variance) patterns
for the Richmond & Danville, another major system spanning the Southern border, but no such
effects for interior Southern railroads ­ suggesting that investors believed the benefits were mainly
realized by the lines where breaks in gauge were once located.


                                                [Figure 4 about here]


The magnitude of the cumulative abnormal returns to the L&N through the end of June suggests
that the gauge change had a substantive financial impact on the affected railroads, and paired with
earlier evidence that prices and overall quantities did not change, it suggests most of the benefits
of the gauge change were appropriated by these carriers.

17
     Note that this exercise is limited to railroads, as no steamship companies were traded on the NYSE at the time. The
     results are also limited to stock price changes and cannot be extended to measure changes in market capitalization
     (or other measures of value), because the number of outstanding shares is not observed.


                                                            23
6    Implications and Conclusion

In summary, I find that the gauge change generated significant growth in all-rail market share that
declines with route distance, but it did not affect prices or total shipments. To explain these results,
I use theory to argue that the presence of the cartel may have enabled the gauge change to take
place as it did, while likely also tempering the effects on prices and total shipments. The theory
indicates that prices and total shipments may not be affected by standardization if either cartel
price adjustments are sufficiently costly, or if interchange is in fact costless. Contemporary evidence
appears to favor the former, as cartel meeting minutes document contentious debate around price
changes, whereas railroads' annual reports demonstrate that the costs of servicing breaks in gauge
were large enough to make an otherwise-profitable railroad unprofitable, and evidence from stock
market returns indicates that investors perceived a windfall.

These results bring into focus a nuanced interaction of interoperability and product market com-
petition. Although antitrust scholars and regulators have traditionally been more concerned with
standards-setting efforts by competitors being a bridge to product market collusion, in this paper,
it appears that collusion instead contributed to standards adoption ­ but with some of the classical
downstream consequences. The tension between the two (effectively, between value creation and
consumer welfare) can arise in any setting with strategic complementarities, but it may be particu-
larly liable to occur in networked settings, where transactions are executed through intermediaries
that interconnect for delivery, and the technological complementarities are therefore large ­ such
as freight carriers (for physical trade), Internet service providers (communications), or financial ex-
changes (asset purchases). This tension is underappreciated in the academic literature but ripe for
attention, especially since firms in many network industries not only benefit from interoperability
but also have a natural tendency towards concentration.

The results also contribute to the largely-theoretical academic literature on technological compat-
ibility. Compatibility standards can be found in nearly every technical product and industry, but
to-date there is limited evidence directly linking them to firms' or market outcomes. In unveiling
the ways in which the Southern gauge change affected the market for freight shipment, this paper
provides a historical datapoint on the effects of compatibility on transactions and has implications
for other settings where traffic is exchanged across connecting, incompatible networks, such as the
those identified above. With archival data becoming increasingly accessible, historical settings such
as the early U.S. telephone and railroad industries present a growing opportunity for future research
on network connection, compatibility, and related themes.


                                                  24
References
Argue, David A., Cartel Operation with Revenue Pooling and Output Quotas: The Southern Railway and
 Steamship Association 1990. Unpublished dissertation.

Atack, Jeremy, Historical Geographic Information Systems (GIS) database of U.S. Railroads for 1861 Septem-
  ber 2015.

  and Robert A. Margo, "The Impact of Access to Rail Transportation on Agricultural Improvement: The
  American Midwest as a Test Case, 1850­1860," Journal of Transport and Land Use, 2011, 4, 5­18.

  , Michael Haines, and Robert A. Margo, "Railroads and the Rise of the Factory: Evidence for the
  United States, 1850­1870," in Paul W. Rhode, Joshua Rosenbloom, and David Weiman, eds., Economic
  Evolution and Revolutions in Historical Time, Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 2011.

Basker, Emek and Timothy Simcoe, Upstream, Downstream: Diffusion and Impacts of the Universal
 Product Code. 2019. Working paper.

Besen, Stanley M. and Joseph Farrell, "Choosing How to Compete: Strategies and Tactics in Standard-
  ization," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1994, 8 (2), 117­131.

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Anca Cristea, "The Effects of the Interstate Commerce Act on Transport Costs:
  Evidence from Wheat Prices," Review of Industrial Organization, 2013, 43 (1-2), 41­62.

Chandler, Alfred D. Jr., The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business, Cambridge:
 The Belknap Press, 1977.

Cincinnati, New Orleans & Texas Pacific Railway Co., Report and Statement of Accounts 1884. Fiscal
  year ending December 31, 1884.

  , Report and Statement of Accounts 1885. Fiscal year ending December 31, 1885.

  , Report and Statement of Accounts 1886. Fiscal year ending December 31, 1886.

Conley, Timothy G., "GMM Estimation with Cross-Sectional Dependence," Journal of Econometrics, 1999,
 92 (1), 1­45.

David, Paul A. and Julie Ann Bunn, "The Economics of Gateway TEchnologies and Network Evolution:
 Lessons from Electricity Supply History," Information Economics and Policy, 1988, 3, 165­202.

   and Shane Greenstein, "The Economics of Compatibility Standards: An Introduction to Recent Re-
  search," Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 1990, 1 (1-2), 3­41.

Economides, Nicholas, "Desirability of Compatibility in the Absence of Network Externalities," American
  Economic Review, 1989, 79 (5), 1165­81.

Ellison, Glenn, "Theories of Cartel Stability and the Joint Executive Committee," The RAND Journal of
  Economics, 1994, 25 (1), 37­57.

Farrell, Joseph and Garth Saloner, "Standardization, Compatibility, and Innovation," The RAND Journal
  of Economics, 1985, 16 (1), 70­83.

   and , "Installed Base and Compatibility: Innovation, Product Preannouncements, and Predation," Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 1986, 76 (5), 940­955.

   and , "Coordination through Committees and Markets," The RAND Journal of Economics, 1988, 19 (2),
  235­252.

   and , "Converters, Compatibility, and the Control of Interfaces," Journal of Industrial Economics, 1992,
  40 (1), 9­35.

                                                    25
Haines, Henry S., Restrictive Railway Legislation, New York: The MacMillan Company, 1905.

Hudson, Henry, "The Southern Railway and Steamship Association," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1890,
 5 (1), 70­94.

Joubert, Willam H., Southern Freight Rates in Transition, Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 1949.

Katz, Michael L. and Carl Shapiro, "Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibility," American
 Economic Review, 1985, 75 (3), 424­440.

   and     , "Technology Adoption in the Presence of Network Externalities," Journal of Political Economy,
  1986, 94 (4), 822­41.

   and    , "Systems Competition and Network Effects," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1994, 8 (2), 93­115.

Knittel, Christopher R. and Victor Stango, "Incompatibility, Product Attributes and Consumer Welfare:
 Evidence from ATMs," The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2008, 8, 1­42.

Kolko, Gabriel, Railroads and Regulation, 1877-1916, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965.

Krajewski, Markus, "The Great Lightbulb Conspiracy," IEEE Spectrum, 2014. September 24.

Li, Jing, Compatibility and Investment in the U.S. Electric Vehicle Market. 2019. Working paper.

Louisville & Nashville Railroad Co., Annual Report to Investors 1886. Fiscal year ending June 30, 1886.

Matutes, Carmen and Pierre Regibeau, ""Mix and Match": Product Compatibility without Network
 Externalities," The RAND Journal of Economics, 1988, 19 (2), 221­234.

   and , "Compatibility and Bundling of Complementary Goods in a Duopoly," Journal of Industrial Eco-
  nomics, 1992, 40 (1), 37­54.

McHenry, James, "Atlantic and Great Western," The Railway Times, 1875, 38 (15), 361­362.

Minnesota Population Center, National Historical Geographic Information System: Version 2.0, Minneapo-
 lis: University of Minnesota, 2011.

Mueller, Milton L., Universal Service: Competition, Interconnection and Monopoly in the Making of the
 American Telephone System, Washington: AEI Press, 1997.

Poor, Henry V., "Cincinnati and Seaboard Railways," American Railroad Journal, 1851, 7 (37), 386.

  , Poor's Manual of Railroads of the United States. 1868. Volumes 1882, -84, -86, -88, -90.

Porter, Robert H., "A Study of Cartel Stability: The Joint Executive Committee, 1880-1886," The Bell
  Journal of Economics, 1983, 14 (2), 301­314.

Prager, Robin A., "Using Stock Price Data to Measure the Effects of Regulation: The Interstate Commerce
  Act and the Railroad Industry," The RAND Journal of Economics, 1989, 20 (2), 280­290.

Puffert, Douglas J., "The Standardization of Track Gauge on North American Railways, 1830-1890," The
 Journal of Economic History, 2000, 60 (4), 933­960.

  , "Path Dependence in Spatial Networks: The Standardization of Railway Track Gauge," Explorations in
  Economic History, 2002, 39 (3), 282­314.

  , Tracks across Continents, Paths through History: The Economic Dynamics of Standardization in Railway
  Gauge, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.

Shapiro, Carl and Hal R. Varian, Information Rules, Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1999.


                                                      26
Siddall, William R., "Railroad Gauges and Spatial Interaction," Geographical Review, 1969, 59 (1), 29­57.

Sindall, Charles A., "Development of the Traffic between the Southern States and the Northern and North-
  western States," in U.S. Treasury Department, ed., Report on the Internal Commerce of the United States,
  Washington: Government Printing Office, 1886.

Southern Railway and Steamship Association (SRSA), Circular Letters. 1875. Volumes 1-24.

Taylor, George R. and Irene D. Neu, The American Railroad Network, 1861-1890, Urbana and Chicago:
  University of Illinois Press, 1956.

Ulen, Thomas S., Cartels and Regulation: Late Nineteenth Century Railroad Collusion and the Creation of
  the Interstate Commerce Commission 1979. Unpublished dissertation.

  , "The Market for Regulation: The ICC from 1887 to 1920," American Economic Review: Papers and
  Proceedings, 1980, 70 (2), 306­310.

U.S. Department of Commerce and Labor, Report of the Commissioner of Corporations on Transportation
  by Water in the United States, Part III: Water Terminals, Washington: Government Printing Office, 1910.

U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission, Antitrust Enforcement and Intellectual
  Property Rights: Promoting Innovation and Competition 2007.

U.S. Department of the Interior, Statistical Report of the Railroads in the United States in 1880, Washing-
  ton: Government Printing Office, 1883.

White, John H. Jr., The American Railroad Freight Car, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
 1993.




                                                    27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 1: Installed Railroad Gauge East of the Mississippi River, 1861­1891 (holding network fixed)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Panel (B)                                                                                                                                                                               Panel (C)
                      Panel (A)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Updated Railroad Gauges of                                                                                                                                                              Updated Railroad Gauges of
           Baseline: 1861 Railroad Network                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the 1861 Network, as of 1881                                                                                                                                                            the 1861 Network, as of 1891




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !! !!! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !      !                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !   !                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                            !                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!                                                 !                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! !                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !!                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!!!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                               !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !!! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!!! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!  !                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!! !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                               !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!




                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!!




                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                        !!!!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!




                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                          !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !!
                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                           !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                        ! !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                    !          !
                                                                                                                     !       !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                     ! ! !!
                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !   !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                   ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                             !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                     !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!                                                                               !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !! !




                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                  !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                     !!!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                     !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                      !                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                        !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! ! !                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!




                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!                                                                                                                                    !                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                     !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !             !                  !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                  !                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!!!                  !!                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!!                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!




                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!




                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !! !                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !!




                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                         !   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                 !                                                                                     ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !! !                 !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !          !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                            !! !                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!!                                       !!                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                             !   !!                       !                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!             !                  !!                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                !!                                                                                                                                                        ! !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!                                                                                                                                                            !                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                              ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                               !!             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! !!                                                                    !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! !                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                       !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! !!!                  !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                     !!        !!




                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                              !! !! !                         !       !!       ! !
                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                         ! ! !!             !!
                                                                                                                            !       !!!!           !
                                                                                                                                                   !!!
                                                                                                                                                         !!
                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                             !
                                                                                          !!
                                                                                  !!
                                                                      !!
                                                                      !      !! !
                                                              !! ! !!
                     !!                           !! !    !!
                     !!!!
                     !
                      !!! !!
                     !
                                ! !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




28
                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                       !!!
                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                  !
                                                                      !
                                                                      !!!!    ! ! !! !
                                                                !
                                                                !!                   !!      !!
                               ! !
                                 !!
                                       !
                                       !
                                       !                 !!




                                       !
                                       !
           !!   !! !! ! !                         !




                                       !
                                        !
                                        !!




                                        !
                                          !   ! !




                                              !
                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Gauge, 1861                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Gauge, 1881
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4' 8.5-9"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4' 8.5-9"                                                  Gauge, 1891
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5' 0"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5' 0"                                                              4' 8.5-9"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !   !                                                                                   !   !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Other                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Other                                                              Other




     Notes: Figure illustrates the United States' transition to a unified, standard-gauge railroad network in the second half of the 19th century.
     The left-most panel shows the state of the railroad network east of the Mississippi River in 1861, color-coding segments of railroad by their
     gauge (blue solid line: 4' 8.5-9''; red dashed line: 5' 0''; green dotted line: other). Panels (B) and (C) show the gauge in use in 1881 and
     1891, respectively, holding the network fixed (omitting new construction). Network and gauge data for 1861 railroads obtained from the Atack
     (2015) Historical Transportation Shapefile of Railroads in the United States. Contemporary gauges for these same railroads or their subsequent
     acquirers in 1881 and 1891 were obtained from Poor's Manual of Railroads volumes for all railroads that could be matched. Over 99.5% of track
     miles in the 1861 network shown above were matched to the Poor's data in both 1881 and 1891.
                             Figure 2: Changes in All-rail vs. Steamship Traffic and Total Traffic over Time

                            Panel A: All-rail vs. steamship DID                                                Panel B: Total route-level traffic

                        4                                            2.0                                   2                                          1.0
Coefficient estimate




                                                                                   Coefficient estimate
                        3                                            1.5
                                                                                                           1                                          0.5
                        2                                            1.0
                        1                                            0.5                                   0                                          0.0
                        0                                            0.0
                                                                                                          -1                                          -0.5
                       -1                                            -0.5
                       -2                                            -1.0                                 -2                                          -1.0

                             1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890                                                1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890
                                   Annual effect (left axis)                                                        Annual effect (left axis)
                                   x distance (100 mi; right axis)                                                  x distance (100 mi; right axis)



                            Notes: Figure shows the estimated changes in all-rail vs. steamship traffic (Panel A) and in total
                            route-level traffic (Panel B) on the sampled routes by year, relative to 1884. Panel (A) plots
                            coefficients from a regression in which log quantities are regressed on an indicator for the all-rail
                            mode, interacted with indicators for year (in blue), and triple-interacted with route length (in
                            red). Panel (B) plots coefficients from a regression of log quantities at the route-year level on
                            indicators for year (in blue), interacted with route length (in red). SEs clustered by route and
                            95% confidence intervals provided around each point estimate.




                                                                             29
 Figure 3: Distribution of Cartel Price Changes, pre- vs. post-Gauge Change

                             Panel A:                                                                       Panel B:
                      Jul. 1883 to Apr. 1884                                                         Apr. 1884 to Feb. 1885
               1.00                                                                           1.00


               0.75                                                                           0.75
    Fraction




                                                                                   Fraction
               0.50                                                                           0.50


               0.25                                                                           0.25


               0.00                                                                           0.00
                      -0.20    -0.10   0.00           0.10       0.20                                  -0.20      -0.10   0.00   0.10   0.20




                              Panel C:                                                                      Panel D:
                       Feb. 1885 to Jul. 1885                                                        Jul. 1885 to Mar. 1886
               1.00                                                                           1.00


               0.75                                                                           0.75
    Fraction




                                                                                   Fraction
               0.50                                                                           0.50


               0.25                                                                           0.25


               0.00                                                                           0.00
                      -0.20    -0.10   0.00           0.10       0.20                                  -0.20      -0.10   0.00   0.10   0.20




                                                     Panel E:
                              Mar. 1886 (pre-gauge change) to Jul. 1887 (post-change)
                                                    1.00


                                                    0.75
                                         Fraction




                                                    0.50


                                                    0.25


                                                    0.00
                                                             -0.20      -0.10    0.00           0.10       0.20


                       Pct. change in freight rates, across routes and class of merchandise

Notes: Figure shows the distribution of cartel price changes across routes and classes of
merchandise throughout the sample period, for the subset of routes appearing in both
the SRSA freight traffic tables and the rate tables. The handful of rate increases in
Panel E come entirely from two routes: Philadelphia to Montgomery, and Philadelphia
to Selma. Data from SRSA Circular Letters, Volumes 13-24.




                                                                            30
Figure 4: Cumulative Abnormal Returns to L&N Stock, May 1 to June 30, 1886
                                     0.20
                                                     Reported in CFC (May 29) >




       Cumulative abnormal returns
                                     0.15
                                                                                      < Change completed (Jun 1)

                                     0.10


                                     0.05


                                     0.00
                                            6




                                                            6




                                                                                  6




                                                                                                        6




                                                                                                                              6
                                          8




                                                           8




                                                                                8




                                                                                                     88




                                                                                                                           88
                                       18




                                                        18




                                                                             18




                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                           1
                                        -




                                                        -




                                                                             -




                                                                                                 n-




                                                                                                                        n-
                                     ay




                                                     ay




                                                                          ay




                                                                                                 u




                                                                                                                       u
                    -M




                                                 -M




                                                                       -M




                                                                                              -J




                                                                                                                    -J
                                                                                            15




                                                                                                                   30
       01




                                                16




                                                                     31
                                                                                  Date

                                                      Louisville & Nashville RR            Non-Southern RRs

   Notes: Figure shows cumulative abnormal returns to the stock of the Louisville
   & Nashville Railroad, the largest railroad in the South by mileage and one of
   two that directly connected the South to other regions and were listed on the
   NYSE, in a two-month window around the gauge change. The figure marks two
   key dates around the gauge change: May 29, when the event was first announced
   and discussed at length in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle, and June 1,
   when the change was completed. See text for additional discussion. Data from
   New York Times historical stock quote tables.




                                                                            31
Table 1: Approx. Miles of Railroad in each Gauge, by Region, 1881-1889 (Poor's Manual of Railroads)

                                                   Pre-Gauge Change                   Post-Gauge Change
                                               1881      1883      1885                1887       1889

  New England              Total Miles         6,251.3         6,283.8     6,418.2     6,784.9       6,744.1
                           Pct. 4' 8.5-9"         97%             97%         97%         97%           98%

  Mid-Atlantic             Total Miles        15,845.6        18,588.1    19,792.2    19,420.9      20,893.3
                           Pct. 4' 8.5-9"         94%             95%         96%         96%           97%

  Midwest                  Total Miles        37,246.4        41,470.0    40,495.6    43,559.5      46,966.7
                           Pct. 4' 8.5-9"         94%             93%         94%         97%           98%

  South (focal region)     Total Miles        17,257.5        19,316.6    20,694.3    23,596.7      26,793.4
                           Pct. 4' 8.5-9"         25%             25%         29%         92%           94%

  Western States           Total Miles        29,834.8        39,575.8    41,078.0    51,948.4      58,318.5
                           Pct. 4' 8.5-9"         88%             85%         89%         92%           93%

  Notes: Table shows the approximate miles of railroad in the U.S. from 1881 to 1889 in two-year intervals
  and fraction in standard-compatible gauge, confirming the scale of the conversion: 13,000 miles of Southern
  railroad converted from 5'0" to 4' 9" between 1885 and 1887. Data from Poor's Manual of Railroads, which
  provides a near-complete, annual enumeration of U.S. railroads.




   Table 2: Descriptive Statistics: Traffic, Revenue, and All-Rail Shares, for Short vs. Long Routes
                                                Short Routes               Long Routes
                                               (<25th pctile)             (>75th pctile)
                                               Pre       Post             Pre      Post

                 Route-years                    39             52          39          52

                 Route Distance (mi)          589.01         589.01      977.65      977.65
                                              (6.90)         (5.95)      (10.54)     (9.09)

                 Tons (1,000s)                715.88          818.55     1066.39     1161.54
                                             (130.58)        (134.66)    (210.85)    (221.31)

                 Revenue ($1,000s)             8.61            8.97       14.59       15.21
                                              (1.48)          (1.41)      (3.03)      (3.02)

                 All-Rail Share, Tonnage       0.40            0.56        0.23        0.19
                                              (0.04)          (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)

                 All-Rail Share, Revenue       0.41            0.57        0.24        0.20
                                              (0.04)          (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)

               Notes: Table reports average tonnage, revenue, and all-rail shares of traffic and
               revenue for shorter versus longer routes (below the 25th percentile and above
               the 75th percentile of route length, respectively), before versus after the gauge
               change. Standard error of each mean in parentheses.




                                                        32
                           Table 3: Change in All-Rail Traffic
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
All-rail x post-change    1.658***    1.672***    1.663***     1.721***   2.466***     2.541***
                            (0.316)     (0.298)     (0.307)     (0.316)    (0.559)      (0.582)
   * distance (100 mi)    -0.227***   -0.239***   -0.238***   -0.244***   -0.331***   -0.341***
                            (0.042)     (0.041)     (0.041)     (0.042)    (0.073)      (0.075)
Steamship x post-change    -0.779**    -0.756**    -0.761**    -0.763**
                            (0.319)     (0.306)     (0.320)     (0.312)
   * distance (100 mi)     0.096**      0.089**     0.090**     0.090**
                            (0.040)     (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.038)
N                            1036         1036        1036        1036      1036        1036
R2                            0.32        0.67        0.67        0.73      0.70        0.75
Route FE                                    X           X
Year FE                                                 X
Route-mode FE                                                    X                       X
Route-yr FE                                                                  X           X
Notes: Table estimates effect of the gauge change on merchandise shipments for shorter
versus longer routes. Observations are route-mode-years. The dependent variable in all
columns is log pounds of traffic. Estimates in Columns (1) to (4) should be interpreted as
mode-specific changes relative to the pre-period; those in Columns (5) and (6) as differences-
in-differences due to the route-year FEs. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by route in parentheses.



                  Table 4: Change in All-Rail Traffic, ACL and PAL
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
A.C.L. x post-change      2.061***    2.082***     2.074***    2.064***    2.848***    2.809***
                            (0.443)     (0.472)     (0.477)     (0.477)     (0.686)     (0.671)
   * distance (100 mi)    -0.302***   -0.310***   -0.309***   -0.306***   -0.403***   -0.396***
                            (0.059)     (0.064)     (0.064)     (0.064)     (0.094)     (0.090)
P.A.L. x post-change      1.030***      0.973**     0.956**     1.045**     1.748**     1.829**
                            (0.356)     (0.435)     (0.438)     (0.432)     (0.754)     (0.754)
   * distance (100 mi)    -0.143***    -0.151**    -0.150**    -0.158**    -0.247**    -0.253**
                            (0.050)     (0.062)     (0.061)     (0.062)     (0.100)     (0.101)
Steamship x post-change    -0.779**    -0.770**    -0.776**    -0.763**
                            (0.320)     (0.311)     (0.326)     (0.313)
   * distance (100 mi)     0.096**      0.092**     0.093**     0.090**
                            (0.040)     (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.038)
N                            1036         1036        1036        1036      1036        1036
R2                            0.48        0.83        0.84        0.89      0.86        0.91
Route FE                                    X           X
Year FE                                                 X
Route-mode FE                                                    X                       X
Route-yr FE                                                                  X           X
Notes: Table estimates effect of the gauge change on merchandise shipments for shorter
versus longer routes. Observations are route-mode-years. The dependent variable in all
columns is log pounds of traffic. Estimates in Columns (1) to (4) should be interpreted as
mode-specific changes relative to the pre-period; those in Columns (5) and (6) as differences-
in-differences due to the route-year FEs. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by route in parentheses.




                                             33
           Table 5: Effects on Traffic Shares
                                            (1)          (2)
 All-rail x post-change                 2.281***     2.400***
                                         (0.428)      (0.450)
    * distance (100 mi)                -0.315***    -0.327***
                                         (0.056)      (0.058)
 N                                         676          676
 R2                                        0.12         0.45
 Route FE                                                 X
Notes: Table estimates effect of the gauge change on all-
rail traffic shares on shorter versus longer routes. The
dependent variable is the log difference in all-rail and
steamship shares within route-years. *, **, *** represent
significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
SEs clustered by route in parentheses.



     Table 6: Change in Total Traffic/Revenue
                          Ln(Freight traffic)     Ln(Revenue)
                             (1)      (2)          (3)     (4)
Post-change                 0.039    0.051       -0.114  -0.091
                          (0.230) (0.222)       (0.183) (0.186)
  * distance (100 mi)      -0.000   -0.006       0.009   0.003
                          (0.031) (0.028)       (0.023) (0.022)
N                            360      360         360     360
R2                          0.01     0.96         0.01    0.97
Route FE                               X                    X
Notes: Table estimates the effect of the gauge change on
total shipments. Observations are route-years. The de-
pendent variable in Columns (1) to (2) is log quantities;
in Columns (3) to (4), log revenue. *, **, *** represent
significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
SEs clustered by route in parentheses.




                              34
Web Appendix
A         Data Appendix

This paper draws on several sources of data, most importantly the SRSA records of freight traffic on
the set of routes apportioned, monitored, and reported to cartel members. As the paper explains,
the SRSA collected daily data on the traffic and revenue of carriers on any route where at least
one member requested apportionment, compiled these data into monthly and annual totals, and
then circulated the data for select routes to cartel members. These tables, as well as other SRSA
circulars, were organized into semiannual volumes and have been preserved in original hard copy
at the New York Public Library and Yale University archives.1

Figure A.1 provides an example table from these records. The table shows pounds and revenue
of merchandise shipments from Boston to Augusta, GA for the 1886-87 and 1887-88 fiscal years.
The table lists five different paths that freight traveled for this route: three by steamship plus
rail, and two entirely by rail. All-rail shipments can be identified as "via A.C.L." or "via P.A.L.",
while the steamship line items indicate the intermediate ports where freight was transshipped (here,
Savannah and Charleston). Similar tables are available for other destinations, origins, and years,
although in most cases a table shows data for one period only.

                          Figure A.1: Example of Table from SRSA Traffic Reports




           Notes: Figure shows an extracted table from the source data. The table lists total pounds
           of traffic and revenue from merchandise shipments from Boston to Augusta, GA by carrier,
           for June 1 to May 31, 1886 and for the same period in 1887. All-rail paths (termed "routes"
           in the table) can be identified as either A.C.L. or P.A.L.

For the second half of the sample, the cartel operated on a June to May fiscal year and reported
annual data accordingly. This accounting period is ideally suited to the purposes of this paper,
as the gauge change occurred over May 31 and June 1, 1886 ­ such that the cartel's annual data
provide the cleanest possible comparison. However, until 1886, the cartel operated on a September
to August fiscal year. For this earlier period, I therefore collected year-to-date (YTD) traffic in
May and August, in order to back out shipments for the June to May period. Concretely: The
1884 fiscal year spanned September 1883 to August 1884, but this paper requires totals from June
to May. To obtain them, I transcribed data from three YTD tables in the cartel traffic reports:
September 1882 to May 1883 (1), September 1882 to August 1883 (2), and September 1883 to May
1
    A subset of the content in these circular letters are also available on microfilm from HBS Baker Library, though the
    microfilm omits the monthly traffic reports which yield the data in this paper.


                                                            1
1884 (3). I then impute June 1883 to May 1884 traffic as (2)-(1)+(3).

The primary sample in the paper contains 52 routes, with 4 Northern origins and 13 Southern
destinations. Table A.1 lists the origins and destinations in this sample (also mapped in Figure
A.2). To make clear how all-rail freight reached Southern interior cities, Figure A.3 shows maps of
the A.C.L. and P.A.L. circa 1885. Both served nearly every route in nearly every year, with a few
exceptions: the P.A.L. did not deliver freight to Macon in 1884-86, Athens in 1886, or Albany in
any year, and the A.C.L. did not deliver to Albany in 1890 (as inferred from their absence from
the respective traffic tables). Additionally, no data are available for Albany in 1887. As a result,
the sample reported in tables is reduced from 1,092 (= 52 · 3 · 7) to 1,036.

                       Table A.1: Origins and Destinations for Sampled Routes
                                 Destinations                     Origins
                                   (south)                        (north)
                          Albany        GA                  Boston          MA
                          Athens        GA                  New York        NY
                          Atlanta       GA                  Philadelphia    PA
                          Augusta       GA                  Baltimore       MD
                          Macon         GA
                          Milledgeville GA
                          Newnan        GA
                          Rome          GA
                          Montgomery AL
                          Opelika       AL
                          Selma         AL
                          A. & W. Pt. stations (GA)
                          W. & A. stations (GA)
                        Notes: Table lists the origin and terminus of routes in the
                        sample of Northern merchandise shipments used in the re-
                        mainder of this paper. These 52 routes (4 origins x 13
                        destinations) are those for which data was reported by the
                        Southern Railway and Steamship Association both before
                        and after the gauge change. "A. & W. Pt. Stations" refers
                        to stations on the Atlanta and West Point Railroad between
                        East Point and West Point, GA (70 mi), whose traffic was
                        reported collectively; "W. & A. Stations" refers to stations
                        on the Western and Atlantic Railroad between Chattanooga,
                        TN and Marietta, GA (87 mi). These destinations are geo-
                        tagged to the centroid of their respective endpoints.




                                                     2
    Figure A.2: Map of Sampled Origins (North) and Destinations (South)




                                                                                            Boston




                                                                                 New York

                                                                        Philadelphia

                                                                     Baltimore




                                   Rome       Athens
                                       Atlanta       Augusta
                                    Newnan
                                             Macon   Milledgeville
                                  Opelika
                          Selma
                                    Montgomery
                                          Albany




Notes: Figure shows the northern route origins and southern destinations for routes in
the sample. These destinations are those for which data was reported by the Southern
Railway and Steamship Association both before and after the gauge change. Not
shown are two additional destinations in the data, "A. & W. Pt. Stations" (stations
on the Atlanta and West Point Railroad between East Point and West Point, GA, 70
mi., whose traffic was reported collectively), and "W. & A. Stations" (stations on the
Western and Atlantic Railroad between Chattanooga, TN and Marietta, GA, 87 mi.);
these destinations are geotagged to the centroid of their respective endpoints. Freight
transportation was available by all-rail routes traversing Virginia, Tennessee, and the
Carolinas or by a combination of steamship and railroad, via southern port cities such
as Charleston, Savannah, Norfolk, and Port Royal.




                                                        3
                 Figure A.3: All-Rail Paths connecting North and South ca. 1885
       Panel A: Atlantic Coast Line (A.C.L.)               Panel B: Piedmont Air Line (P.A.L.)




       Notes: Figure provides maps of the two all-rail paths between the North and South, as of
       1885: the Atlantic Coast Line and Piedmont Air Line. Each was established by mutual
       agreement among the traversed railroads to facilitate interregional traffic. Maps acquired
       from the David Rumsey Historical Map Collection.

On a few routes, merchandise shipments between Northern and Southern cities are occasionally
indicated to have entered the South from the West, via the Louisville and Nashville or the Cincinnati
Southern ­ crossing the Ohio River at Louisville and Cincinnati, respectively. In these cases,
it remains ambiguous whether the active mode was all-rail versus river steamer plus connecting
railroad. I thus omit these shipments from the analysis. As Figure A.4 shows, little is lost: the
omitted shipments on average comprise 0.8% of traffic in any given year.




                                                   4
                             Figure A.4: Western paths' share of North-South traffic
                          0.80




                          0.60
               Fraction




                          0.40




                          0.20




                          0.00
                                 1884           1886                 1888                   1890

               Notes: Figure shows the annual proportion of total traffic on the sampled
               routes reported to have been by the L. & N. and the C.S. Railroads, osten-
               sibly after having crossed the Ohio River. Due to ambiguity over the mode
               of westward travel, this traffic is omitted from all analysis.


To estimate effects that vary with route length, I must measure distances between origin and
destination. Throughout the paper, I measure distance as "straight-line" (geodesic) distance, rather
than traveled distance, which is not observed. Though traveled distance can in concept be computed
for all-rail routes using maps and mapping software, the same cannot be done for steamships, and
it is unclear what additional information is generated. Indeed, one early-twentieth century source
(Ripley 1913) lists all-rail shipping distances from Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore
to Atlanta, and as Table A.2 shows, straight-line distance is a roughly fixed proportion (85%) of
the point-to-point track length between origin and destination.

                     Table A.2: Comparison of Straight-line and Track Distances
            Origin       Destination Straight-line (mi.) All-rail (mi.)                     Ratio
            Boston       Atlanta                 937                  1089                   0.86
            New York     Atlanta                 747                   876                   0.85
            Philadelphia Atlanta                 666                   786                   0.85
            Baltimore    Atlanta                 577                  690                    0.84
            Notes: Table compares straight-line (geodesic) distances and all-rail shipping distances
            between the points shown. Shipping distances from Ripley (1913).


With a limited sample of routes ­ and particularly, with origins all in the northeast and destinations
in Georgia and Alabama ­ one might be concerned that the sample does not exhibit sufficient
variation in distance to identify this source of heterogeneity. Table A.3 lays this concern to rest,


                                                       5
showing that across the 52 routes in the sample, distance varies from 500 to 1,100 miles, with a
25th-75th percentile spread of over 300 miles.

                        Table A.3: Descriptive Statistics: Distribution of Route Distances
                                         N    Min     p10      p25     p50     p75     p90      Max
                Route Distance (mi.)     52   501.0   585.8    661.1   749.5   889.0   971.7   1111.8
                Notes: Table summarizes the distribution of routes in the sample by straight-line
                (geodesic) distance between northern origins and southern destinations. See Table A.1
                for a list of origins and destinations, and Figure A.2 for a map.




Other Data

I also collect data from annual volumes of Poor's Manual of Railroads (1868) to confirm the scale
of the gauge change. The Poor's Manual was an annual compendium of railroads in the U.S. and
Canada that provides railroads' location, mileage, information on their financial performance (when
available) ­ and conveniently, their gauge. These volumes allow me to calculate annual mileage by
region and gauge for the universe of U.S. railroads, and thereby observe both the growth of the
network and the standardization of gauge across the country.

To do so, I recorded the name, total mileage, and principal gauge of every railroad in five Poor's
Manual volumes: 1882, 1883, 1886, 1888, and 1890 (which provide data from 1881, 1884, 1885,
1887, and 1889).2 I also recorded the region in which each railroad had principal operations: New
England (ME, NH, VT, MA, RI, CT); Middle Atlantic (NY, NJ, PA, DE, MD); Central Northern
(OH, IN, IL, MI, WI); South Atlantic (VA, WV, NC, SC, GA, FL); Gulf and Mississippi Valley
(KY, TN, AL, MS, LA); Southwestern (MO, AR, TX, KS, CO, NM); Northwestern (WY, NE, IA,
MN, Dakota Territory); and Pacific (CA, OR, WA, NV, AZ, UT). In two of the sampled volumes,
railroads are sorted alphabetically by these regions; in two other volumes, by state; and in one
volume, at the national level. Where available, I use the Poor's Manual-designated region or state
as a railroad's location. For the volume with national sorting, I infer each railroad's location from
previous or later volumes, or from the address of its principal office (if not otherwise available).
There was of course a great deal of new construction and consolidation over this period, but all of
it is accounted for in these volumes ­ indeed, each volume concludes with a table listing all mergers
and acquisitions since the first volume in the series was published in 1868.

The collection of the Poor's Manual data proved to be a painstaking process that required significant
attention to detail, as many railroads owned subsidiary lines that were listed twice (alone and under
the owner), and many railroads leased lines that were listed twice (alone and under the owner).
All subsidiary and leased lines were therefore cross-checked against the entered to data to ensure
they were not double-counted. The volumes also included railroads under construction, and every
2
    Please contact the author at dgross@hbs.edu if you would like to make use of these data. I extend a hearty thanks
    to the Historical Collections team at HBS Baker Library for providing access to the Poor's Manual volumes, and to
    Mary Vasile for her help in compiling the data.


                                                           6
effort was made to count only completed mileage ­ though this count includes railroads which were
complete but not yet (or no longer) in operation. In a few cases, a gauge was not provided ­ when
this occurred, I inferred the gauge from previous or later volumes, from separately-listed parents
or subsidiaries, or from information obtained through Internet searches. There were also a few
railroads which listed multiple gauges, and I count these railroads as standard-gauge roads of one
of the listed gauges is standard gauge. Finally, in each volume there are a handful of railroads for
which the gauge could not be determined, and these railroads are omitted from all analysis, as the
cumulative mileage with unknown gauge in any given year is less than 0.1% of the network. In
Table 1, I sum railroad mileage by year, region, and gauge, consolidating the Poor's regions into
five super-regions: New England, Mid-Atlantic, Midwest, South, and West.

I also make use of mapping data from two sources. I use the NHGIS state boundary shapefiles to
sketch states east of the Mississippi River, and Atack's (2015) Historical Transportation Shapefiles
to map the railroad network. The Atack (2015) railroad shapefile includes railroads constructed
between 1826 and 1911; within this file, individual segments are identified by owner and gauge
through the Civil War, but this identifying information is not available for later periods. Given
the importance of this information to mapping the network by gauge, I restrict attention to set of
railroads in operation by 1861. I use these data to illustrate the diversity of gauge in 1861 and then
the standardization that took place through 1881 and 1891, leveraging the Poor's Manual data to
identify later gauges of railroads in the Atack (2015) shapefile.

To perform the stock price event study in Section 5, I have also collected daily stock prices from
the New York Times for stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange between January 1 and
October 31, 1886. The stock quote tables in the New York Times report opening, closing, high,
and low prices and estimated trading volume for stocks traded each trading day. Stocks that did
not trade on a given day are not reported in the daily stock quote table, and I treat their price as
unchanged from their previous trading day.


Appendix references not in paper:

Ripley, William Z. Railway Problems, Boston: Ginn and Company, 1913.




                                                  7
B     Vertical Structure of Freight Shipping

Long-distance freight shipment in the 19th century had an inherent vertical character: to get from
origin to destination, traffic had to traverse the tracks of multiple, separately-owned connecting
lines. Frictions in the vertical transactions required for through shipment were the source of decades
of holdup, and led to the formation of numerous innovative contractual relationships, which could
be the subject of an entire separate paper ­ and indeed are the focus of a large contemporary and
historical academic literature. For the purposes of this paper, a better understanding of vertical
contracting arrangements is both useful context and important to evaluating the model used to
estimate demand and supply and simulate competitive conduct.


B.1    How were long-distance shipments priced?

To fix terms, freight shipments borne by multiple, connecting carriers were known as "through"
shipments, typically traveling long distances. Shipments which could be delivered by the originating
carrier were "local" shipments. There were two approaches to pricing through shipments: the most
primitive method was a combination of local rates, whereby a shipment from point A to point C
would be charged the first carrier's local rate from A to B plus the second carrier's local rate from
B to C, which were independently determined. Given the number of local rates that had to be
considered on routes with many connections, and the frequency of rate changes, predicting the cost
of shipping under combination rates was a formidable challenge for shippers.

To simplify pricing, railroads began to set joint rates (also/more often termed as "through rates"),
which were point-to-point freight rates set jointly by carriers involved in the route, with a negotiated
division of revenue. By the dawn of the regulatory era, through rates were by far the most common
means of pricing through traffic. However, while there's abundant discussion of the definition and
applications of through rates in historical records, there's unfortunately remarkably little coverage
of how through rates were set, and how revenue was divided among carriers.

With effort, it was possible to unearth some contemporary references to the issue, which consistently
point to prorating of through revenue according to the distance of each carrier's leg in the journey.
Proportions were determined by the "constructive mileage" of each leg, which is derived from true
distances but allows adjustments (Haney 1924). For example, in Congressional testimony in 1874,
the P.A.L. general manager claimed to prorate through revenue with the water lines with which it
connects (U.S. Congress 1874, p. 401), with ocean steamships prorating 3 miles for every 1 railroad
mile. In the same Congressional record, a representative of the Green Line (a fast freight line, see
next subsection) stated that all railroads in the organization received the same rate per mile from
through revenue (p. 786). Division pro rata thus appears to have been the norm, although there
were exceptions in the form of "arbitrary divisions", which often applied to the use of bridges or
terminals, compensated carriers for a shipment's fixed costs such as loading and unloading, and
were allocated before the remaining revenue was prorated (Haines 1905). It is unclear whether

                                                   8
arbitraries were used to compensate carriers for the cost of breaks in gauge ­ and because joint
rates came into use around the same time that the gauge was being standardized, no contemporary
references to the precise question could be located.

Joint pricing was not the only means of contracting around vertical transfers of shipments. Trackage
rights were also common, which gave an originating carrier rights to travel freely over a connecting
carrier's tracks. An alternative was vertical integration via merger or acquisition, which was also
occurring at a rapid pace during and after the Reconstruction era.


B.2     Who owned/controlled the rolling stock?

Vertical transfers of rolling stock were an entirely different contracting problem that was resolved
in a distinct way. While not as important to the paper as the process determining rates, it is useful
to understand how rolling stock was transferred across railroads, and who maintained ownership
and control, as freight traveled the tracks of multiple carriers along its route.

The root of the problem is that, to send shipments over long distances on the same car, originating
railroads had to (i) send their rolling stock across connecting lines, and (ii) get it back. Conversely,
intermediate railroads had to host the rolling stock of their connections. The moral hazard problems
arise in several places: not only does the originating carrier have to relinquish control over its rolling
stock, but it also retains liability for damage or loss of its shipments on connections. Moreover,
different railroads might have different quality cars and different maintenance practices, and a low-
quality or poorly-maintained car could damage the tracks it traveled. As a result, until the 1860s,
freight had to be unloaded, unregistered, reregistered, and reloaded every time one line ended and
another began, imposing enormous costs and delays on through traffic.

To address these issues, railroads around the country formed "fast freight lines" in the 1860s and
1870s, which were joint ventures between connecting railroads which pooled their freight cars into
a shared rolling stock. The largest of these in the South was the Green Line fast-freight company,
established in 1868. Under the agreement, members of the Green Line submitted rolling stock to
the common pool in proportion to their total track mileage, and members were paid 1.5 cents per
car-mile when other carriers used their cars. Ordinary maintenance was performed by the railroad
operating the car and charged to its owner, but if a railroad damaged another carrier's car, it
would be responsible for repairing or replacing it ­ though enforcement of this latter provision was
inherently challenged by the difficulty of determining the party at fault.3,4




3
  When asked by Congress "How do you know whether it is the fault of the road or ... the car?" a Green Line agent
  responded that the issue was an ongoing source of contention (U.S. Congress 1874, p. 788).
4
  For more information on the Green Line, see the following sources: Sindall (1886, pp. 680-861), Joubert (1949, pp.
  31-40), Taylor and Neu (1956, pp. 67-76), and Puffert (2009, p. 134).


                                                         9
B.3        What was the vertical structure in the South?

Though these contracting innovations were being developed around the country during Reconstruc-
tion, the key question for this paper is ultimately what vertical contracting arrangements were in
place in the South around the time of the gauge change, to evaluate whether the model of industry
conduct is appropriate. The fundamental issues are (i) whether SRSA freight rates were for end-
to-end North-South freight traffic, (ii) whether they applied to both railroads and steamships, and
(iii) whether they were determined in coordination with Northern carriers (which comprised half
of each all-rail route) and how revenue from each shipment was divided. If the answer to any of
these questions is in the negative, or if revenue division was endogenous, the model of the market
could require nonstandard features such as bargaining or a vertical dimension.

Information on the SRSA's vertical contracting arrangements is thin, but a few key details are
available from the cartel's records. What is clear from these records is that the cartel rates were
through rates, from origin to destination, and that these rates applied to all lines in the cartel.
However, the records yield no insight into what role Northern railroads played in price-setting. My
understanding from cartel documents and later accounts is that the SRSA fundamentally controlled
prices on shipments into and out of the South ­ in part due to its outsize influence over these routes,
and in part because Southern traffic was relatively unimportant to Northern carriers in volume and
value ­ and it is thus appropriate to model the SRSA as a price-setter.5 The cartel's records
also make clear that revenue division was negotiated outside of the cartel, and typically pro rata,
following industry norms ­ such that revenue division is orthogonal to price-setting and would not
enter or affect the cartel's profit-maximization problem.


Appendix references not in paper:

Haney, Lewis H. The Business of Railway Transportation, New York: Ronald Press Company, 1924.

U.S. Congress. Reports of the Select Committee on Transportation Routes to the Seaboard, Wash-
ington: Government Printing Office, 1874.




5
    Total railroad tonnage in the New England, Mid-Atlantic, and Great Lakes regions was over 10x that in the South
    in 1880, and the difference in ton-miles even greater (U.S. Department of Interior 1883).


                                                         10
C    Contemporary Accounts of the Gauge Change

The gauge change received broad coverage in contemporary railroad periodicals and Southern news-
papers. The Atlanta Constitution reported on the SRSA's gauge change convention as it was under-
way (Figure C.1), and the Louisville Courier-Journal reported several weeks later on the planning,
preparations, and procedure for converting 13,000 miles of track in one day (Figure C.2). Though
not widely covered in the North, the impending gauge change was nevertheless reported in a lengthy
article in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle on May 29, where the paper acknowledges that
"the matter is hardly attracting the attention it deserves," and the New York Times reported on
May 31 that the Louisville and Nashville ­ the only Southern railroad of real importance to North-
ern shippers and investors ­ had completed its changeover that day, with no mention of the other
railroads simultaneously converting to standard gauge (Figures C.3 and C.4).

Contemporary accounts were not limited to reporting on the mechanics of the gauge change: some
newspapers speculated on the effects it might have, or was already having, on the Southern economy.
For example, the Wilmington Morning Star wrote in April 1886 that to date, "very little lumber
[goes] North by rail, for the reason that Southern roads [have] a different gauge from the Northern
roads," and that "Southern lumber ports are bound to suffer a considerable loss of business"
following the gauge change (Figure C.5) ­ a prediction consistent with this paper's results.

A year after the gauge change, in July 1887, The Railroad Gazette and other railroad journals
published a detailed postmortem analysis (Figure C.6) ­ covering the history of Southern gauge
and its "burden [on] both railroads and shippers," the SRSA's gauge change convention in February
1886 and the decision to convert to a 4' 9'' gauge on June 1, the plans and procedures for the day
of the conversion and the months leading up to it, the engineering challenges, and even estimates
of the aggregate expense of converting the rails and the rolling stock. For those interested, this
article is the best source for understanding how 13,000 miles of railroad track could be converted
to standard gauge in just 36 hours, and confirmation that it was.




                                                11
Figure C.1: Report of the Gauge Change Convention (Atlanta Constitution, February 3, 1886)




                                           12
Figure C.2: Preparations and Procedures for Conversion (Louisville Courier-Journal, March 23, 1886)




                                                13
Figure C.3: Report on the Conversion (Commercial and Financial Chronicle, May 29, 1886)




                                          14
Report on the Conversion (CFC, cont'd)




                 15
Figure C.4: Report on the Conversion (New York Times, May 31, 1886)




                                16
Figure C.5: Example of Anticipated Effects (Wilmington Morning Star, April 16, 1886)




                                        17
Figure C.6: Technical Summary of the Gauge Change (Railroad Gazette, October 14, 1887)




                                         18
19
20
D     Sensitivity Checks

D.1    Sensitivity Checks: Dropping Origins

This section evaluates the sensitivity of the main results in Tables 3 and 5 to dropping observations
with a given origin. Figure D.1 illustrates the stability of the results in Table 3, plotting the focal
coefficient estimates from a specification of log quantities with route-year fixed effects (as in Column
5), omitting the given origin. Figure D.2 does the same for Table 3, plotting the focal coefficient
estimates from a specification of traffic shares with route fixed effects (as in Column 2). The 95%
confidence interval for each parameter is also provided.


          Figure D.1: Focal coefficient estimates from Table 3, omitting the given origin

                                       5

                                       4
               Coefficient estimate




                                       3

                                       2

                                       1

                                       0

                                      -1
                                              on




                                                               rk




                                                                                 a




                                                                                                  e
                                                                               hi




                                                                                               or
                                                             Yo
                                            st




                                                                               lp




                                                                                             m
                                           Bo




                                                                            de




                                                                                            lti
                                                          ew




                                                                                          Ba
                                                                         ila
                                                         N




                                                                      Ph




                                                      Origin omitted from estimation sample

                                                   All-rail x post-change        x distance (100 mi)

               Notes: Figure plots focal coefficient estimates (and 95% confidence intervals)
               from a regression of log quantities with route-year fixed effects (as in Column
               5 of Table 3), omitting the given origin.




                                                                    21
Figure D.2: Focal coefficient estimates from Table 5, omitting the given origin
                             5

                             4

     Coefficient estimate    3

                             2

                             1

                             0

                            -1
                                    on




                                                     rk




                                                                       a




                                                                                        e
                                                                     hi




                                                                                     or
                                                   Yo
                                  st




                                                                     lp




                                                                                   m
                                 Bo




                                                                  de




                                                                                  lti
                                                ew




                                                                                Ba
                                                               ila
                                               N




                                                            Ph
                                            Origin omitted from estimation sample

                                         All-rail x post-change        x distance (100 mi)

    Notes: Figure plots focal coefficient estimates (and 95% confidence intervals)
    from a regression of traffic shares with route fixed effects (as in Column 2
    of Table 5), omitting the given origin.




                                                          22
D.2    Sensitivity Checks: Dropping Destinations

This section evaluates the sensitivity of the main results in Tables 3 and 5 to dropping observations
with a given destination. Figure D.3 illustrates the stability of the results in Table 3, plotting the
focal coefficient estimates from a specification of log quantities with route-year fixed effects (as in
Column 5), omitting the given origin. Figure D.4 does the same for Table 3, plotting the focal
coefficient estimates from a specification of traffic shares with route fixed effects (as in Column 2).
The 95% confidence interval for each parameter is also provided.


       Figure D.3: Focal coefficient estimates from Table 3, omitting the given destination
                                       5

                                       4
               Coefficient estimate




                                       3

                                       2

                                       1

                                       0

                                      -1
                                                t.

                                                      ny

                                                                            ns

                                                                 Au ta

                                                                              a

                                                                   dg n

                                                                              e

                                                                 N ry

                                                                   O n

                                                                              a

                                                                             e

                                                                   W a
                                                                            A.
                                               .P




                                                                           st

                                                                            o

                                                              on vill



                                                                        na

                                                                          lik

                                                                        om

                                                                         lm
                                                                          n




                                                                           e
                                                     ba

                                                            he




                                                                         c




                                                                      .&
                                                                      gu
                                                                       la




                                                                     om



                                                                     pe
                                                                       a




                                                                    Se
                                                                    ew
                                                                      e
                                            W




                                                                     R
                                                    Al

                                                          At

                                                                   At



                                                                    M



                                                                  tg
                                           &




                                                              ille
                                       A.




                                                            M

                                                            M




                                                                 Destination omitted from estimation sample

                                                                 All-rail x post-change   x distance (100 mi)

               Notes: Figure plots focal coefficient estimates (and 95% confidence intervals)
               from a regression of log quantities with route-year fixed effects (as in Column
               5 of Table 3), omitting the given destination.




                                                                                  23
Figure D.4: Focal coefficient estimates from Table 5, omitting the given destination
                               5

                               4

       Coefficient estimate    3

                               2

                               1

                               0

                              -1
                                        t.

                                              ny

                                                                    ns

                                                         Au ta

                                                                      a

                                                           dg n

                                                                      e

                                                         N ry

                                                           O n

                                                                      a

                                                                     e

                                                           W a
                                                                    A.
                                       .P




                                                                   st

                                                                    o

                                                      on vill



                                                                na

                                                                  lik

                                                                om

                                                                 lm
                                                                  n




                                                                   e
                                             ba

                                                    he




                                                                 c




                                                              .&
                                                              gu
                                                               la




                                                             om



                                                             pe
                                                               a




                                                            Se
                                                            ew
                                                              e
                                    W




                                                             R
                                            Al

                                                  At

                                                           At



                                                            M



                                                          tg
                                   &




                                                      ille
                               A.




                                                    M

                                                    M
                                                         Destination omitted from estimation sample

                                                         All-rail x post-change   x distance (100 mi)

       Notes: Figure plots focal coefficient estimates (and 95% confidence intervals)
       from a regression of traffic shares with route fixed effects (as in Column 2
       of Table 5), omitting the given destination.




                                                                          24
D.3    Sensitivity Checks: Dropping Years

This section evaluates the sensitivity of the main results in Tables 3 and 5 to dropping observations
in a given year. Figure D.5 illustrates the stability of the results in Table 3, plotting the focal
coefficient estimates from a specification of log quantities with route-year fixed effects (as in Column
5), omitting the given origin. Figure D.6 does the same for Table 3, plotting the focal coefficient
estimates from a specification of traffic shares with route fixed effects (as in Column 2). The 95%
confidence interval for each parameter is also provided.


           Figure D.5: Focal coefficient estimates from Table 3, omitting the given year
                                       5

                                       4
               Coefficient estimate




                                       3

                                       2

                                       1

                                       0

                                      -1
                                              84



                                                      85



                                                                  86



                                                                           87



                                                                                    88



                                                                                             89



                                                                                                      90
                                            18



                                                    18



                                                                18



                                                                         18



                                                                                  18



                                                                                           18



                                                                                                    18
                                           FY



                                                   FY



                                                              FY



                                                                       FY



                                                                                 FY



                                                                                         FY



                                                                                                  FY




                                                           Year omitted from estimation sample

                                                        All-rail x post-change    x distance (100 mi)

               Notes: Figure plots focal coefficient estimates (and 95% confidence intervals)
               from a regression of log quantities with route-year fixed effects (as in Column
               5 of Table 3), omitting the given year.




                                                                         25
Figure D.6: Focal coefficient estimates from Table 5, omitting the given year
                            5

                            4

    Coefficient estimate
                            3

                            2

                            1

                            0

                           -1
                                   84



                                           85



                                                       86



                                                                87



                                                                         88



                                                                                  89



                                                                                           90
                                 18



                                         18



                                                     18



                                                              18



                                                                       18



                                                                                18



                                                                                         18
                                FY



                                        FY



                                                   FY



                                                            FY



                                                                      FY



                                                                              FY



                                                                                       FY
                                                Year omitted from estimation sample

                                             All-rail x post-change    x distance (100 mi)

    Notes: Figure plots focal coefficient estimates (and 95% confidence intervals)
    from a regression of traffic shares with route fixed effects (as in Column 2
    of Table 5), omitting the given year.




                                                              26
E        Proofs of Propositions

Proofs for Section 4.1

Lemma 1.
Standardization can generate the following payoffs to R1 and R2 relative to the status quo, before
accounting for the fixed cost of conversion C :
                             10 > 0,  10 = 0
    a. If R1 converts alone: R 1     R2

                             01 < 0,  01 < 0
    b. If R2 converts alone: R 1     R2

                                     11 >  10 ,  11 > 0
    c. If R1 and R2 convert jointly: R 1  R1    R2



Proof:

Part 1. If neither R1 nor R2 convert to standard gauge:

    1 = (P1 - c - )Q1 = (P1 - c - )(M1 - aP1 )
       1                                        1                      1
          = M1 - 2aP1 + a(c + ) = 0 = P1 =        (M1 + a(c + )) , Q1 = (M1 - a(c + ))
      P1                                       2a                      2
              1                       1
      1 =       (M1 + a(c + )) - c -    (M1 - a(c + ))
             2a                       2
                                                                           2
              1   M1               1     M1                1     M1
          =          -c-             a      - c - )       = a       -c-
              2   a                2     a                 4     a

                              M2              2
and by symmetry, 2 = 1
                     4a       a    - 2c -  .

R1 and R2 profits are thus:

                                          2                            2
    00        1   1        M1                   1   1     M2
    1    = 1 + 2 = a          -c-             +       a      - 2c - 
              2   4        a                    2   4     a
                                          2
    00  1    1      1     M2
    2  = 2 =          a      - 2c - 
        2    2      4     a




                                                    27
Part 2. If only R1 converts to standard gauge:

  1 = (P1 - c)Q1 = (P1 - c)(M1 - aP1 )
     1                                                    1                 1
        = M1 - 2aP1 + ac = 0         =            P1 =      (M1 + ac) , Q1 = (M1 - ac)
    P1                                                   2a                 2
            1                        1
    1 =       (M1 + ac) - c            (M1 - ac)
           2a                        2
                                                                      2
           1   M1             1     M1                1       M1
       =          -c            a      - c)          = a         -c
           2   a              2     a                 4       a

  2 = (P2 - 2c - )Q2 = (P2 - 2c - )(M2 - aP2 )
     2                                         1                       1
        = M2 - 2aP2 + a(2c + ) = 0 = P2 =        (M2 + a(2c + )) , Q2 = (M2 - a(2c + ))
    P2                                        2a                       2
            1                        1
    2 =       (M2 + a(2c + )) - c -    (M2 - a(2c + ))
           2a                        2
                                                                                       2
           1   M2                   1     M2                     1        M2
       =          - 2c -              a      - 2c - )           = a          - 2c - 
           2   a                    2     a                      4        a


R1 and R2 profits are thus:

                                      2                               2
  10      1   1           M1                  1    1     M2
  1  = 1 + 2 = a             -c           +          a      - 2c - 
          2   4           a                   2    4     a
                                              2
  10  1    1       1     M2
  2  = 2 =           a      - 2c - 
      2    2       4     a




                                                         28
Part 3. If only R2 converts to standard gauge:

  1 = (P1 - c - )Q1 = (P1 - c - )(M1 - aP1 )
     1                                        1                      1
        = M1 - 2aP1 + a(c + ) = 0 = P1 =        (M1 + a(c + )) , Q1 = (M1 - a(c + ))
    P1                                       2a                      2
            1                       1
    1 =       (M1 + a(c + )) - c -    (M1 - a(c + ))
           2a                       2
                                                                             2
           1   M1               1       M1                  1     M1
       =          -c-             a        - c - )         = a       -c-
           2   a                2       a                   4     a

  2 = (P2 - 2c - 2)Q2 = (P2 - 2c - 2)(M2 - aP2 )
     2                                         1                        1
        = M2 - 2aP2 + a(2c + 2) = 0 = P2 =       (M2 + a(2c + 2)) , Q2 = (M2 - a(2c + 2))
    P2                                        2a                        2
            1                          1
    2 =       (M2 + a(2c + 2)) - c - 2   (M2 - a(2c + 2))
           2a                          2
                                                                                   2
           1   M2                 1      M2                     1    M2
       =          - 2c - 2          a       - 2c - 2)          = a      - 2c - 2
           2   a                  2      a                      4    a


R1 and R2 profits are thus:

                                         2                               2
  01      1   1           M1                     1   1     M2
  1  = 1 + 2 = a             -c-             +         a      - 2c - 2
          2   4           a                      2   4     a
                                          2
  01  1    1       1     M2
  2  = 2 =           a      - 2c - 2
      2    2       4     a




                                                     29
Part 4. If both R1 and R2 convert to standard gauge:

  1 = (P1 - c)Q1 = (P1 - c)(M1 - aP1 )
     1                                                  1                 1
        = M1 - 2aP1 + ac = 0          =         P1 =      (M1 + ac) , Q1 = (M1 - ac)
    P1                                                 2a                 2
            1                         1
    1 =       (M1 + ac) - c             (M1 - ac)
           2a                         2
                                                                     2
           1   M1             1      M1             1       M1
       =          -c            a       - c)       = a         -c
           2   a              2      a              4       a

                     1        M2          2
and by symmetry, 2 = 4 a      a     - 2c .

R1 and R2 profits are thus:

                                      2                          2
  11        1   1         M1                1    1     M2
  1    = 1 + 2 = a           -c           +        a      - 2c
            2   4         a                 2    4     a
                                      2
  11  1    1       1     M2
  2  = 2 =           a      - 2c
      2    2       4     a




                                                       30
Part 5. Comparisons to the status quo


If R1 converts alone:
                                                2                                      2
  10    10   00  1               M1                  1    M1
  R 1 = R1 - R1 = a                 -c              - a      -c-
                 4               a                   4    a
                        2                             2
      1       M1                 M1                        1                    M1                     1          1
     = a         -c         -       -c-                   = a 2                    - c - 2            =  M1 - ac - a   >0
      4       a                  a                         4                    a                      2          2

  10    10   00
  R 2 = R2 - R2 = 0



If R2 converts alone:
                                                           2                                             2
  01    01   00         1       1     M2                                   1    1          M2
  R 1 = R1 - R1 =                 a      - 2c - 2                  -              a           - 2c - 
                        2       4     a                                    2    4          a
                                 2                             2
      1       M2                              M2
     = a         - 2c - 2             -          - 2c - 
      8       a                               a
                                      2                            2
      1       M2                                M2
     = a         - 2c -  -                -        - 2c - 
      8       a                                 a
      1            M2                                   1           3
     = a -2           - 2c -  + 2                    = -  M2 - 2ac - a                           <0
      8            a                                    4           2

  10    10   00    1           3
  R 2 = R2 - R2 = -  M2 - 2ac - a                              <0
                   4           2

If R1 and R2 convert jointly:

                                                                       2                                      2
  11    11   00   10                      1    1      M2                           1       1     M2
  R 1 = R1 - R1 = R1 +                           a       - 2c                  -             a      - 2c - 
                                          2    4      a                            2       4     a
                                                                       2                                      2
      1          1    1                        1      M2                         1         1     M2
     =  M1 - ac - a +                            a       - 2c                  -             a      - 2c - 
      2          2    2                        4      a                          2         4     a
                                                           2                                      2
      1          1   1                          M2                         M2
     =  M1 - ac - a + a                            - 2c            -          - 2c - 
      2          2   8                          a                          a
      1                 1    1     M2
     =  M1 - ac -         a + a 2     - 2c - 2
      2                 2    8     a
      1                 1    1           1     1               3
     =  M1 - ac -         a +  M2 - 2ac - a =  2M1 + M2 - 4ac - a                                                 >0
      2                 2    4           2     4               2

  11    11   00  1           1
  R 2 = R2 - R2 =  M2 - 2ac - a                           >0
                 4           2



                                                           31
Proposition 1.
                                        10 < C <  11 , there are two equilibria for standard-
In the absence of competition, provided R 1      R2
ization: either both firms convert to standard gauge, or neither firm converts (the status quo).
Unilateral conversion to standard gauge is never an equilibrium.

Proof:

                                         10 <  11 , so that  C s.t. C  ( 10 ,  11 ):
As a preliminary, we will establish that R 1  R2                        R1    R2

                    1               1     1             1  1 1
  2M1 < M2 = M1 < M2 = M1 - a < M2 = M1 - ac - a < M2 - ac - a
                    2               4     2             2  2 4
                  1     1             1
    = M1 - ac - a <        M2 - 2ac - a
                  2     2             2
           10   1           1       1             1    11
    = R     1 =    M1 - ac - a <        M2 - 2ac - a = R 2
                2           2       4             2


Status quo equilibrium: R1 does not convert to standard gauge  R2 does not convert.

   · (=) Suppose R1 does not convert to standard gauge. Then R2 will not convert to standard
                        01 - C , by Lemma 1.
     gauge, because 0 > R 2

   · (=) Suppose R2 does not convert to standard gauge. Then R1 will not convert to standard
                        10 - C , by the condition assumed.
     gauge, because 0 > R 1


Standardization equilibrium : R1 converts to standard gauge  R2 converts.

   · (=) Suppose R1 converts to standard gauge. Then R2 will also convert to standard gauge,
             11 - C > 0 =  10 , by Lemma 1 and the condition assumed.
     because R 2          R2

   · (=) Suppose R2 converts to standard gauge. Then R1 will also convert to standard gauge,
             11 - C > 0 >  01 , by Lemma 1 and the condition assumed.
     because R 1          R1




                                               32
 Proposition 2.
 Collective standardization is only an equilibrium outcome with collusion.

 Proof:

 The proof consists of two parts: (1) Collective standardization is not an equilibrium with competi-
 tion, and (2) it can be an equilibrium with collusion. For the sake of exposition we will set the fixed
 cost C of changing the gauge to C = 0, but the results hold with C > 0 subject to the regularity
 conditions below. We also assume that in the collusive scenario, R1-R2 and R3-R4 set a single,
 common price P to maximize joint profits, consistent with this paper's setting.

 The requisite regularity conditions are:

(RC1) Each party can unilaterally break the cartel but cannot unilaterally form it.

(RC2) When R1-R2 standardizes alone, its profits in a competitive market (subject to limit pricing)
       are greater than its profits in a collusive market (subject to side payments).

(RC3) The fixed cost of standardization (C ) is less than half of monopoly profits under standard-
       ization (in the notation used below: C < 1 11
                                                2 joint ).


 Part 1. Collective standardization is not an equilibrium with competition.

 With symmetric, undifferentiated competition, prices will be competed to marginal costs, as per
 the Bertrand paradox. Profits in the status quo are thus zero for both R1-R2 and R3-R4.

 If either R1-R2 or R3-R4 standardizes, it can set the monopolist profit-maximizing price or a limit
 price that prices the other out of the market and earns positive profits. Concretely: WLOG, suppose
 R1-R2 standardizes and R3-R4 doesn't, and let P  denote the monopolist profit-maximizing price.
 Then, if (i) P  < c2 + , then R1-R2 can price at P = P  , whereas if (ii) P  > c2 + , then R1-R2
 can set a limit price of P = c2 +  ­ in both cases, pricing R3-R4 out of the market, and yielding
 positive profits. If both R1-R2 and R3-R4 standardize, prices will again be competed to marginal
 costs (such that R3-R4 has no incentive to then do so). In this case, the model has two equilibria,
 whether one (and only one) of R1-R2 and R3-R4 standardizes.

 Part 2. Collective standardization can be an equilibrium with collusion.

 To show that collective standardization is an equilibrium under collusion, we'll begin by calculating
 payoffs to R1-R2 and R3-R4 under status quo, one-party, and joint standardization.




                                                   33
If neither or both routings standardize, they will be symmetric and split profits. If neither stan-
dardizes, equilibrium cartel price, quantity, and profits can be identified as follows:

   = (P - 2c - )(QR12 + QR34 ) = 2(P - 2c - )(M -  - aP )
     = 2(P (M - ) - aP 2 - (2c + )(M - ) + (2c + )aP
  
    = 2(M -  - 2aP + (2c + )a) = 0
  P
                1
   = P 00 =       [M -  + (2c + )a]
               2a
                       1
   = Q00          00
          R12 = QR34 = (M -  - (2c +  )a)
                       2

such that:

  00
  joint = (P - 2c -  )(QR12 + QR34 )
          1
     =      (M -  + (2c + )a) - 2c -  (M -  - (2c + )a)
         2a
        1
     =     (M -  + (2c + )a - 4ca - 2a)(M -  - (2c + )a)
       2a
        1
     =     (M -  - (2c + )a)(M -  - (2c + )a)
       2a
        1
     =     (M -  - (2c + )a)2
       2a

If both standardize,  = 0 and  drops out, such that:

          1
  P 11 =    [M + (2c)a]
         2a
                   1
  Q11        11
   R12 = QR34 = (M - (2c)a)
                   2
             1
  11
   joint =      (M - (2c)a)2
            2a

Now suppose WLOG that R1-R2 standardizes alone. In this event, the cartel maximizes profits by
having R1-R2 carry all traffic (at lower cost, as there are no capacity constraints), charge monopoly
prices (P 11 ), and split the profits (11
                                       joint ) with R3-R4. In principle this scenario could be sustained
with side payments: to make R3-R4 indifferent between this and joint standardization, R1-R2 must
pay R3-R4 ( 1 11                                          1 11
            2 joint - C ) and would then retain profit of 2 joint .

However, because R1-R2 can unilaterally leave the cartel (RC1), side payments are not incentive
compatible: once it has standardized, R1-R2 can increase profits by exiting the cartel and reverting
to the competitive equilibrium where it is a monopolist subject to limit pricing (RC2), and R3-R4
makes zero profits and has no incentive to standardize. With collusion, the R3-R4 best response
to standardization by R1-R2 is thus to standardize as well.



                                                  34
Proofs for Section 4.2

Proposition 3. Effects of standardization on collusive price and quantities
                                                                     1
Eliminating the break in gauge reduces the collusive price by        4 ,   redistributes market share from
                                                           1
steamships to all-rail, and increases total shipments by   2  (a   - b).

Proof:

Part 1. In the pre-period, where BR = BS = 1:

   = (P - c)(QR + QS ) - (QR + QS ) = (P - c - )(QR + QS )
     = (P - c - )[(1 - (a - b)P ) + (1 - (a - b)P )]
     = 2(P - c - )(1 - (a - b)P )
     = 2(P - c -  - (a - b)P 2 + (c + )(a - b)P )
                                                                      1     1
    = 2(1 - 2(a - b)P + (c + )(a - b)) = 0        =        P =             + (c + )
  P                                                                2(a - b) 2


Quantities QR and QS are then as follows:

                                        1     1
  QR = 1 - (a - b)P = 1 - (a - b)            + (c + )
                                     2(a - b) 2
            1 1               1
     =1-     - (a - b)(c + ) = (1 - (a - b)(c + ))
            2 2               2

and by symmetry, QS = 1
                      2 (1 - (a - b)(c +  )).


Part 2. In the post-period, where BR = 0 and BS = 1:

   = (P - c)(QR + QS ) - (QS ) = (P - c)QR + (P - c - )QS
     = (P - c)(1 +  - (a - b)P ) + (P - c - )(1 -  - (a - b)P )
     = 2(P - c)(1 - (a - b)P ) - (1 -  - (a - b)P )
     = 2(P - c - (a - b)P 2 + c(a - b)P - (1 -  - (a - b)P ))


                                                                              1     1    1
    = 2(1 - 2(a - b)P + c(a - b)) + (a - b) = 0        =           P =             + (c + )
  P                                                                        2(a - b) 2    2




                                                 35
Quantities QR and QS are then as follows:

                                       1       1    1
  QR = 1 +  - (a - b)P = 1 +  - (a - b)     + (c + )
                                    2(a - b) 2      2
              1 1           1      1                1
      = 1 +  - - (a - b)(c + ) =  + (1 - (a - b)(c + ))
              2 2           2      2                2

and

                                       1      1     1
  QS = 1 -  - (a - b)P = 1 -  - (a - b)     + (c + )
                                    2(a - b) 2      2
              1 1           1        1                1
      = 1 -  - - (a - b)(c + ) = - + (1 - (a - b)(c + ))
              2 2           2        2                2


Part 3. Pre vs. Post Comparisons

Part 3a. Prices

Post-gauge change, the change in the collusive price is:

  P = P post - P pre

             1     1    1       1     1        1  1    1
      =           + (c + ) -         + (c + ) =  -  = -  < 0
          2(a - b) 2    2    2(a - b) 2        4  2    4


Part 3b. Quantities

Post-gauge change, the change in all-rail shipments is:

  QR = Qpost pre
        R - QR

          1                1     1                       1
      =  + (1 - (a - b)(c + )) - (1 - (a - b)(c + )) =  + (a - b)
          2                2     2                       4

whereas the change in steamship shipments is:

  QS = Qpost
        S    - Qpre
                S

           1                1     1                        1
      = - + (1 - (a - b)(c + )) - (1 - (a - b)(c + )) = - + (a - b)
           2                2     2                        4

Adding the two together, the change in total shipments is:

                   1
  QT OT = QR + QS = (a - b)
                   2




                                                36
Corollary 3.1. Conditions under which prices and total quantity may not change
(i) If  = 0, the collusive price and total shipments are unaffected by removing the break in gauge.
(ii) If  > 0, and collusive prices and quantities do not adjust after removing the break in gauge,
the cost of price adjustments must be greater than the foregone profits, 1 2
                                                                         8  (a - b).


Proof:

Part 1.

When  = 0: P = 1                  1
               4  = 0 and QT OT = 2 (a - b) = 0.


Part 2.

To demonstrate this statement, we'll need to calculate post-gauge change profits under unadjusted
prices (optimized for pre-gauge change period) and adjusted prices (optimized for post-gauge change
period), which we can denote P pre and P post :

  (P pre ) = (P pre - c) · QT OT -  · QS
     = (P pre - c) · 2 [1 - (a - b)P pre ] -  · [1 -  - (a - b)P pre ]
  (P post ) = (P post - c) · QT OT -  · QS
     = (P post - c) · 2 1 - (a - b)P post -  · 1 -  - (a - b)P post


Taking the difference:

  (P post ) - (P pre )
     = 2(1 - (a - b)P post )(P post - c) - (1 -  - (a - b)P post )
          - [2(1 - (a - b)P pre )(P pre - c) - (1 -  - (a - b)P pre )]
     = 2(P post - (a - b)(P post )2 + c(a - b)P post ) + (a - b)P post
          - 2(P pre - (a - b)(P pre )2 + c(a - b)P pre ) + (a - b)P pre
     = (2 + (2c + )(a - b))(P post - P pre ) - 2(a - b)((P post )2 - (P pre )2 )
     = (P post - P pre )(2 + (2c + )(a - b) - 2(a - b)(P post + P pre ))
             1                                        1       3
     =      -       (2 + (2c + )(a - b) - 2(a - b)       +c+ 
             4                                      a-b       4
             1                                           3
     =      -       (2 + (2c + )(a - b) - 2 - 2c(a - b) - (a - b)
             4                                           2
             1        1             1
     =      -       - (a - b) = 2 (a - b)
             4        2             8

If the cartel does not adjust its price, then the cost of the price adjustment must be greater than
this amount, which is the incremental profit it would realize by re-optimizing P .


                                                     37
Proofs for Section 4.3

Proposition 4. Effects of standardization in a competitive market
Eliminating the break in gauge has an ambiguous effect on the all-rail price, depending on the size
of a demand effect, which puts upward pressure on the all-rail price, and the pass-through of cost
savings, which puts downward pressure. Steamship prices strictly decline, market share shifts from
                                                                a(a-b)
steamships to all-rail, and total shipments increase by          2a-b .


Proof:

Part 1. In the pre-period, where BR = BS = 1:

                                            2
  R = (1 - aPR + bPS )(PR - c - ) = (PR - aPR + bPS PR ) + (1 - aPR + bPS )(-c - )
     R
       = 1 - 2aPR + bPS + a(c + ) = 0               =         PR = (1 + bPS + a(c + ))/2a
    PR

                                            2
  S = (1 - aPS + bPR )(PS - c - ) = (PS - aPS + bPR PS ) + (1 - aPS + bPR )(-c - )
     S
       = 1 - 2aPS + bPR + a(c + ) = 0              =          PS = (1 + bPR + a(c + ))/2a
    PS

Combining the two, we can solve for PR and PS :

               1+bPR +a(c+)
         1+b        2a          + a(c + )          1   b   b2     b       1
  PR =                                        =      + 2 + 2 PR + (c + ) + (c + )
                       2a                         2a 4a   4a     4a       2

  4a2 - b2       1   b             b   1                     2a   b        ab   2a2
           PR =    +   +             +        (c + ) =          +    +        +       (c + )
    4a2         2a 4a2            4a 2                       4a2 4a2      4a2 4a2

           1
  PR =          ((2a + b) + (ab + 2a2 )(c + ))
         4a2
           - b2
              1                                          1
     =                  ((2a + b) + a(2a + b)(c + )) =        (1 + a(c + ))
       (2a + b)(2a - b)                                2a - b

                           1
and by symmetry, PS =    2a-b   (1 + a(c + )).


Quantities QR and QS are then as follows:

                                   1                          1
  QR = 1 - aPR + bPS = 1 - a            (a(c + ) + 1) + b          (a(c + ) + 1)
                                 2a - b                     2a - b
                     1                           a-b
     = 1 - (a - b)        (a(c + ) + 1) = 1 -          (a(c + ) + 1)
                   2a - b                       2a - b

                                a-b
and by symmetry, QS = 1 -       2a-b (a(c   + ) + 1).


                                                        38
Part 2. In the post-period, where BR = 0 and BS = 1:

                                                 2
  R = (1 +  - aPR + bPS )(PR - c) = (PR + PR - aPR + bPS PR ) + (1 +  - aPR + bPS )(-c)
     R
       = 1 +  - 2aPR + bPS + ac = 0        =       PR = (1 +  + bPS + ac)/2a
    PR

                                                    2
  S = (1 -  - aPS + bPR )(PS - c - ) = (PS - PS - aPS + bPR PS ) + (1 -  - aPS + bPR )(-c - )
     S
       = 1 -  - 2aPS + bPR + a(c + ) = 0          =    PS = (1 -  + bPR + a(c + ))/2a
    PS

Combining the two, we can solve for PR and PS :

                   1-+bPR +a(c+)
         1++b           2a         + ac
  PR =
                      2a
          1          b          b2     b       1
     =      (1 + ) + 2 (1 - ) + 2 PR + (c + ) + c
         2a         4a         4a     4a       2

  4a2 - b2        1          b             b    1      b
       2
            PR =    (1 + ) + 2 (1 - ) +       +    c+ 
    4a           2a         4a            4a 2        4a
         2a            b            ab   2a 2      ab
    = 2 (1 + ) + 2 (1 - ) +           2
                                        + 2 c + 2
        4a            4a           4a    4a       4a

            1
  PR =           (2a(1 + ) + b(1 - ) + (ab + 2a2 )c + ab)
        4a2 - b2
           1
     = 2        (2a(1 + ) + b(1 - ) + (ab + 2a2 )(c + ) - 2a2 )
       4a - b2
               1
     =                  ((2a + b) + a(2a + b)(c + ) + (2a - b) - 2a2 )
       (2a + b)(2a - b)
          1                       1                1
     =        (1 + a(c + )) +         () -                   (2a2 )
       2a - b                  2a + b       (2a + b)(2a - b)




                                              39
and

                    1++bPS +ac
         1-+b          2a        + (c + )
  PS =
                      2a
         1          b          b2     b  1
      =    (1 - ) + 2 (1 + ) + 2 PS + c + (c + )
        2a         4a         4a     4a  2

  4a2 - b2        1          b             b    1    1
       2
            PS =    (1 - ) + 2 (1 + ) +       +    c+ 
    4a           2a         4a            4a 2       2
         2a            b            ab   2a 2     2a
    = 2 (1 - ) + 2 (1 + ) +           2
                                        + 2 c + 2
        4a            4a           4a    4a       4a

            1
  PS =            (2a(1 - ) + b(1 + ) + (ab + 2a2 )c + 2a)
         4a2- b2
           1
      = 2        (2a(1 - ) + b(1 + ) + (ab + 2a2 )(c + ) - ab)
        4a - b2
                1
      =                  ((2a + b) + a(2a + b)(c + ) - (2a - b) - ab)
        (2a + b)(2a - b)
          1                        1                1
      =        (1 + a(c + )) -         () -                   (ab)
        2a - b                  2a + b       (2a + b)(2a - b)


Quantities QR and QS are then as follows:

  QR = 1 +  - aPR + bPS
                   1                       1                 1
      =1+-a             (a(c + ) + 1) +         () -                   (2a2 )
                 2a - b                  2a + b       (2a + b)(2a - b)
            1                       1                  1
       +b        (a(c + ) + 1) -         () -                    (ab)
          2a - b                  2a + b        (2a + b)(2a - b)
              a-b                     a+b             a(2a2 - b2 )
      =1+-          (a(c + ) + 1) -         () +                    ()
             2a - b                  2a + b        (2a + b)(2a - b)

and

  QS = 1 -  - aPS + bPR
                   1                       1                 1
      =1--a             (a(c + ) + 1) -         () -                    (ab)
                 2a - b                  2a + b       (2a + b)(2a - b)
            1                       1                  1
       +b        (a(c + ) + 1) +         () -                    (2a2 )
          2a - b                  2a + b        (2a + b)(2a - b)
              a-b                     a+b            a(ab - 2ab)
      =1--          (a(c + ) + 1) +         () +                    ()
             2a - b                  2a + b        (2a + b)(2a - b)




                                                40
Part 3. Pre vs. Post Comparisons

Part 3a. Prices

Post-gauge change, the change in the all-rail price is:

        post    pre
  PR = PR    - PR

          1                       1                1                     1
     =         (1 + a(c + )) +         () -                  (2a2 ) -         (1 + a(c + ))
       2a - b                   2a + b      (2a + b)(2a - b)           2a - b
                                                          
         1                  1                             > 0 if  > 1 (2a2 )
                                                                      2a+b
     =        () -                    (2a2 ) = PR
       2a + b        (2a + b)(2a - b)                     < 0 if  < 1 (2a2 )
                                                                         2a+b
         Demand effect          Cost effect


which consists of both a demand effect driven by the improvement in the relative quality of all-rail
shipment (relative to steamships), which puts upward pressure on PR , and a cost effect driven by
the reduction in the cost of all-rail carriage, which puts downward pressure on PR . The net effect
on PR may be positive or negative.

The change in the steamship price is:

        post    pre
  PS = PS    - PS

            1                      1                1                  1
     =           (1 + a(c + )) -        () -                  (ab) -        (1 + a(c + ))
          2a - b                 2a + b      (2a + b)(2a - b)        2a - b
             1                1
     =-           () -                  (ab)       =    PS < 0
           2a + b      (2a + b)(2a - b)
         Demand effect    Competitor cost effect


which consists of both a demand effect driven by the reduction in the relative quality of steamships
(relative to all-rail), which puts downward pressure on PS , and a competition effect driven by
the reduction in the all-rail costs of carriage, which puts further downward pressure on PS . The
combined effect on PS is negative.

Part 3b. Quantities

Post-gauge change, the change in all-rail shipments is:

  QR = Qpost pre
        R - QR

                     a-b                    a+b          a(2a2 - b2 )            a-b
     = 1+-                 (a(c + ) + 1) -        () +                  () - 1 -        (a(c + ) + 1)
                    2a - b                 2a + b      (2a + b)(2a - b)          2a - b

              a+b           a(2a2 - b2 )
     =-              () +                  ()
              2a + b      (2a + b)(2a - b)


                                                   41
whereas the change in steamship shipments is:

  QS = Qpost
        S    - Qpre
                S

                   a-b                    a+b          a(ab - 2ab)             a-b
     = 1--               (a(c + ) + 1) +        () +                  () - 1 -        (a(c + ) + 1)
                  2a - b                 2a + b      (2a + b)(2a - b)          2a - b
              a+b           a(ab - 2ab)
     = - +           () +                  ()
              2a + b      (2a + b)(2a - b)

Adding the two together, the change in total shipments is:

                               a(2a2 - ab - 2b2 )      a(2a + b)(a - b)      a(a - b)
  QT OT = QR + QS =                               () =                  () =          ()
                                (2a + b)(2a - b)       (2a + b)(2a - b)      (2a - b)




Corollary 4.1. Comparing the effects by market structure
Standardization generates a larger increase in total shipments under competition than collusion.

Proof:
                               a(a-b)                                                  1
The increase in shipments is    2a-b    under competition (Proposition 4), compared to 2 (a - b) under
collusion (Proposition 3, although Corollary 3.1 also points out that the increase in shipments may
be zero if cartel price changes are costly).

The formal comparison is as follows:
                                          1
  a(a - b)      1             a(a - b) - 2  (a - b)(2a - b)
            -     (a - b) =
   2a - b       2                        2a - b
     a(a - b) - a(a - b) + 1
                           2 b (a - b)  1      a-b
   =                                   = b             >0
                  2a - b                2     2a - b




                                                    42
