                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          WORK AFTER RETIREMENT:
              WORKLIFE TRANSITIONS OF CAREER PUBLIC EMPLOYESS

                                        Robert L. Clark
                                      Robert G. Hammond
                                          Siyan Liu

                                       Working Paper 26272
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26272


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the Sloan Foundation, Grant Number
2013-10-20. The research reported here is part of an on-going project that is being conducted in
partnership with the North Carolina Retirement Systems Division. The opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not represent the opinions or policy of the
North Carolina Retirement System, any other institution with which the authors are affiliated, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Robert L. Clark, Robert G. Hammond, and Siyan Liu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Work after Retirement: Worklife Transitions of Career Public Employess
Robert L. Clark, Robert G. Hammond, and Siyan Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 26272
September 2019
JEL No. J14,J26,J45

                                          ABSTRACT

Engaging in paid employment after claiming retirement benefits may be an important avenue for
individuals to work longer as life expectancies rise. After separating from one's career employer,
individuals may engage in paid work to stay active or to supplement their current level of
retirement savings or both. Individuals who choose not to work after claiming may be
expressing their preference to stay retired, perhaps because their retirement income is sufficient.
However, the decision to work after claiming may be driven by the lack of retirement planning
and insufficient savings, while the lack of post-claiming work may reflect the inability to find
adequate employment opportunities. We use administrative records merged with panel data from
several surveys of public employees in North Carolina to study the decision to engage in paid
work after claiming retirement benefits. More than 60 percent of active workers plan to work
after claiming benefits, while only around 42 percent of the same sample of individuals have
engaged in post-claiming paid work in the first few years after leaving public sector employment.
Despite this gap, stated work plans are strongly predictive of actual post-claiming work behavior


Robert L. Clark                                  Siyan Liu
Poole College of Management                      North Carolina State University
Box 7229                                         Raleigh, NC 27695
North Carolina State University                  sliu27@ncsu.edu
Raleigh, NC 27695
and NBER
robert_clark@ncsu.edu

Robert G. Hammond
Department of Economics, Finance
and Legal Studies
University of Alabama
robert.hammond@cba.ua.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26272
                                       Work after Retirement:
                      Worklife Transitions of Career Public Employees
I. Introduction

          For the past three decades, labor force participation rates among older persons have been

rising. 1 A longer worklife is consistent with increasing life expectancy and improving health

status. However, working longer does not necessarily imply delaying retirement from career

jobs. Increasingly, retirement is becoming a transitional process instead of a one-time event.

Individuals leave their career jobs and move on to new employment situations before

permanently leaving the labor force. 2

          There is long literature examining the transition from career jobs to bridge jobs to

complete retirement. Most of these studies focus on all retiring workers without distinguishing

between public and private sector workers. There are several reasons that one might expect

public retirees to have a higher incidence of return to work after retirement compared to private

sector retirees. Most importantly, public employees tend to retire at younger ages. Earlier

retirement decisions are driven, in part, by coverage of more generous retirement benefits such as




1
    The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that the participation rate of men aged 60-64 rose from 54.3
percent in 1996 to 62.0 percent in 2016. Over the same period, the rate for men 65 and older increased
from 16.9 percent to 24.0 percent. Similarly, the participation rate of women aged 60-64 increased from
38.2 percent to 50.1 percent while the rate for those aged 65 and older rose from 8.6 percent to 15.5
percent. See https://www.bls.gov/emp/tables/civilian-labor-force-participation-rate.htm.
2
    Cahill, Giandrea, and Quinn (2018) provide a comprehensive review of the bridge job literature. They
conclude that "One well-documented finding from the retirement literature is that between one half and
two thirds of older Americans with career jobs transition to a new job (a "bridge" job) before exiting the
labor force" (page 346).

                                                       2
defined benefit plans and retiree health insurance. 3 The economic incentives imbedded in

defined benefit pension encourage public sector employees to leave their state or local

government jobs as soon as they qualify for retirement benefits. Rules regarding public sector

defined benefit pension plans may limit immediate return to paid employment in public agencies

in the same state or local government following retirement from a public sector job, but these

regulations do not prohibit employment by private firms. 4

            Understanding what retirement paths individuals follow and why can help inform

government and employer policies regarding benefit design and return to work provisions. We

use a novel dataset comprised of three surveys merged with administrative records to examine

the retirement transitions of public sector workers in North Carolina. First, we study post-

retirement work plans as employees approach and enter retirement from their government job.

We find that more than 70 percent of workers over the age of 50 plan to engage in paid work

after claiming retirement benefits. Planning for post-claiming work is associated with those who

are younger, more highly educated, and have children. Among married individuals, having a

currently employed spouse is positively associated with own post-claiming work plans.




3
    Clark, Craig, and Sabelhaus (2011) provide a discussion of the generosity of state and local retirement
plans and how they vary by whether workers are also covered by Social Security. Clark and Morrill
(2010) examine the retiree health plans of states and describe their generosity and funding status.
4
    Franzel, Young, and Liss-Levinson (2018) provide a detailed overview of return to work policies of 83
of the largest state pension plans. They find substantial differences across public plans with 40 of these
plans making significant modifications to their policies since 2009. Fitzpatrick (2019) examines the
impact of hours restrictions on post-retirement work by public employees and finds that raising the
number of hours that retirees can work leads to increased benefit claiming and greater hours of work by
retirees.

                                                       3
       Then, we study survey responses to examine the labor market participation of these

individuals shortly after claiming retirement benefits. Around 42 percent of retirees have worked

since claiming, which is a period of around 18 months on average. More than 40 percent of

these individuals started working within 3 months of benefit claiming. We find plans to work

after leaving the career job and claiming pension benefits to be positively associated with work

after retirement, as are younger age and better health. As with plans, among those who are

married, having a working spouse is positively associated with own work. Further, we consider

separately whether individuals are working post-retirement due to insufficient retirement income

and savings, or whether individuals exhibit preferences for engaging in post-retirement

productive activities.

       Our final analysis uses self-reported measures to gauge the financial well-being of our

sample in the early years after leaving career employment. We conclude that stated retirement

well-being is lower for individuals who, late in their career, reported that they planned to engage

in post-claiming work, relative to those who did not plan to work. It appears that, on average,

late career plans to work after claiming retirement benefits may be correlated with low self-

perceived retirement preparedness.

       Our findings suggest that many public workers make plans about work after retirement.

Some readily realize these plans soon after benefit claiming, which may improve their retirement

income security. The key policy question is whether modifications to retirement rules would

increase welfare by allowing post-claiming paid work when an individual wants to work but is

constrained by income or hours restrictions. Retirement plan characteristics may influence the

work after retirement choices both through relatively young ages for full eligibility for benefits

and through limiting options for return to work.



                                                   4
II. Background

Work after Retirement Incentives for Public Workers

          Most economic studies of the final worklife transition examine data from either the

Retirement History Study (RHS) conducted between 1969 and 1979 and the more recent Health

and Retirement Survey (HRS), which began in 1992 and is still ongoing. In general, studies

based on these surveys do not consider differences between public and private sector workers in

their transition from career jobs to complete retirement from the labor force. 5

          It is important to distinguish between public and private sector workers when examining

their decisions to work after retirement. To begin with, work after retirement behavior may

differ for those covered by a defined benefit pension (DB) plan compared to workers covered by

defined contribution plans (DC) and those without any retirement benefits. The most important

difference is that DB participants eligible for unreduced retirement benefits experience large

opportunity costs of continued working on their career job. Thus, an individual that would prefer

to continue in her job, all else equal, faces a strong incentive to terminate employment and claim

retirement benefits.

          The pension effect is one of the primary reasons we anticipate that public employees

leave their career jobs at relative young ages. In comparison, DC participants continue to build

retirement income through delayed retirement. Second, most defined benefit pension plans

include a final average salary calculation based on actual earning during those years. This will

incentivize individuals to work more hours per year towards the end of a career. Thus, an

individual that might otherwise reduce hours on career jobs at older ages will instead face an



5
    An exception to this gap in the literature is the recent study by Quinn, Cahill, and Gianrea (2019
forthcoming).

                                                        5
incentive to claim retirement benefits and shift to new jobs that have greater flexibility in hours

after retirement. Since public employees are much more likely to be covered by DB plans, these

retirement incentives may lead to higher proportions of early retirement and work after

retirement among public workers.

           Details of DB plans also vary between the public sector and the private sector. Public

pension plans typically allow employees to reach the normal retirement age at relatively young

ages and almost all have early retirement options that allow workers reaching age 50 with 20 or

more years of service to retire at a reduced benefit. A worker covered by a defined benefit

pension without a minimum age requirement could potentially retire in their 50s with unreduced

benefits after some minimum years of service (e.g., 30 years of service). 6 In addition, many of

these relatively young retirees are eligible to remain in their employer's health plan, which is a

valuable benefit for those not yet eligible for Medicare.

           Another potentially important distinction between public and private sector defined

benefit pension is the default to an annuity type distribution. In the private sector, ERISA rules

mandate that all DB plan participants default into a Joint and Survivor benefit and require a

beneficiary's signature before electing for a single life annuity. In the public sector, there is no

default option and the rate of retirees selecting single-life annuities is considerably higher. 7

Thus, conditional on earnings and the benefit formula, a public sector worker will, on average,




6
    Many public plans allow workers to qualify for unreduced pension benefits after achieving 30 years of
service while others have provisions such as the rule of 85 for normal retirement (age plus years of
service). Thus, many workers qualify for full retirement benefits in their 50s.
7
    Clark, Hammond, and Vanderweide (2019 forthcoming) describe the differences in annuities in public
and private pension plans and how defaults influence the probability of selecting a joint and survivor
benefit.

                                                      6
be receiving a higher monthly benefit. Further, many public plans offer a Social Security

leveling option whereby the individual receives a higher benefit up until age 62 (see Clark, et al,

2018). At that point, the benefit is reduced such that the sum of the pension and expected Social

Security benefit is equal to the prior benefit amount. This will again provide more wealth at

earlier ages, at the expense of higher benefits over the longer term. This higher wealth may

disincentivize working after retirement through an "income effect." Thus, differences in pension

benefits and retiree health insurance coverage may push relatively young workers out of career

jobs. We do not have a priori prediction on their tendency to work after claiming benefits.

Being young and in good health, these individuals may be more likely to seek bridge jobs.

However, given their lifetime benefits, they will have a lower economic need to work after

retirement.

       While all of these frictions are present in any defined benefit pension plan, these may be

even more problematic in the public sector in terms of continued employment. First, while in the

private sector there may be other firms that an individual can work at and not be subject to a

pension plan-related earnings test, finding appropriate work that is not covered by the same

retirement system may be challenging for public workers. Furthermore, public sector workers

are often covered by strict wage schedules whereby the most experienced are paid the most.

This will inhibit public employers from making accommodations for their oldest, and hence

highest paid, employees.

       The choice of post-career employment with the same public employer is subject to state

and federal laws. Changes in federal legislation to allow in-service distributions of pension

benefits after employees have attained the normal retirement age has moderated a significant




                                                 7
impediment to phased retirement (Hill, 2010). 8 In the public sector, the length of time between

retirement and re-employment is clearly stated along with how returning to work impacts the

annual pension amount. 9

          Public sector workers may have different preferences than private sector counterparts.

There is some evidence indicating that public sector workers are more risk averse than

comparable individuals who choose to work in the private sector (Bellante and Link, 1981). This

greater risk aversion influences individuals to migrate toward jobs with lower turnover

probabilities, DB pension plans, retiree health insurance, along with other benefits at the expense

of lower lifetime earnings. Clark, Hammond, and Khalaf (2019) provide a discussion of risk and

time preferences and their importance in retirement planning for public employees. Having

worked for a full career with the belief of a large retirement benefit, public sector workers may

be less inclined to seek employment after claiming retirement benefits.

Bridge Jobs and Work after Retirement

          Over the past three decades, economists have been documenting the change in the

worklife transition and the importance of individuals moving to bridge jobs (e.g., Quinn 1980,

1999, Ruhm 1990). Bridge jobs are typically defined as a job not with one's former employer


8
    Allen, Clark, and Ghent (2004) and Johnson (2011) also discuss the incidence of phased retirement and
why many employers are reluctant to adopt formal phased retirement programs.
9
    In North Carolina, there is a six-month mandatory work break for teachers and state employees and a
one-month mandatory work break for local government employees after claiming pension benefits.
Workers who return to work for a public employer in the same benefit system also face restraints in the
number of hours worked and earnings in order to continue receiving benefits. The rules governing return
to work for state retirees in North Carolina are defined in
https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Return%20to%20Work/RTWGuidanceTSERS.pdf, while the regulations
for employees of local governments are described at
https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Return%20to%20Work/RTWGuidanceLGERS.pdf.

                                                      8
that has fewer hours and less responsibility, acting as a bridge from full time work to complete

retirement. Clark and Morrill (2017) find that the first transition of 20 percent of career

employees in the 1992 HRS cohort was to a bridge job with an additional 5 percent moving into

self-employment. 10 Individuals who leave career employers but choose not to move directly

into complete retirement may be seeking new challenges in different types of jobs or they may be

looking for jobs with less physical or mental stress.

          A series of studies indicate that the new norm of retirement is to gradually transition from

full-time work with a career employer to an additional period of employment prior to leaving the

labor force permanently. 11 Giandrea, Cahill, and Quinn (2009) find that 60 percent of

individuals leaving full-time career jobs ultimately moved to bridge jobs instead of permanently

retiring. The transition often includes changes in occupations, industries, and hours of work.

For example, Giandrea, Cahill, and Quinn (2009) show that 46 percent of men and 54 percent of

women transiting to bridge jobs were working part-time for the cohort aged between 59 and 64

in 2006. Johnson, Kawachi, and Lewis (2009) find that two thirds of older job changers

switched occupations and that hourly wages were substantially lower in their bridge jobs. They

note that bridge jobs tend to be less stressful, have more flexible work schedules, and are less

likely to have health insurance.

          The probability of a gradual transition into retirement is found to be affected by the age

of termination of career job, health status at retirement, and type of pension in which the



10
     This analysis of transitions is based on comparing the employment status in one wave of the HRS to the
next wave, which is two years later. Thus, what is reported as a change in status for a career job to a
bridge job could have involved some period of time out of the labor force.
11
     For some individuals, the retirement transition includes a movement into self-employment where hours
and work assignments can be more flexible (Giandrea, Cahill, and Quinn, 2008).

                                                      9
individual was enrolled. Cahill, Giandrea, and Quinn (2006) examine ten years of data from the

HRS and find that the tendency to move to a post-career bridge job is positively correlated with

young age, good health, number of dependent children, and the lack of health insurance coverage

on full-time career jobs. They also find that those with both defined benefit and defined

contribution pension plans likely to hold a bridge job. Quinn, Cahill, and Giandrea (2019) is one

of the few studies to directly compare the retirement transition in public sector to that of private

sector workers. They find that gradual retirements of public sector career workers are very

similar to those in the private sector. They conclude that public-sector workers are not more

likely than private-sector workers to choose one-time, permanent exits from the labor force. The

present study builds on this analysis but focuses solely on public retirees and their tendency to

work after retirement from full-time career jobs using surveys that were developed specifically to

examine the retirement transition.

Unretirements and Labor Force Reentry

       Subsequent to retirement from full-time career jobs or bridge jobs, the worklife transition

may include a period of non-employment followed by the return to the labor force. The decision

to re-enter the labor force after a period of nonparticipation may be part of an ex ante retirement

plan. Alternatively, re-entry may not be planned at the time of retirement. Instead, unexpected

economic events, such as a shock to retirement wealth due to market fluctuations or changes in

family circumstances, can create a renewed need for income. Thus, return to work or the

movement to bridge jobs may be due to bad planning or unanticipated events may have resulted

in a change in the optimal work plans in retirement. We are unable to test the magnitude of these

two hypotheses on the reasons for work after retirement.




                                                 10
             Maestas (2010) uses the HRS to examine the tendency of individuals to return to work

after retiring and completely leaving the labor force. She finds that between 27 and 37 percent of

individuals who moved from work to full retirement reversed their retirement decisions and re-

entered the labor market. Some of these re-entries were planned while individuals were still on

their career jobs and some were the result of unanticipated events in the post-retirement period.

She finds that the jobs obtained by these individuals are similar to the bridge jobs of those that

move from career jobs to new employment.

             Zissimopoulos and Karoly (2009) examine data from the HRS from 1992 to 2002 and

find that 5 percent of retirees found new employers between waves of the survey and that about

one third of those who had left the labor force moved into self-employment. Cahill, Giandrea,

and Quinn (2011) estimate that about 15 percent of career employees who exited the labor force

returned to work. As might be expected, younger and healthier individuals are more likely to

return to the labor force. Taken together, the limited research on labor force re-entry by retirees

indicates that complete withdrawal from the labor force is not a permanent state for many

individuals and that re-entering the labor force after a period of zero hours of work can be part of

a lifetime plan or driven by unexpected events that occur after retirement.

      III.      Evidence on Public Employees in North Carolina

             This study provides a detailed assessment of retirement and work after retirement plans

of older public employees in North Carolina along with the post-claiming of pension benefits

work behavior of recent retirees. The analysis is based on three surveys of employees aged 50 to

69 who were working full-time in 2014. 12 The analysis began when we were provided the



12
     The Data Appendix provides a discussion of these surveys and the sample construction.

                                                     11
administrative records of all full-time state and local employees employed as of March 2014.

From these data as well as a second release of administrative records as of April 2016, we drew

random stratified samples of these older workers and sent detailed questionnaires asking about

their future work and retirement plans. As part of a larger research project on the transition of

from career jobs to retirement by public employees, we conducted several surveys, including

surveys of active workers and surveys of benefit claimants. 13 Surveys were fielded in spring

2014, 2016, and 2018 with individuals being linked across the surveys.

           We focus on individuals for whom we have two sets of survey responses: pre-claiming

(i.e., individuals employed full-time by their public sector employer) and after claiming

retirement benefits. Our restriction to respondents who retired between surveys generates a

sample of 590 individuals. 261 (44.2 percent of the full sample) of these individuals claimed

benefits between 2014 and 2016. We refer to this sample as "Sample 1." 329 (55.8 of the full

sample) claimed between 2016 and 2018, who are referred to as "Sample 2." Table 1 presents

the means of economic and demographic characteristics of all of these individuals and then

separately by whether retirement occurred in the first or second time period described above.

The mean age is 60.7 years as of 2016. About 70 percent of the sample is female, and about 30

percent are teachers. 14 The respondents are mostly white with relatively high levels of

education. 15


13
     For more detail on the larger project, please see: https://sites.google.com/site/publicsectorretirement/.
14
     We define teachers as those who have the job classification "Education professionals" in our
administrative records.
15
     The data are from two samples, and the sample construction is described in more detail in the Data
Appendix. For the second sample, the administrative records do not include information on years of
service. The other variables are observed consistently across the two samples.


                                                        12
                                                    [Table 1]

           All full-time employees working for a state agency in North Carolina, as well as teachers

employed by local public school systems, are required to enroll in the Teachers and State

Employees Retirement System (TSERS). Most municipal, county, and other local governmental

employers participate in Local Government Employees Retirement System (LGERS). Both

plans are defined benefit pension plans and are managed through the office of the State

Treasurer. The benefit formula for TSERS is 1.82 percent of the employees' final average salary

per year of creditable service while the LGERS benefit is based on 1.85 percent per year of

service. Both plans provide an unreduced benefit for individuals at any age with 30 years of

service, at age 62 with 20 years of service, or at age 65 with 5 years of service. Thus, individuals

who entered public employment in NC immediately after completing high school or college

could be eligible for an unreduced benefit beginning around age 50. Early retirement benefits

are available to individuals who attain age 50 with 20 years of service. 16

           Both state and local employees along with teachers are also covered by Social Security.

Most of those who are covered by TSERS are also eligible to remain in the state health plan after

retirement. Some local governments also cover employees and retirees in the state health plan,

while others provide their own health insurance plan. Most state and many local employees are

also eligible to participate in the two state-managed voluntary supplemental retirement saving

plans, the NC 401(k) Plan and the NC 457 Plan, in addition to other voluntary supplemental



16
     Details of the benefit formulas and eligibility conditions for retirement benefits are described in the
employee handbooks for both systems which can be found at
https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Benefits%20Handbooks/TSERShandbook.pdf
https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Benefits%20Handbooks/LGERShandbook.pdf.

                                                        13
retirement saving plans administered by North Carolina public employers (i.e., local 457 plans or

403b plans for school district employees).

          A key objective of this study is to examine older workers' plans for their upcoming

retirement transitions. While still employed, respondents were asked their expected retirement

age, whether they plan to work after claiming retirement benefits, and why they either are or are

not planning to work after claiming. Given young retirement ages of public sector employees,

we might expect that many of these individuals would plan to stay engaged in the labor force

after leaving public employment. Evidence on this and related points are shown in the leftmost

columns of Table 2.

                                                  [Table 2]

          Among these older workers, around 69 percent indicated that they had developed a

retirement plan. In terms of subjective expectations with respect to retirement standard of living,

our survey questions elicited wide variability in satisfaction with retirement preparedness: 63

percent of respondents expect to have enough money to live comfortably, yet only 43 percent

indicating that they are saving the right amount for retirement.

          Around 80 percent of our sample responded with their post-claiming work plans. Among

these 471 respondents, 357 individuals (or 76 percent) reported that they planned to work after

leaving public sector employment, with the majority planning for part-time work. Thus, there is

a desire among a relatively large proportion of older public sector workers to remain engaged in

paid work after claiming. 17 There is also evidence of a lot of uncertainty, as seen by the high



17
     Between 30 and 50 percent of individuals plan to work in retirement according to the HRS in studies
using pooled samples of public and private sector workers (Maestas, 2010; Pienta and Hayward, 2002).

                                                     14
proportion of individuals who responded that they did not know their plans (around 20 percent)

or did not answer the question (less than 1 percent). 18 Finally, we have an informative set of

responses on rationales for plans to or not to work (e.g., staying active is more commonly listed

than income needs as a reason for post-claiming work).

          Table 3 presents descriptive statistics of these same individuals as measured after benefit

claiming. These responses provide insights into the early years of retirement for these public

sector workers. Our survey data give us a panel of work history since claiming, and the main

measure is an indicator of whether they engaged in any post-claiming work. 247 individuals

have worked for pay since benefit claiming, which is 43 percent of the 574 individuals who

responded with their post-claiming work behavior. The majority of those who worked after

claiming engaged in part-time work in their first job after retirement. The rightmost columns of

Table 2 align the post-claiming measures with the pre-claiming measures to analyze the

realization of work plans. Work plans are predictive of actual post-claiming work: 55 percent of

those who planned to work have engaged in post-claiming work, which is much higher than the

approximately 21 percent rate of work for those who did not plan to work or who did not know

their post-claiming work plans. It is important to recognize that the time between claiming and

our survey is relatively short. Thus, some of the retirees who have not yet returned to work may

do so in the future so the percent of claimants who report having worked since benefit claiming

should be considered an underestimate of the proportion that will ever return to paid

employment.




18
     The "Don't know" option was not provided in the pre-retirement survey for Sample 1. The proportion
of those uncertain of work plans reported in Table 2 may be underestimated.

                                                    15
                                              [Table 3]

       Figure 1 shows the distribution of the break in months between career employment and

post-claiming work, for those in our sample who engaged in post-claiming work. Around 11

percent of survey respondents report that they began work before claiming benefits. We do not

know separation dates from their career employers, and presumably the majority of these

individuals started at their new job very soon after leaving their career job but before claiming.

Around 34 percent of this sample who worked did so within three months of claiming. This

analysis focuses on the immediate post-claiming work behavior of public retirees, so we cannot

address the realization of post-claiming work plans of individuals who planned a break before

reentering the labor force, if this break was longer than two years.

                                              [Figure 1]

       Table 4 presents a regression analysis of plans to work after leaving public employment

and claiming retirement benefits. In all regression specifications, gender and marital status are

interacted. Relative to the omitted category of single females, single males are more likely to

plan to work, married females are less likely, and married males are much less likely.

Respondents who are older are less likely to plan to work. African Americans are similar to

whites in their plans, while individuals of other races have a large positive effect that is

statistically insignificant (possibly because of our small sample of individuals other than African

American or white). Those with high levels of education are much more likely to plan to engage

in post-claiming work. Having children also strongly predicts a higher propensity to plan to

work, with the main effect appearing to come from having children versus not, rather than an

additional effect associated with more children. High financial knowledge is positively



                                                  16
associated with not planning to work (around 9 percentage points). 19 Finally, time-impatient or

risk-averse workers are less likely to plan to work, but the coefficients are statistically

insignificant. 20 In a separate analysis of married retirees shown in Appendix Table B5, workers

whose spouse is employed are 9 percentage points more likely to plan for work.

                                                  [Table 4]

           Turning to post-claiming work behavior, Table 5 presents regression analysis of the

decision to work after claiming benefits. Stated plans are predictive of actual behavior: those

who planned to work are 30.1 percentage points more likely to work after claiming in Column 1.

The strong effect of plans on behavior continues to hold when the model adds additional

covariates. Relative to the baseline rate of post-claiming work among those not planning to work

of 21.1 percent (as shown in Table 2), the increase of 30.1 percentage points more than doubles

the rate of post-claiming work. We separately control for individuals who responded that they

did not know their post-claiming work plans. These uncertain responses map into post-claiming

work rates that are statistically indistinguishable from those who responded that they did not plan

to work. This is consistent with the summary statistics in Table 2, where both set of results

suggest that those answering that they do not know their plans behave like those who say they do

not plan to work. Both groups work at rates around 21 percent.

                                                  [Table 5]




19
     Financial knowledge is objectively measured as correctly answering financial literacy survey questions.
See the appendix for more details on the measurement of this and other variables.
20
     Time and risk preference are measured by binary indicators. See the appendix for details on these two
indicators.

                                                      17
        Single males work after claiming at rates that are slightly higher than single females, but

the effect is statistically insignificant; married individuals do not work a different rate than those

who are not married. The effects of gender and marital status were larger and more precisely

estimated for plans relative to work after claiming. One interpretation is that the effect of gender

and marital status operate through plans and, conditional on plans, they do not largely affect

post-claiming work. In a separate analysis of married retirees (Appendix Table B6), claimants

who report that their spouse is working are 20 percentage points more likely to be working.

Those who were older in their late career are less likely to work. African Americans work at

much lower rates, while there is no statistically significant difference for those of other races.

Individuals who report being in very good or excellent health work at meaningfully higher rates

than those who reported worse health status. While having children was strongly positively

predictive of planned work, having children is not associated with differential work behavior in

Column 1 of Table 5.

        Since most teachers are not employed for several months in the summer during their

career, many have the opportunity to form work relationships that might extend after retiring

from their career teaching job. These labor market contacts should make it easier to shift to a

bridge job. In addition, there may be job opportunities in private schools that require identical

skills to those utilized on their career job. To test the hypothesis that teachers may be more

likely to work after retirement, we include an indicator variable for being an educational

professional in our specification. The result shown in Table 5 indicates that, conditional on plans

to work, teachers are 17-19 percent more likely to work after retirement compared to other public

retirees.




                                                  18
          As the model is expanded to include additional covariates, parents continue to work at

similar rates as non-parents, conditional on plans. However, Column 4 adds stated caregiving

activities, where survey respondents were asked whether they spent time caring for certain

individuals in a typical week. We categorize caregiving activities into care for own children,

grandchildren, and others, where individuals can provide care for multiple individuals at the

same time. 21 In Column 4, individuals who are caring for children are more likely to engage in

post-claiming work, with an effect size of 20.5 percentage points. The coefficients for the other

two groups of care activities are not statistically significant. Conditional on plans, parents who

are still caring for their children are working at much higher rates than parents who are no longer

caring for their children; the latter group is working at rates that are similar to non-parents.

          Post-claiming work of parents is strongly associated with the extent of care currently

given to their children. We interpret stated caregiving for children as a measure of those

individuals who have financially dependent children relative to financially independent children.

Under this interpretation, we conjecture that parents who expect their children to remain

financially dependent plan to work after claiming and frequently do so, while parents whose

children are unexpectedly financially dependent might work despite having not planned to do so.

The survey of active workers did not ask question about the expected future financial

dependence of respondents' children, so we are not able to test this conjecture beyond pointing

out that it is one interpretation of the results in Table 5.




21
     We do not add caregiving indicators to the model on plan to work, as information on planned
caregiving in retirement is not available in the pre-claiming surveys.

                                                     19
   III.      Well-being in Retirement

          Table 6 analyzes stated well-being in the early years of retirement. The interaction of

work plans and realized post-claiming work provides four groups of interest: those who neither

planned to work nor worked (the reference group), those who planned to work but did not work,

those who worked but did not plan to work, and those who both planned to work and worked.

Separately, we include an indicator for individuals who reported that they did not know their

work plans. Those with uncertain work plans are sometimes statistically distinguishable from

those who did not plan to work, but the rationale for including this indicator is to control for

differences among those with uncertain plans to make a clean comparison of those individuals

who did and did not plan to work after claiming.

                                               [Table 6]

          In the following analysis, we examine how planning to work after retirement while

working and actually working after retirement influence six different measures or indicators of

satisfaction in retirement. The dependent variables in the well-being regressions are self-reported

agreement with the following statements: (1) made the best decisions concerning retirement

timing, (2) made the best decisions concerning annuity choice, (3) had enough information to

make informed retirement decisions, (4) saved enough for retirement while working, (5)

confident of not outliving savings, and (6) satisfied with standard of living in retirement. These

subjective well-being measures provide insight into the outcomes early in retirement years.

          The coefficient on plan to work represents the comparison of those who planned to work

but did not work, relative to those who neither planned to work nor worked. Having a plan to

work not realized could suggest a positive retirement well-being shock or an inability to find


                                                  20
adequate work. We find that those whose plan to work was not realized are doing worse than

those with a realized plan to not work. Individuals whose plan to work were not realized are

statistically significantly less likely to say they saved enough (Column 4), less confident in their

retirement savings (Column 5), and less satisfied with their post-claiming standard of living

(Column 6). These individuals appear to have low well-being in retirement, which is

inconsistent with not working because of a positive shock in retirement income or another type

of positive shock.

       The coefficient on having worked for pay in retirement represents the comparison of

those who worked but did not plan to work, relative to those who neither planned to work nor

worked. Not realizing a plan not to work could suggest a positive shock to one's work

prospects/capacity or a dissatisfaction with retirement savings that necessitates unplanned work.

The results on having worked after claiming do not provide a clear picture: while some effects

are meaningfully large, they are not statistically significant. Further, an individual might

unexpectedly work because her savings are inadequate, but before responding to the survey, she

may bolster her savings to a sufficient degree. It is perhaps because of this ambiguity that we

cannot precisely detect the average effect of unexpected work.

       The final group of individuals who planned to work and worked are represented by the

sum of the coefficients for planned to work, worked, and their interaction. While Table 6

presents the three coefficients separately, we test their joint significance to detect meaningful

effects for the realized plan to work group, relative to the realized not plan to work group. For

those with a realized plan to work, there is evidence of lower retirement well-being: the effects

are statistically significantly negative in terms of best timing (15.0 percentage points lower, p-

value = 0.01), saved enough (15.8 percentage points lower, p-value = 0.01), and confident (20.2

                                                 21
percentage points lower, p-value = 0.00), and marginally statistically significantly negative in

terms of satisfied (10.5 percentage points lower, p-value = 0.10). In total, the early-retirement

outcomes among individuals in this sample are associated with the lowest levels of stated well-

being for individuals who planned to work and in fact worked. One interpretation is that these

individuals were aware of their low levels of retirement preparedness when reporting their plan

to engage in post-claiming work, which continued as they worked after claiming. 22

      IV.      Conclusions

            A public employee who becomes eligible for retirement benefits faces a choice to delay

retirement and continue working or to separate from public employment and claim retirement

benefits. The latter decision is often called "retirement" even though the individual may

continue engaging in paid employment for several more years. After claiming a retirement

benefit, the individual might return to her previous employer in the same role or in a role with a

reduced time commitment (and, potentially, compensation level). The individual may seek a

bridge job at another employer or spend time not working and then re-enter the labor force. It is

difficult to capture the full range of possible patterns for one's worklife transition.

            This study examines the worklife transitions of career public sector employees in North

Carolina. First, we assess expectations for retirement and plans for working after retirement for

workers aged 50 to 69. Career public employees plan to retire at relatively young ages, and

around 60 percent older workers indicate that they plan to work after retirement. The labor

market activities of these individuals are consistent with their plans in the sense that plans are


22
     The interpretation is supported by an alternative model specification shown in Appendix Table B7.
When defining plans to work as plans to work because of insufficient income, plans to work and realizing
plans to work have stronger negative associations with the rightmost three subjective wellbeing measures.

                                                     22
strongly predictive of behavior. Around 42 percent of individuals have worked since claiming,

within a period of around two years on average. Among those who planned to work, around 55

percent worked, which is much higher than the rate of around 21 percent for those who did not

plan to work or reported that they did not know their plans to work. Finally, our data contain

self-reported measures of the financial well-being of these individuals in the early years after

claiming benefits. Stated retirement well-being is lower for individuals who, late in their career,

reported that they planned to engage in post-claiming work, relative to those who did not plan to

work. Our results indicate that public workers in our sample who make and realize plans to work

after retirement feel less secure about their retirement income and savings. These workers may

benefit from policies that better allow them to work while claiming benefits in order to increase

income in retirement.




                                                 23
                                       REFERENCES

Allen, Steven, Robert Clark, and Linda Ghent. 2004. "Phasing into Retirement." Industrial and
       Labor Relations Review, 58(1): 112­127.

Bellante, D. O. N., & Link, A. N. 1981. Are Public Sector Workers More Risk Averse Than

    Private Sector Workers? Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 34(3), 408­412.

Cahill, Kevin, Michael Giandrea, and Joseph Quinn. 2006. "Retirement Patterns from Career
       Employment." The Gerontologist 46 (4): 514­523.

Cahill, Kevin, Michael Giandrea, and Joseph Quinn. 2011. "Reentering the labor force after
       retirement," Monthly Labor Review, 134(6): 34-42.

Cahill, Kevin, Michael Giandrea, and Joseph Quinn. 2018. "Is Bridge Job Activity Overstated?"
       Work, Aging, and Retirement, 4(4): 330-351.

Clark, Robert, Lee Craig, and John Sabelhaus. 2011. State and Local Retirement Plans in the

       United States. Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Clark, Robert, Robert Hammond, and David Vanderweide. 2019. "Navigating

       Complex Financial Decisions at Retirement: Evidence from Annuity Choices in Public

       Sector Pensions," Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 18(4):594-611.

Robert Clark, Robert Hammond, and Christelle Khalaf. 2019. "Planning for Retirement? The
       Importance of Time Preferences," Journal of Labor Research, 40(2): 127-150.
Clark, Robert, Robert Hammond, Melinda Morrill, and David Vanderweide. 2018. "Annuity

    Options in Public Pensions Plans: The Curious Case of Social Security Leveling," Journal of

    Retirement, 6(1): 33-44.

Clark, Robert and Melinda Morrill. 2010. Retiree Health Plans in the Public Sector: Is There a

   Funding Crisis? Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.



                                               24
Clark, Robert and Melinda Morrill. 2017. Extending Work-Life of Career Employees: Employer
       Interests and Concerns. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
       Research.

Fitzpatrick, Maria. 2019 forthcoming. "Pension Reform and Return to Work Policies," Journal
       of Pension Economics and Finance, 18(4): 500-514.

Franzel, Joshua, Gerald Young, and Rivka Liss-Levinson. November 2018. "Balancing
       Objectives in Public Employee Post-Retirement Employment Policies," Center for State
       and Local Government Excellence, https://www.slge.org/assets/uploads/2018/11/slge-
       nasra-post-retirement-employment.pdf

Giandrea, Michael, Kevin Cahill, and Joseph Quinn. 2008. "Self-Employment Transitions
       among Older American Workers with Career Jobs." BLS Working Papers No. 418.

Giandrea, Michael, Kevin Cahill, and Joseph Quinn. 2009. "Bridge Jobs: A Comparison across
       Cohorts." Research on Aging, 31(5): 549­576.

Hill, Tomeka. 2010. "Why Doesn't Every Employer Have a Phased Retirement Program?"
       Benefits Quarterly, 26(4): 29-39.

Johnson, Richard. 2011. "Phased Retirement and Workplace Flexibility for Older Adults:
       Opportunities and Challenges." The Annals of the American Academy of Political and
       Social Science, 638: 68­85.

Johnson, Richard W, Janette Kawachi, and Eric K Lewis. 2009. "Older Workers on the Move:
       Recareering in Later Life." AARP Public Policy Institute. Available:
       http://assets.aarp.org/rgcenter/econ/2009_08_recareering.pdf.

Maestas, Nicole. 2010. "Back to Work: Expectations and Realizations of Work after
       Retirement." Journal of Human Resources, 45(3): 718­748.

Pienta, Amy Mehraban, and Mark D. Hayward. 2002. "Who expects to continue working after
       age 62? The retirement plans of couples." The Journals of Gerontology Series B:
       Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 57(4), S199-S208.

                                              25
Quinn, Joseph. 1980. "Labor Force Participation Patterns of Older Self-Employed Workers."
       Social Security Bulletin, 43(4): 17-28.

Quinn, Joseph. 1999. "Retirement Patterns and Bridge Jobs in the 1990s." Employee Benefit
       Research Institute (EBRI), Issue Brief No. 206: 1­22.

Quinn, Joseph, Kevin Cahill, and Michael Giandrea. 2019. "Transitions from Career
       Employment among Public and Private Sector Workers," Journal of Pension Economics
       and Finance: 18(4): 529-548.

Ruhm, Christopher. 1990. "Bridge Jobs and Partial Retirement." Journal of Labor Economics, 8
       (4): 482­501.

Zissimopoulos, Julie, and Lynn Karoly. 2009. "Labor Force Dynamics at Older Ages:
       Movements into Self-Employment for Workers and Nonworkers." Research on Aging,
       31(1): 89­111.




                                                 26
Figure 1. Distribution of break from work in retirement




Notes: Author's calculations based on survey responses to date of initial benefit claiming and start time of first
job since benefit claiming, conditional on having worked for pay since benefit claiming.




                                                       27
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
                                                                     Full Sample      Sample 1        Sample 2
 N                                                                        590            261             329
 Age as of 3/23/2016                                                     60.7           61.1            60.4
                                                                         (4.3)          (4.6)           (4.0)
 Expected retirement age                                                 61.4           61.0            61.7
                                                                         (4.4)          (4.7)           (4.1)
 Years since benefit claiming                                             1.4            1.8             1.1
                                                                         (0.6)          (0.5)           (0.6)
 K-12 teacher/administrator                                             31.5%          35.6%           28.3%
 Police/firefighter                                                      3.9%           2.7%            4.9%
 University/college faculty/staff                                        4.6%           3.4%            5.5%
 Other public employee                                                  60.0%          58.2%           61.4%
 Annual salary in 2013                                                 $60,549        $61,014         $60,179
                                                                      (24,122)        (25,036)        (23,402)
 Years of service                                                        25.4           25.5              -
                                                                         (8.9)          (8.8)             -
 Married female                                                         45.6%          46.0%           45.3%
 Married male                                                           26.6%          24.9%           28.0%
 Single female                                                          21.9%          22.6%           21.3%
 Single male                                                             5.8%           6.5%            5.2%
 African-American/Black                                                 11.5%          15.3%            8.5%
 White/Caucasian                                                        80.5%          72.8%           86.6%
 Other race                                                              6.4%          11.5%            2.4%
 Less than Bachelor's degree                                            24.6%          19.9%           28.3%
 Bachelor's degree                                                      29.5%          29.5%           29.5%
 Master's degree                                                        36.3%          36.4%           36.2%
 Professional degree/ PhD                                                5.4%           4.6%            6.1%
 Retirement account balances >250K                                      25.3%          20.7%           28.9%
 Financial knowledge-number of correct answers                            2.1            2.0             2.2
                                                                         (1.0)          (1.1)           (0.9)
 1-2 children                                                           58.1%          57.5%           58.7%
 3 or more children                                                     19.2%          18.0%           20.1%
 Caregiving for children                                                 7.6%           9.6%            6.1%
 Caregiving for grandchildren                                           14.1%          12.6%           15.2%
 Caregiving for anyone else                                             19.2%          18.8%           19.5%
 Self-reported health is good                                           84.6%          77.4%           90.3%
 Has any health insurance in retirement                                 95.9%          92.4%           98.5%
 Has health insurance provided by own employer in retirement            89.1%          81.7%           94.8%

 Married*spouse relative age (years)                                     -0.6            -0.5           -0.7
                                                                         (5.3)           (4.8)          (5.6)
 Married* spouse health good                                            83.3%           82.7%          83.8%
 Married*spouse currently working                                       51.2%           50.8%          51.5%
Notes: Data is comprised of two cohorts that include individuals who were working as of March 2014 and had
initiated retirement benefits as of May 2016 and individuals who were working as of April 2016 and had initiated
retirement benefits as of May 2018. Job classifications, salary, years of service, and gender are drawn from
administrative records as of April 2016. Race, education, number of children, and health insurance are drawn from
S2016. Expected retirement is drawn from ex-ante surveys. All other variables are drawn from ex-post surveys,
S2016 for sample 1, S2018 for sample 2. Details are provided in the appendix.

                                                       28
Table 2: Characteristics from Worker Survey, Cross-Tab with Post-Claiming Work
                                                                 Full        Pct      Number      Pct
                                                                sample                worked     worked
 N                                                                590                   247
 Has made retirement plans                                        404       68.5%       174       43.1%

 Supplemental retirement savings plans:
 Retirement saving plan with my current public employer           394       66.8%       178       45.2%
 IRA                                                              276       46.8%       126       45.7%
 Retirement saving plan with my spouse's current employer         178       30.2%        80       44.9%

 Expected subjective well-being:
 Expect to have enough money to live comfortably                  371       62.9%       159       42.9%
 Expect to have enough money for medical expenses                 281       47.6%       118       42.0%
 Saving the right amount for retirement                           255       43.2%       104       40.8%
 Will choose the best way to use savings                          483       81.9%       201       41.6%

 Answered plans to work after retirement                          471       79.8%       222       47.1%
    Among those who answered plans to work:
    Plan to work after retirement                                 357       75.8%       198       55.5%
        Plan to work full-time                                     50       10.6%        33       66.0%
        Plan to work part-time (includes contractor)              307       65.2%       165       53.7%
    Completely retire and never work for pay again                114       24.2%        24       21.1%
 Don't know                                                       115       19.5%        25       21.7%
 Missing plan to work                                               4        0.7%         0       0.0%

 Among those who plan to work:
 Reason for plan to work:
 Stay active                                                      246       68.3%       135       54.9%
 Need income                                                      125       34.7%        79       63.2%
 Other                                                             49       13.6%        30       61.2%

 Among those who don't plan to work:
 Reason for not planning to work:
 Expect to have enough money                                       62       54.4%        13       21.0%
 Health issues                                                      6        5.3%         2       33.3%
 No longer enjoy work                                              16       14.0%         3       18.8%
 Not able to find work                                             11        9.6%         3       27.3%

Notes: Data is comprised of two cohorts that include individuals who were working as of March 2014
and had initiated retirement benefits as of May 2016 and individuals who were working as of April 2016
and had initiated retirement benefits as of May 2018. Details are provided in the appendix.




                                                   29
Table 3: Characteristics from Post-Claiming Survey
                                                                          Count Pct
 N                                                                          590
 Worked after Retirement                                                    247 41.9%
 Missing work for pay                                                        16 2.7%
 Among those who worked for pay:
 Currently working for pay                                                   199 80.6%
 Descriptions for currently working:
 Able to find a suitable position                                            141   70.9%
 Difficult to find current position                                           23   11.6%
 Stay active                                                                 160   80.4%
 Need income                                                                 140   70.4%
 Need health benefits                                                          8   4.0%

 Hours worked:
 Worked Full-time                                                             30 12.1%
 Worked Part-time                                                            149 60.3%
 Missing hours of work                                                        68 27.5%

 Time of break from work
 < 0 month                                                                    26   10.5%
 0-3 months                                                                   83   33.6%
 4-6 months                                                                   40   16.2%
 7-12 months                                                                  42   17.0%
 >12 months                                                                   18   7.3%
 Missing date began working                                                   23   9.3%
 Don't know date began working                                                 3   1.2%
 Missing date of initial benefit claiming                                     12   4.9%

 Type of work
 Public sector full-time                                                         10 4.0%
 Public sector part-time                                                         68 27.5%
 Public sector hours not known                                                     1 0.4%
 Private sector                                                                  65 26.3%
 Self-employed                                                                   26 10.5%
 Other                                                                           11 4.5%
 Missing type of work                                                            66 26.7%
Notes: Data is comprised of two cohorts that include individuals who were working as of March 2014
and had initiated retirement benefits as of May 2016 and individuals who were working as of April 2016
and had initiated retirement benefits as of May 2018. Details are provided in the appendix.




                                                  30
Table 4: Regression of Plan to Work
                                                      (1)           (2)            (3)
 Male                                              0.206**       0.202**        0.203**
                                                    (0.095)       (0.095)       (0.094)
 Married                                           -0.085*       -0.093*        -0.093*
                                                    (0.050)       (0.050)       (0.050)
 Male * Married                                     -0.168        -0.164         -0.147
                                                    (0.105)       (0.105)       (0.105)
 Age                                              -0.018***     -0.018***     -0.017***
                                                    (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)
 African American                                    0.022         0.023          0.008
                                                    (0.063)       (0.063)       (0.064)
 Other race                                          0.138         0.143          0.116
                                                    (0.091)       (0.090)       (0.092)
 Bachelor's degree or above                          0.073         0.079         0.090*
                                                    (0.049)       (0.049)       (0.050)
 2013 Salary in $10k                                 0.006         0.006          0.007
                                                    (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)
 Has 1-2 kids                                      0.127**       0.126**        0.125**
                                                    (0.051)       (0.051)       (0.051)
 Has more than 2 kids                              0.126**       0.128**        0.130**
                                                    (0.062)       (0.062)       (0.062)
 Teacher                                             0.115         0.109          0.107
                                                    (0.074)       (0.074)       (0.073)
 Own health is good                                                0.065          0.067
                                                                  (0.068)       (0.069)
 Expected mortality 85+                                           -0.033         -0.027
                                                                  (0.040)       (0.040)
 High financial knowledge                                                      -0.085**
                                                                                (0.041)
 Time impatient                                                                  -0.034
                                                                                (0.040)
 Risk averse                                                                     -0.016
                                                                                (0.041)
 N                                                    571           571            571
Notes: Data is comprised of two cohorts that include individuals who were working as of March 2014
and had initiated retirement benefits as of May 2016 and individuals who were working as of April 2016
and had initiated retirement benefits as of May 2018. Dependent variable is planning to work after
retirement while still working. Coefficients are average marginal effects from a probit model with
standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include agency type and year of claiming fixed effects.
Details are provided in the appendix. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    31
Table 5: Regression of Work after Retirement
                                                                              (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)
 Plan to work                                                             0.301***          0.302***            0.296***           0.282***
                                                                           (0.048)            (0.048)            (0.048)            (0.049)
 DK plan to work                                                             0.009             0.010               0.004              0.004
                                                                           (0.068)            (0.067)            (0.068)            (0.067)
 Male                                                                        0.093             0.106               0.112              0.099
                                                                           (0.095)            (0.094)            (0.095)            (0.094)
 Married                                                                     0.017             0.017               0.017              0.020
                                                                           (0.051)            (0.051)            (0.051)            (0.050)
 Male * Married                                                             -0.071            -0.071              -0.072             -0.063
                                                                           (0.105)            (0.104)            (0.104)            (0.104)
 Age                                                                     -0.018***          -0.018***          -0.018***          -0.015***
                                                                           (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.005)
 African American                                                         -0.130**           -0.114*             -0.123*            -0.118*
                                                                           (0.063)            (0.064)            (0.065)            (0.064)
 Other race                                                                 -0.085            -0.024              -0.031             -0.028
                                                                           (0.093)            (0.097)            (0.099)            (0.098)
 Bachelor's degree or above                                                  0.041             0.028               0.033              0.020
                                                                           (0.050)            (0.050)            (0.051)            (0.051)
 2013 Salary in $10k                                                        0.016*             0.014              0.015*             0.015*
                                                                           (0.009)            (0.009)            (0.009)            (0.009)
 Has 1-2 kids                                                               -0.010            -0.016              -0.017             -0.020
                                                                           (0.051)            (0.051)            (0.051)            (0.051)
 Has more than 2 kids                                                        0.017             0.004              -0.000             -0.015
                                                                           (0.063)            (0.063)            (0.063)            (0.065)
 Teacher                                                                   0.184**           0.192**             0.190**            0.167**
                                                                           (0.075)            (0.075)            (0.075)            (0.075)
 Own health is good                                                                           0.118*              0.126*             0.122*
                                                                                              (0.064)            (0.065)            (0.064)
 Expected mortality 85+                                                                        0.060               0.060              0.048
                                                                                              (0.045)            (0.045)            (0.045)
 High financial knowledge                                                                                         -0.047             -0.046
                                                                                                                 (0.041)            (0.041)
 Time impatient                                                                                                   -0.016             -0.019
                                                                                                                 (0.040)            (0.040)
 Risk averse                                                                                                       0.002              0.002
                                                                                                                 (0.041)            (0.041)
 Cared for children                                                                                                                 0.184**
                                                                                                                                    (0.077)
 Cared for grandchildren                                                                                                             -0.036
                                                                                                                                    (0.056)
 Cared for anyone else                                                                                                                0.066
                                                                                                                                    (0.049)
 N                                                                            571               571                571                 571
Notes: Data is comprised of two cohorts that include individuals who were working as of March 2014 and had initiated retirement benefits as of
May 2016 and individuals who were working as of April 2016 and had initiated retirement benefits as of May 2018. Dependent variable is
having worked for pay after initiating retirement benefits. Coefficients are average marginal effects from a probit model with standard errors in
parentheses. All specifications include agency type and year of claiming fixed effects. Details are provided in the appendix. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                       32
Table 6: Regression of Retirement Income Well-being
                                  Best       Best     Enough       Saved
                                                                            Confident   Satisfied
                                timing    annuity        info     enough
                                   (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
 Plan to work                    -0.044     -0.011     -0.048    -0.126**   -0.153***   -0.127**
                                (0.055)    (0.045)    (0.055)     (0.058)     (0.056)    (0.062)
 DK plan to work                -0.111*     -0.033     -0.044      -0.073     -0.103*     -0.079
                                (0.057)    (0.049)    (0.059)     (0.061)     (0.059)    (0.067)
 Worked                           0.039      0.016      0.045       0.035       0.078      0.085
                                (0.069)    (0.058)    (0.070)     (0.068)     (0.067)    (0.079)
 Plan to work * Worked          -0.142*     -0.000     -0.021      -0.067      -0.126     -0.059
                                (0.080)    (0.068)    (0.081)     (0.083)     (0.082)    (0.092)
 Male                             0.116     -0.034      0.026    0.268***    0.243***      0.076
                                (0.094)    (0.069)    (0.087)     (0.096)     (0.092)    (0.099)
 Married                          0.003      0.022     -0.025    0.182***       0.060      0.041
                                (0.043)    (0.037)    (0.043)     (0.052)     (0.050)    (0.049)
 Male * Married                  -0.114      0.058      0.052    -0.209**      -0.070      0.009
                                (0.101)    (0.077)    (0.096)     (0.105)     (0.102)    (0.109)
 Age                            -0.008*      0.001      0.006       0.002       0.007      0.003
                                (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)
 African American                -0.010     -0.007     -0.028       0.026      -0.022     -0.013
                                (0.053)    (0.045)    (0.053)     (0.064)     (0.063)    (0.062)
 Other race                       0.073      0.008      0.047       0.040      -0.219     -0.060
                                (0.115)    (0.091)    (0.112)     (0.119)     (0.137)    (0.122)
 Bachelor's degree or above       0.034      0.048      0.034      -0.027      -0.051      0.028
                                (0.044)    (0.037)    (0.045)     (0.052)     (0.051)    (0.052)
 2013 Salary in $10k             -0.005      0.011      0.014    0.033***    0.032***    0.025**
                                (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.008)    (0.010)
 Has 1-2 kids                    -0.015   -0.088**     -0.016   -0.147***   -0.144***   -0.122**
                                (0.046)    (0.044)    (0.046)     (0.050)     (0.049)    (0.054)
 Has more than 2 kids            -0.045   -0.121**      0.008    -0.136**   -0.176***     -0.096
                                (0.057)    (0.051)    (0.059)     (0.062)     (0.061)    (0.067)
 Teacher                         -0.093     -0.042     -0.005       0.074      -0.032   -0.157**
                                (0.070)    (0.058)    (0.068)     (0.077)     (0.072)    (0.077)
 Own health is good            0.142***   0.137***    0.109**    0.291***       0.047   0.225***
                                (0.049)    (0.039)    (0.050)     (0.071)     (0.060)    (0.057)
 Expected mortality 85+           0.065     0.069*      0.005     0.093**       0.065      0.024
                                (0.040)    (0.037)    (0.040)     (0.042)     (0.042)    (0.045)
 Time impatient                  -0.012     -0.032      0.008       0.041       0.053      0.024
                                (0.036)    (0.031)    (0.037)     (0.040)     (0.040)    (0.041)
 Risk averse                      0.005      0.000      0.018      -0.020       0.005     -0.035
                                (0.034)    (0.030)    (0.035)     (0.039)     (0.039)    (0.040)
 High financial knowledge        -0.023      0.021      0.008       0.021      -0.049      0.034
                                (0.035)    (0.031)    (0.037)     (0.040)     (0.039)    (0.041)
 Cared for children              -0.068    -0.095*     -0.100      -0.092      -0.014    -0.124*
                                (0.061)    (0.050)    (0.063)     (0.076)     (0.075)    (0.072)
 Cared for grandchildren          0.072     0.079*     0.102*      -0.030      -0.040     -0.004
                                (0.050)    (0.044)    (0.054)     (0.055)     (0.054)    (0.056)
 Cared for anyone else            0.038      0.000      0.012    -0.104**    -0.125**     -0.063


                                              33
                                          (0.044)         (0.037)         (0.044)         (0.050)          (0.049)         (0.050)
 N                                          564             564             564             564              564             564
Notes: Data is comprised of two cohorts that include individuals who were working as of March 2014 and had initiated
retirement benefits as of May 2016 and individuals who were working as of April 2016 and had initiated retirement benefits as of
May 2018. Dependent variables are indicated in column headings. Coefficients are average marginal effects from a probit model
with standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include agency type and year of claiming fixed effects. Details are
provided in the appendix. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                              34
