                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      HITTING THE ELUSIVE INFLATION TARGET

                                       Francesco Bianchi
                                       Leonardo Melosi
                                        Matthias Rottner

                                      Working Paper 26279
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26279


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2019, Revised January 2020




We thank Marco Bassetto, Gadi Barlevy, Richard Clarida, Charlie Evans, Jonas Fisher, and
Spencer Krane for their very helpful suggestions. We thank the seminar participants at various
institutions and conferences for useful comments. The views in this paper are solely those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Francesco Bianchi, Leonardo Melosi, and Matthias Rottner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hitting the Elusive Inflation Target
Francesco Bianchi, Leonardo Melosi, and Matthias Rottner
NBER Working Paper No. 26279
September 2019, Revised January 2020
JEL No. D84,E31,E51,E62,E63

                                         ABSTRACT

Since the 2001 recession, average core inflation has been below the Federal Reserve's 2% target.
This deflationary bias is a predictable consequence of the current symmetric monetary policy
strategy that fails to recognize the risk of encountering the zero-lower-bound. An asymmetric rule
according to which the central bank responds less aggressively to above-target inflation corrects
the bias, improves welfare, and reduces the risk of deflationary spirals--a pathological situation
in which inflation keeps falling indefinitely. This approach does not entail any history
dependence or commitment to overshoot the inflation target and can be implemented with an
asymmetric target range.

Francesco Bianchi                                             Matthias Rottner
Social Sciences Building, 201B                                European University Institute
Department of Economics                                       Department of Economics
Duke University                                               Villa La Fonte
Box 90097                                                     Via delle Fontanelle 18
Durham, NC 27708-0097                                         San Domenico di Fiesole
and CEPR                                                      Italy
and also NBER                                                 matthias.rottner@eui.eu
francesco.bianchi@duke.edu

Leonardo Melosi
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle street
Chicago, IL 60604
and the European University Institute
and also CEPR
lmelosi@frbchi.org
1     Introduction
Since the 2001 recession, core in   ation has been on average below the Federal Reserve'   s
implicit 2% target. This phenomenon has become even more severe in the aftermath
of the 2008 recession. In other words, the "conquest of US in      ation"that started with
the Volcker disin   ation seems to have gone too far. In       ation, instead of stabilizing
around the desired 2% in      ation target, has kept falling down. This de     ationary bias
is a predictable consequence of a low nominal interest rate environment in which the
central bank follows a symmetric strategy to stabilize in      ation. We argue that a low
in  ation target should be combined with an asymmetric monetary policy strategy
calling for more aggressive actions when in      ation is below target than when in    ation
is above target.
    Figure 1 provides evidence for the stylized fact that we are interested in. The year-
to-year PCE core in     ation is reported with its ten-year moving average. In the early
1990s in  ation was still well above 2%. By the end of the same decade, the Federal
Reserve had completed the long process that had started with the Volcker disin        ation.
Around this time the Federal Reserve started discussing the possibility of moving to
an explicit in  ation targeting regime. While an explicit 2% target was only announced
on 25 January 2012 by Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, the existence of an
implicit 2% target predates this historical shift. However, as the graph illustrates,
in  ation has not stabilized around the desired target, instead it has kept on falling. As
of today, the ten-year moving average is around 1.6%. Importantly, a similar picture
emerges even when removing the 2001 and 2008 recessions. Furthermore, survey-
based measures of long-term in      ation expectations also declined in recent years. The
University of Michigan'   s survey-based expectations on in     ation ...ve to ten years out
have fallen by 80 basis points since the 2007. The survey of professional forecasters'
ten-year-ahead expectations on CPI in      ation has followed a similarly declining pattern
since 2012.
    The de   ationary bias poses serious challenges to the central bank. For instance,
it may entail a considerable reputation loss if the private sector loses con...dence in
the Federal Reserve'   s ability to bring in  ation back to target in an expansion. This
outcome may be very costly as it could impair the central bank'     s capability to credibly
commit to future actions, which is particularly critical to stimulate the economy when
the current interest rate is at its zero lower bound (ZLB) constraint (Krugman 1998;
and Eggertsson and Woodford 2003). Furthermore, a prolonged period of low in           ation

                                             2
          4.5
                                                                                 Inflation
                                                                                 10-Year Moving Average
           4


          3.5


           3


          2.5


           2


          1.5


           1


          0.5
           1990           1995           2000             2005          2010            2015



  Figure 1: Year-to-year PCE core ination and its ten-year moving average. Unit: Annualized percentage rates.



might cast doubts about whether or not the Federal Reserve is in fact committed to
a symmetric 2% in     ation target, as opposed to a two-percent ceiling on the in     ation
rate. Such an interpretation of the Federal Reserve'      s commitment can be shown to
exacerbate the bias.
    In addition to these challenges, we show that the de     ationary bias is the harbinger
of de  ationary spirals. De  ationary spirals represent a pathological situation in which
in  ation keeps falling unboundedly. The de     ationary bias arises when the probability
of hitting the zero lower bound is nonzero. To counteract this de    ationary pressure, the
central bank keeps the interest rate low even when the economy is healthy and away
from the zero lower bound. This de    ationary pressure can become so large that the ZLB
becomes binding also in good states. Lacking the o¤setting e¤ects of monetary policy,
the real interest rate starts increasing and, in doing so, depresses aggregate demand,
exacerbating the de    ationary pressure. This vicious circle of low in   ation, rising real
interest rates, and even lower in  ation sets the stage for de ationary spirals and implies
that no stable rational expectations equilibrium exists. Note that this scenario does
not require any recessionary shock to materialize. All it takes is a su¢ ciently large
risk of encountering the ZLB constraint in the future, which could be driven by an
increase in macroeconomic uncertainty or a fall in the natural interest rate. Given the
persistent and increasing de    ationary bias observed in the last twenty years, the US
economy might currently be in the proximity of this scenario, implying that remedying


                                                      3
the de  ationary bias is an issue of ...rst order importance.
    The interaction of the following two factors explains the de       ationary bias: (i ) the
remarkably low long-run nominal interest rates and (ii ) the perfect symmetry of the
current monetary policy framework, which treats positive and negative deviations of
in  ation from the central bank'   s target on equal footing. We formalize our argument
using a prototypical non-linear New Keynesian model, which we solve with global
methods to show that in the absence of either one of these two factors the bias would
not emerge.
    When the long-run real interest rate is calibrated to the low values that seem plau-
sible today (Laubach and Williams 2003), the model predicts that average in         ation will
remain below target even during expansions. Forward-looking price setters anticipate
that in case of a large negative shock the central bank will be unable to fully stabilize
in  ation due to the ZLB constraint on nominal rates. These beliefs bring about de          a-
tionary pressures and depress in     ation dynamics even when the economy is away from
the ZLB. All changes in the macroeconomic environment that make ZLB episodes more
likely or more persistent also cause the de    ationary bias to become more severe. Thus,
a decline in the long-term real interest rate raises the probability of hitting the ZLB
in the future and consequently makes the de         ationary bias larger. Similarly, height-
ened macroeconomic uncertainty causes or prolongs the ZLB and, hence, contributes
to exacerbating the de     ationary bias.
    We argue that the symmetric approach to in        ation stabilization, which is currently
followed by the Federal Reserve, loses e¢ cacy in a low interest rates environment be-
cause it contributes to the formation of the de    ationary bias. An example of the Federal
Reserve' s symmetric strategy is in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary
Policy Strategy, which reads: "The Committee would be concerned if in             ation were
running persistently above or below this objective. Communicating this symmetric
in  ation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term in     ation expectations ...rmly
anchored [. . . ]". We show that in the current low interest rate environment, it is ad-
vantageous for the Federal Reserve to be more concerned about in         ation running below
target than about in     ation going above target.
    The central bank can remove the de        ationary bias and can raise social welfare by
committing to adjust the policy rate less aggressively when in         ation is above target
than when in     ation is below target. By removing the de     ationary bias, this asymmet-
ric strategy raises the long-term in     ation expectations and hence makes de       ationary


                                              4
spirals less likely. The proposed strategy raises the probability of in     ation on the up-
side and, in doing so, o¤sets the downside risk due to the ZLB. Thus, an apparent
paradox emerges: In order to interpret its in       ation target as symmetric, the central
bank should follow an asymmetric strategy. This paradox is only apparent, because
the asymmetric strategy corrects for the constraint represented by the ZLB.
    Of course, in practice, it may not be easy for the central bank to convince agents
that it has adopted an asymmetric strategy. When in        ation is below target, announcing
to be less aggressive in countering future upswings in in     ation is time inconsistent.1 In
this context, the central bank can conduct an opportunistic reation to demonstrate
its commitment to the asymmetric strategy. To conduct an opportunistic re           ation, the
central bank announces the adoption of the asymmetric strategy in the aftermath of
a shock that pushes in     ation above target. Even though this action leads to a higher
in  ation rate in the short run, which entails a welfare loss, this rise in in    ation o¤ers
the central bank the opportunity to show to the public that the central bank is now
committed to follow the asymmetric strategy, which raises welfare in the long-run by
removing the de     ationary bias.2 We show that in our calibrated model an opportunistic
re  ation improves welfare, unless the size of the shock is implausibly large.
    In the minutes of the meeting of September 17-18 2019, the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) discussed whether its current long-run framework can be improved
by adopting asymmetric strategies that require to "respond more aggressively to below-
target in  ation than to above-target in      ation," in line with what advocated in this
paper. Furthermore, according to the minutes, several participants suggested a target
range as an e¤ective way to communicate this asymmetric strategy. We use the model
to show that the introduction of such a range can indeed close the de      ationary bias and
hence reduce the risk of de    ationary spirals provided that the range itself is asymmetric
around the desired in     ation objective. For instance, if the central bank is committed
not to respond to in    ation when in   ation is within the target range, specifying a range
between 1.5 percent and 2.85 percent will remove the de        ationary bias. We show that
while the degree of asymmetry in the range required to remove the bias depends on
   1
     If the announcement is believed by the public, the de    ationary bias disappears and once this
happens, the central bank has an incentive to renege on its announcement and to respond aggressively
to future upswings in in  ation.
   2
     Under the asymmetric rule, the weaker systematic response to positive deviations of in      ation
from target raises agents'long-run uncertainty about in  ation and hence, everything else being equal,
lowers welfare in the long-run. However, in our model these losses are dominated by the gains from
removing the de   ationary bias.



                                                  5
the strength of the central bank'  s in-range response to in   ation, the required degree of
asymmetry is generally fairly modest.
    Kiley and Roberts (2017) and Bernanke et al. (2019) study a set of rules to mitigate
the severity of recurrent ZLB episodes. Mertens and Williams (2019) evaluate a large
varieties of monetary policy rules (including dynamic rules such as price-level-targeting
rules, average-in   ation-rate rules, and shadow-rate rules) and conclude that dynamic
rules, which make up for forgone accommodation after the ZLB episode, can eliminate
the de   ationary biases and deliver better macroeconomic outcomes than static rules
(such as the Taylor rule). Unlike dynamic rules, the asymmetric strategy we propose
does not rely on history dependence to solve the de          ationary bias. Therefore, the
central bank is not committed to engineer de       ation following a period of above-target
in  ation. Similarly, the asymmetric strategy does not contemplate in       ation overshoot-
ing; that is, a contingency in which the central bank maneuvers the policy rate so as
to create positive deviations of in    ation from its target to make up for past periods
in which in   ation ran below the central bank'    s target. Unlike the standard approach
in this literature that studies linearized models with a kink in the monetary policy
reaction function, we solve the fully non-linear speci...cation of the model with global
methods.
    Adam and Billi (2007) were among the ...rst to formally show that the de        ationary
bias and the corresponding output bias arise in New Keynesian models in which the
nominal interest rate is occasionally constrained by the zero lower bound. With respect
to the existing literature, we emphasize that the symmetry of standard monetary policy
rules (e.g., the Taylor rule) plays an important role for these biases to arise and show
that adopting an asymmetric strategy can remove these biases.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present a prototypical New
Keynesian model to study the de       ationary bias, the solution method, and the calibra-
tion of the model to U.S. data. In Section 3, we introduce a simpli...ed version of the
model to illustrate the conditions that give rise to the de     ationary bias and when the
de  ationary bias turns into de    ationary spirals. In Section 4, we show that given the
low long-run real interest rate, in   ation fails to converge to the Federal Reserve'   s 2%
in  ation target in the long run. We also assess that the sensitivity of the bias to the
level of macroeconomic uncertainty and to the natural rate of interest. In Section 5, we
introduce the asymmetric strategy and show that it can remove the de           ationary bias.
We also show that this strategy improves households'welfare compared to following a


                                             6
symmetric Taylor rule. We also show how the asymmetric strategy can be implemented
in the aftermath of an in  ationary shock (opportunistic re  ation) to avoid time incon-
sistency. In Section 6, we use the model to evaluate the e¤ects of introducing a target
range, which was recently discussed by the FOMC as a way to implement asymmetric
strategies of the kind proposed in this paper. In Section 7, we conclude.


2     The Model
In this section, we introduce a prototypical New Keynesian model in the tradition of
Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000), Woodford (2003), and Galí (2008) augmented with a
zero lower bound constraint for the nominal interest rate set by the monetary authority.
The model is solved with global methods in its non-linear speci...cation.


2.1    Model description
The economy consists of households, ...nal goods producers, a continuum of monopolis-
tic intermediate goods ...rms, a monetary authority, and a ...scal authority. Households
buy and consume the ...nal goods from producers, trade one-period government bonds,
and supply labor to ...rms. The ...nal goods producers buy intermediate goods and
aggregate them into a homogenous ...nal good using a CES aggregation technology.
The intermediate goods ...rms set the price of their di¤erentiated good subject to price
adjustment costs a la Rotemberg. They demand labor to produce the amount of di¤er-
entiated goods to be sold to households in a monopolistic competitive market. Labor is
the only factor of production. The ...scal authority balance its budget in every period.
The monetary authority sets the interest rate for the government bonds.

The Representative Household In every period, the representative household
chooses consumption Ct , labor Ht , and government bonds Bt so as to maximize the
expected discounted stream of utility
                        P1                    1
                   E0    t=0
                               t d
                                 t   (1   )       Ct1       (1 + ) Ht1+             (1)

subject to the ow budget constraint

                    Pt Ct + Bt = Pt Wt Ht + Rt 1 Bt     1   + Tt + Pt Divt          (2)


                                              7
where Pt is the price level, Wt is the real wage, Rt is the gross interest rate, Tt are
lump-sum taxes and Divt are real pro...ts from the intermediate good ...rms. Bt denotes
the one-period government bonds in zero net supply. The preference shock d     t follows
                                                  d   d
                              d           d
an AR(1) process in logs ln( t ) = ln( t 1 ) +       t .



Final Goods Producers Final goods producers transform intermediate goods into
the homogeneous good, which is obtained by aggregating intermediate goods using the
following technology:
                                         Z       1                               1
                                                                1
                                  Yt =               Yt (j )        df               ;                            (3)
                                           0

where Yt (j ) is the consumption of the good of the variety produced by ...rm j .
   The price index for the aggregate homogeneous good is:

                                         Z       1                       1
                                                                             1


                                  Pt =               Pt (j )1 df                     ;                            (4)
                                             0


and the demand for the di¤erentiated good j 2 (0; 1) is

                                   Yt (j ) = (Pt (j )=Pt )               Yt :                                     (5)

Intermediate Goods Firms The ...rm j produces output with labor as the only
input
                          Yt (j ) = A Ht (j )                           (6)

where A denotes the total factor productivity, which follows an exogenous process. The
...rm j sets the price Pt (j ) of its di¤erentiated goods j so as to maximize its pro...ts:

                        Pt (j )   Yt                        Pt (j )                      '   Pt (j )
  Divt (j ) = Pt (j )                      mct                               Yt                          1 Yt ;   (7)
                         Pt       Pt                         Pt                          2   Pt 1 (j )

subject to the downward sloping demand curve for intermediate goods. The parameter
' > 0 measures the cost of price adjustment in units of the ...nal good.

Policy makers The monetary authority sets the interest rate Rt responding to in-
 ation and output from their corresponding targets. The monetary authority faces a



                                                        8
 Parameters                                 Value       Parameters                                        Value
              Steady state discount rate    0:9975      '                  Rotemberg pricing              79:41
              Production Function              1                           MP in   ation response           2
              Relative risk aversion           1         Y                 MP output response              0:25
              Inverse Frisch elasticity        1        4 log              Annualized In   ation target    2%
              Price elasticity of demand     7:67         d                Persistence preference shock    0:60
              Disutility labor               0:87       100     d          Std. dev. preference shock     1:175

                           Table 1: Benchmark calibration: Parameter Values



zero lower bound constraint. The policy rule reads as follows
                                   h                                           i
                                                                           Y
                           Rt = max 1; R (         t=    )      (Yt =Y )           :                      (8)

where and Y denote the in       ation target which pins down the in      ation rate in the
deterministic steady state and the natural output level, which is the level output that
would arise if prices were exible. The ...scal authority sets taxes to balance the budget
in every period Tt = Bt Rt 1 Bt 1 :

Resource Constraint The resource constraint is

                               C t = Yt 1      :5' (     t=         1)2 :                                 (9)



2.2    Model Solution and Calibration of Parameters
We solve the model with time iterations and linear interpolation as in Richter et al.
(2014). Expectations are evaluated with Gauss-Hermite Quadrature. A detailed de-
scription about how we solve the model is provided in Appendix A
    We set the discount factor      to 0:9975 that corresponds to an annualized real
interest rate of one percent, which is in line with the FOMC'   s Summary of Economic
Projections (SEP) of September 2018. The standard deviation of preference shocks
  d
    is chosen to be in line with the standard deviation of the U.S. real GDP growth
rate over a period ranging from the ...rst quarter of 1983 through the fourth quarter of
2007. This period has been characterized by record low macroeconomic volatility and
therefore the calibrated value of the standard deviation of preference shocks should be
regarded as low by historical standards. For instance, the standard deviation of the
U.S. real GDP growth rate was twice as big in the 1970s. We will show how trend


                                                  9
in  ation and the long-term real interest rate vary under di¤erent assumptions about
the Post-Great Recession macroeconomic volatility.
     The Rotemberg parameter ' is the equivalent to a Calvo parameter of 0.75 in case
of a ...rst-order approximation. The calibrated value for the demand elasticity implies
a steady-state markup of 15 percent. The parameter controlling the disutility of labor
   is set to normalize the steady-state level of employment to unity.
     The persistence of preference shocks is set to 0:60. Higher values for this parame-
ter prevents us from solving the model. The same problem occurs as well if one raises
the variance of the shock too much. Both parameters lift the unconditional volatility
of preference shocks and hence the number of future periods agents expect monetary
policy to be passive because of the ZLB constraint. We set the in   ation target to 2%.3
The remaining parameters are standard and are listed in Table 1.


3       Deationary Bias and Deationary Spirals
To gain intuition about the causes of the de        ationary bias and its relation with the
de  ationary spirals, we consider a simpli...ed version of the model presented in the
previous section. We assume that the central bank does not respond to the output
gap ( Y = 0) and that the preference shock can only take two values low (bad state)
and high (good state); i.e., d    t 2
                                         d
                                         L; H
                                             d
                                                 with d        d
                                                        H > L . When the realizations of
the preference shock are binary, equilibrium outcomes can be conditioned on the high
or low value of the preference shock and hence can be characterized by solving a set
of nonlinear equations as explained in greater detail in Appendix B. This simpli...ed
version of the model will prove useful for understanding the causes of the de       ationary
bias and those of the de     ationary spirals and why these two outcomes are intertwined.
Once we have established these points, we will go back to the benchmark model and
the calibration introduced in the previous section.
    Given the structure of the simpli...ed model, we can partition the model equilibrium
conditions into two blocks of equations, one for the good state and one for the bad
state. In what follows, we focus on the equilibrium in the good state because - as we
will see - this is the state where the de   ation bias arises. The red dashed line in Figure
2 represents the interest rate RH as function of in      ation H as implied by the Taylor
    3
    There is some disagreement about what the Federal Reserve'   s e¤ective ination objective was
before 2012 (Shapiro and Wilson 2019). However, there is a strong consensus that the objective has
been 2 percent since 2010.


                                               10
                                             Low Volatility                                                             Medium Volatility

                             6                                                                         6


                             4                                                                         4
          Interest Rate RH




                                                                                    Interest Rate RH
                             2                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                          Deflationary Bias
                             0                                                                         0
                                                    No Deflationary Bias
                             -2                                                                        -2


                             -4                                                                        -4
                               -2   -1   0         1           2    3      4                             -2   -1        0        1            2      3         4
                                                          H                                                                               H
                                              Inflation                                                                     Inflation

                                             High Volatility                                                           Very High Volatility

                             6                                                                         6


                             4                                                                         4
          Interest Rate RH




                                                                                    Interest Rate RH
                             2                                                                         2


                             0                                                                         0
                                                Deflationary Bias                                                                       Deflationary Spirals
                             -2                                                                        -2
                                                                                                              Taylor Rule      Other Equations        No ZLB
                             -4                                                                        -4
                               -2   -1   0         1           2    3      4                             -2   -1        0        1            2      3         4
                                                          H                                                                               H
                                              Inflation                                                                     Inflation



Figure 2: Equilibrium interest rate and ination when the preference shock is high (good state). The intersections of
the blue line and the red line mark the rational expectations equilibria.



rule in the good state, subject to the ZLB constraint. The blue line in the same ...gure
con  ates the restrictions imposed on the in   ation rate and the nominal interest rate
in the good state by all the other equations. Importantly, this curve also takes into
account the equilibrium conditions for the bad state because agents in the model are
forward looking. The intersections between the red dashed line and the blue solid line
give us the (stable) Rational Expectations equilibria in the good state. Appendix B
describes how these two lines are worked out.
    The blue line is downward sloping because a fall in the equilibrium in    ation rate
                       H
in the good state,       , lowers ination expectations and hence the nominal interest
rate in the good state, RH .4 The blue line also presents a kink and gets steeper for
low values of in   ation in the good state. When in    ation in the good state declines,
the partial equilibrium e¤ect is such that expected in  ation declines under both states,
   4
    Next period'  s ination expectations are the weighted average of the equilibrium ination expecta-
tions in the two states. In symbols, Et t+1 = pHH H + (1 pHH ) L , where pHH is the probability
that the economy will stay in the good state in the next period and i , i 2 fH; Lg, denotes the
equilibrium in  ation in the state dt+1 = i .




                                                                               11
depressing in    ation in the bad state. When the ZLB is not binding, the central bank
responds by lowering the interest rate in the bad state. However, for su¢ ciently low
levels of in ation in the good state, the central bank encounters the zero lower bound in
the bad state. The existence of this threshold creates the kink in the blue line. When
in  ation is below this threshold, the ZLB constraint is binding in the bad state and
any further decline in in   ation in the good state implies an increase in the real interest
rate in the bad state, which exacerbates the recession and the drop in in       ation in the
bad state. In the good state, agents anticipate that the recession and de       ation in the
bad state will be more severe and these beliefs determine a steeper decline in in      ation
expectations and the nominal interest rate in the good state. For comparison, the blue
dashed-dotted line captures the counterfactual case in which we do not impose the
ZLB constraint on the nominal interest rate in the bad state and hence the slope of
the blue dashed-dotted line does not change.
    The four plots of Figure 2 show the equilibrium in the good state for various levels
of volatility of the discrete shock.5 In particular, we consider scenarios of low volatility
( d                d                                    d              d
  L = 0:9875, H = 1:0025), medium volatility ( L = 0:9625, H = 1:0075), high
volatility ( d               d                                         d
              L = 0:9375, H = 1:0125) and very high volatility ( L = 0:9125, H =
                                                                                        d

1:0175) with a transition probability of staying in the good state p = 0:9 and staying
in the bad state q = 0:5 ...xed for all the levels that are considered. Across the four
panels, we can see that as the volatility of the demand shock increases, the kink in
the blue line occurs for larger values of H , implying that the ZLB becomes a more
relevant concern, even if the economy is currently in the good state.
    In the upper left graph of Figure 2, we consider a low-volatility scenario. The
volatility is relatively low and hence the severity of the negative preference shock is
contained. In this case, there are two equilibria in the good state of the economy. One
equilibrium implies that the nominal interest rate is not constrained (the star mark in
the plot) and the other one is constrained by the ZLB (the square mark in the plot)
in the good state.6 In what follows, we disregard the equilibrium implying that the
ZLB is binding in the good state and focus on the other equilibrium, corresponding to
   5
     The mean of the binary random variable d     t is unchanged when we raise its variance throughout
this exercise. So when we raise the volatility of the preference shock, we e¤ectively make the negative
and positive realizations of the shock bigger.
   6
     This result is reminiscent of the two steady-state equilibria characterized in a perfect-foresight
environment in the in   uential paper by Benhabib et al. (2001). However, the equilibria in upper left
plot are derived in a stochastic environment where agents take into account the probability that the
economy may be hit by preference shocks in future periods.



                                                  12
the star mark in the plot. In the upper-left plot, the economy is away from the ZLB.
Furthermore, in this case the negative preference shock is too small to make the ZLB
constraint binding in the bad state. This can be seen by observing that the equilibrium
of interest, which is denoted by the star mark in the graph, lies on the        atter part of
the blue line.
    We now slightly increase the volatility of the preference shock, which implies that
the negative preference shock is now larger than what it was in the previous case.
Now the target equilibrium lies on the steeper part of the blue line, implying that the
economy will go to the ZLB if a negative preference shock will hit tomorrow. These
expectations have important e¤ects on today'       s equilibrium outcomes. Now in     ation is
lower than what it would have been if the blue line were less steep as in the case in
which we do not impose the ZLB constraint (the dashed-dotted blue line in the graph).
We call the lower in   ation rate in the good state due to the binding ZLB constraint in
the bad state the deationary bias. The magnitude of the de            ationary bias is shown
in the graph.
    A further increase in the volatility of the binary preference shock causes the nominal
rate and in  ation to fall further, as illustrated in the lower left graph of Figure 2. Now
the de  ationary consequences of hitting the ZLB in the bad state are even more severe.
As a result, the in  ation rate in the good state falls further down and the de     ationary
bias widens. To respond to this large de       ationary bias, the central bank has to drive
the nominal interest rate to the ZLB even in the good state. This can be seen in the
graph where the solid blue line intersects the kink of the red dashed line, implying
that the two good-state equilibria now coincide in the graph and the ZLB is binding
in both. Furthermore, note that the de        ationary bias is now larger than that in the
previous case.
    What happens if the volatility increases even further and the realization of the
preference shock in the bad state becomes even worse? The central bank would like
to lower the nominal interest rate further in the good state in order to mitigate the
de  ationary pressures owing to the severe de     ation expected in the bad state. However,
the binding ZLB constraint in the good state prevents the central bank from doing so.
As a result, the fall in in    ation expectations combined with the forced inaction of
the central bank lead to an increase in the real interest rate in the good state, which
depresses in   ation expectations even further. We call this vicious circle of lower and
lower in  ation deationary spirals. In the lower right graph, the blue solid line and


                                             13
the dashed red line do not intersect, implying that no stable Rational Expectations
equilibrium exists.
   This exercise illustrates two important points. First, the de ationary bias emerges
when agents expect with some probability that the interest rate will become constrained
by the ZLB in the future. Second, the de     ationary bias and the de   ationary spirals
are intertwined: de  ationary spirals occur when the de   ationary bias is so large that
the central bank cannot prevent in   ation expectations from spiraling down.


4       ZLB Risk and Macroeconomic Biases
The previous section illustrated the origins of the de ationary bias and the link between
the de   ationary bias and de  ationary spirals. We can now return to our benchmark
calibration, which are shown in Table 1, with a continuum of possible realizations for
the preference shock.
    Hitting the in ation target is more challenging for the central bank when the proba-
bility of encountering the ZLB is non-negligible. Even in tranquil times and away from
the ZLB, the mere risk that monetary policy might become constrained in the future
hinders the convergence of in   ation to the central bank' s in  ation target. This is be-
cause forward-looking price setters anticipate that in case of a large negative shock the
central bank will be unable to fully stabilize in ation due to the ZLB constraint. These
beliefs cause in ation expectations to become disanchored from the central bank'     s tar-
get and to depress in   ation dynamics.
    The existence of this de ationary bias constitutes an important anomaly that should
concern policymakers. Failure to acknowledge this anomaly may lead the central bank
to conduct expansionary monetary policy that ends up overheating the economy and
creating more macroeconomic biases. These macroeconomic biases are broadly consis-
tent with the recent performance of the U.S. economy.7 Moreover, the size of these
biases increases exponentially as the volatility of the macroeconomic environment rises
and the natural rate of interest declines. In the subsequent sections, we will show
that the symmetric approach followed by the central bank to in       ation stabilization is
responsible for these biases.
    7
    See Hills et al. (2016) for an empirical investigation of the magnitude of the deationary bias and
the associated output bias.




                                                 14
                          Expected Frequency of ZLB                                  Probability of Hitting the ZLB

                      r*=2 percent                                               r*=2 percent
                      r*=1.5 percent                                             r*=1.5 percent
             20       r*=1 percent                                               r*=1 percent
                                                                         15
                      Benchmark Calibration                                      Benchmark Calibration

             15
                                                                         10

             10


                                                                         5
              5



                                                                         0
              0.6   0.7     0.8    0.9        1   1.1   1.2   1.3        0.6   0.7      0.8    0.9       1   1.1      1.2   1.3
                    Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks                    Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks

Figure 3: The risk of the zero lower bound. Left graph: Expected frequency of the zero lower bound as the variance
of preference shocks varies and for di¤erent values of the long-run real rate. The frequency is in percentage points and
it is computed as the ratio between the number of periods spent at the zero lower bound and the total sample size
(300,000). Right graph: Probability of hitting the zero lower bound next period conditional on being at the stochastic
steady state in the current period for di¤erent values of the variance of preference shocks and of the steady-state real
rate. The probability is expressed in percentage points.



Probability of encountering the zero lower bound The left plot of Figure 3
shows the percentage of periods spent at the ZLB when the model is simulated for a
long period of time (300,000 periods). In technical jargon, this is the ergodic prob-
ability of being constrained by the ZLB. As shown in the ...gure, this probability is
a¤ected by how volatile the shocks are (x-axis). The di¤erent lines are associated with
                                                                                       1
di¤erent assumptions about the long-run annualized real rate of interest r =             .
Our benchmark calibration for this parameter is one percent, which is in line with the
FOMC'   s projections (SEP) of September 2018. The red stars on the lines denote the
calibrated standard deviation of the preference shock.
    A lower long-term real interest rate raises the expected frequency of the ZLB as
it shrinks the central bank' s room of maneuver to counter the de    ationary e¤ects of
recessionary shocks. We are closer to the bound on average so the central bank is
expected to hit the lower bound more often. Note that the expected frequency of the
ZLB as a function of macroeconomic volatility grows at an increasing speed as the
long-term real interest rate r falls. Symmetrically, a given drop in the long term real
interest rate r implies larger increases in the probability of encountering the ZLB if
the volatility of the shock is higher. Thus, the more volatile shocks are and the lower
r is, the higher the expected frequency of the ZLB, with the two e¤ects reinforcing
each other.
    The graph on the right shows how likely it is for monetary policy to become con-
strained by the ZLB in the next period conditional on being currently at the (stochastic)


                                                                    15
steady state. As for the expected frequency of the ZLB, we study how this probability
varies as we change the standard deviation of the preference shocks and the steady-
state real rate of interest r . The larger the volatility of the shock, the more likely
it is that the ZLB will be binding in the next period. It should be noted that the
probability rises exponentially with the volatility of the shock. Lowering the long-term
real rate of interest leads to similar results.
    The worrying ...nding highlighted by both graphs is that in a low real-interest rate
environment (low r , black dashed lines) the two functions are very steep. This means
that even a small increase in the volatility of the shocks can lead to substantial increases
in the probability of encountering the zero lower bound. Recall that our benchmark
calibration for the volatility of the preference shock is arguably very low for the U.S.,
given that it was chosen to match the level of volatility during the Great Moderation.
The results above imply that even a small increase in macroeconomic volatility may
lead agents to believe that the ZLB constraint has become a pervasive problem for
monetary policy. These beliefs cause serious macroeconomic biases and distortions
and can potentially lead to de    ationary spirals.

Deterministic and stochastic steady state To show that in                ation fails to con-
verge to the central bank'  s target in the absence of in  ationary shocks, it is useful to
de...ne the stochastic steady-state equilibrium of the model.8 We de...ne the de       ation-
ary bias as the di¤erence between the rate of in      ation at the stochastic steady-state
equilibrium and the central bank'   s in ation target, which coincides with the rate of in-
 ation at the deterministic steady state. The de    ationary bias arises when in    ation at
the stochastic steady state is lower than the central bank'  s target. A large de   ationary
bias implies serious hurdles for the central bank to hit its in   ation objective.
     Both the deterministic and stochastic steady states de...ne an economy that has not
been hit by shocks for a su¢ ciently long number of periods, so that their variables have
stabilized around their steady-state values and do not vary anymore (unless a shock
suddenly hits). However, in the deterministic steady state, agents fail to appreciate the
macroeconomic risk due to future realizations of the shocks. Instead, in the stochastic
steady state, agents appreciate the macroeconomic risks due to future realizations of
the shocks and adjust their behavior accordingly. While in a linear model these two
concepts of steady-state equilibria lead to the same macroeconomic outcome, in non-
   8
    Some scholars use the terms "risky steady state" to refer to what we call stochastic steady state.
See, for instance, Coeurdacier et al. (2011).


                                                 16
linear models whether agents act in response to future macroeconomic risks matters.
    Unlike the stochastic steady state equilibrium, the deterministic steady-state equi-
librium of our model can be characterized analytically.9 The real interest rate in the
deterministic steady state, r ; coincides with 1 and captures the long-run level of the
real interest rate in the absence of risk. Importantly, r = ln ( ) also coincides with
the deterministic steady state of the natural interest rate. The deterministic steady
state of in  ation is pinned down by the in    ation target of the central bank, ; and
can be e¤ectively dealt with as a parameter. Since the price adjustment cost function
takes into account the deterministic steady-state in   ation rate, the chosen value of the
in  ation target does not a¤ect any macroeconomic outcomes either at the determinis-
tic steady state or away from the deterministic steady state. Thus, the deterministic
steady state for output Y is purely determined by the level of TFP.
    Unlike the stochastic steady state, the deterministic steady state is not a¤ected by
macroeconomic uncertainty, which in      uences the optimal behavior of rational agents
in non-linear models. Such volatility drives a wedge between the outcomes of these
two steady-state equilibria and hence fuels the de    ationary bias. In this section, we
will show that among the many sources of non-linearity in the model (e.g., the non-
linearities that give rise to precautionary savings), the zero lower bound constraint is
the main culprit behind the formation of the de     ationary bias and all the associated
macroeconomic biases.

The De     ationary Bias The left graph of Figure 4 shows the di¤erence between the
in  ation rate at the stochastic steady state and in ation at the deterministic steady
state with (blue solid line) and without the zero lower bound constraint (black dash-
dotted line). Comparing the blue solid line with the black dash-dotted line allows us
to isolate the e¤ects of the ZLB constraint on the in    ation bias. From the ...gure,
it is easy to conclude that when removing the ZLB constraint, the gap between the
deterministic and stochastic steady state is quite low. Instead, the risk of hitting the
zero lower bound can lead to large discrepancies between the desired and realized levels
of in  ation.
   9
    As shown by Benhabib et al. (2001), there exist two deterministic steady-state equilibria once the
zero lower bound on nominal interest rates is taken into account. The ...rst steady state is characterized
by positive in  ation and a positive policy rate. The second steady state is characterized by a liquidity
trap, that is, a situation in which the nominal interest rate is near zero and in       ation is possibly
negative. In line with most of the literature studying new-Keynesian models, we focus on the positive-
in ation deterministic steady state.


                                                   17
                        Inflation Bias                                           Output Bias                                          Real Interest Rate Bias




                                                                                                                                                                Deflationary Spirals
                                                                       0.1                                                  -0.05




                                               Deflationary Spirals
            -0.1




                                                                                                     Deflationary Spirals
                                                                      0.08                                                   -0.1
            -0.2
                                                                      0.06                                                  -0.15

            -0.3
                                                                                                                             -0.2
                                                                      0.04

            -0.4                                                                                                            -0.25
                                                                      0.02
                      ZLB Constraint
                      No ZLB constraint                                                                                      -0.3
            -0.5                                                        0
                      Benchmark Calibration
                                                                                                                            -0.35
               0.6    0.8      1         1.2                             0.6   0.8        1    1.2                              0.6      0.8      1      1.2
            Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks

Figure 4: Macroeconomic distortions due the zero lower bound as the volatility of the preference shocks varies. Left
graph: The inationary bias due to model'     s non-linearities. The red star denotes the calibrated value of the standard
deviation of this shock. The di¤erence between the blue solid line and the black dot-dashed line captures the deationary
e¤ects of a risk of a recession that pushes the nominal interest rate to its lower bound. Center graph: the same as the
left graph but the bias is computed with respect to output (level). Right graph: the same as the left graph but the
bias is computed with respect to the real interest rate. The gray area marks the region of the values for the standard
deviation of the preference which trigger deationary spirals. Units: Ination and real interest bias is measured in
percentage points of annualized rates while the output bias and the standard deviation of the preference shocks are in
percent.



    The red star denotes the de  ationary bias that arises at the benchmark value of the
standard deviation of the preference shock (Table 1). In   ation undershoots the central
bank' s in ation target by 27 basis points because of the risk of hitting the ZLB in the
future. As the macroeconomic volatility increases, the bias widens up exponentially.
A one-percentage-point increase in the standard deviation of shocks causes a 15-basis-
points reduction in the model'  s long-run in  ation rate. Furthermore, it would take
just a two-percentage-point increase in the standard deviation of preference shocks to
make de   ationary spirals possible. Given that our benchmark calibration re       ects a
record-low macroeconomic volatility, this result is a reason for concern.
    It should also be noted that the steepness of the function of the de    ationary bias
has to be chie   y imputed to the presence of the ZLB constraint. Indeed, the slope
of the black dash-dotted line, which captures the counterfactual case where the ZLB
constraint is not enforced and nominal rates are allowed to become negative, is tiny
and close to constant for di¤erent values of the standard deviation of the shocks.
    What if the central bank realizes that ination is in general below the desired target
and decides to lower its in ation target to make it coincide with average in  ation? The
de  ationary bias induced by the ZLB constraint would become even larger because
lowering the target would make the probability of encountering the zero lower bound
even larger. We discuss below what the central bank can do to bring in       ation in line
with the desired target.

                                                                                     18
The Output Bias The center graph of Figure 4 shows the e¤ects of the risk of
hitting the ZLB on the long-run level of output. As before, the long-term output bias
due to the zero lower bound is given by the vertical di¤erence between the blue solid
line and solid dashed-dot line, which gives us the bias when the ZLB constraint is
not imposed. The output bias is positive because the central bank has a two percent
in  ation target but in ation   uctuates around its stochastic steady state that is lower
than the central bank' s target (see the left graph of Figure 4). As a result the central
bank keeps the interest rate lower than its deterministic steady-state level to close the
negative in  ation gap. Since the central bank applies the Taylor principle ( > 1),
this expansionary monetary policy leads to a negative bias in the real interest rate, as
shown in the right graph of Figure 4. This monetary stimulus drives a positive wedge
between the level of output at the stochastic steady state and that at the deterministic
steady state.
    It should be noted that if we relax the ZLB constraint, the other non-linearities
in the model would imply a level of output lower than the deterministic steady-state
value. The di¤erence between the two would be increasing in the volatility of the
shock. In the absence of the ZLB constraint, the de     ationary bias becomes tiny (see
the graph on the left) and therefore the central bank will respond to this by lowering
the interest rate only by a little. Moreover, in this case precautionary motives, which
prompt households to save more to shelter themselves against future risks, become
the driver of the negative long-term output bias. The positive bias due to the lower
bound constraint dominates these e¤ects for our benchmark calibration of the standard
deviation of preference shocks, which is marked by the red star in the plot.

Implications of a Low Natural Interest Rate. The results we have discussed so
far rely on the assumption that the long-run natural rate of interest is ...xed and equal
to one percent. Now we show that the combination of a low interest rates environment
and the presence of the zero lower bound gives rise to the de   ationary bias. Increasing
values of the real rate of interest would mitigate or even completely eliminate the bias
on in  ation because it would be less likely that monetary policy will become constrained
by the ZLB, as shown in the right plot of Figure 3.
    Figure 5 precisely illustrates these results by showing the e¤ects of changing both
the standard deviation of shocks and the long-term real rate of interest r . The im-
portant takeaway from this graph is that as the long-term real interest rate r in-


                                           19
                        Inflation Bias                           Output Bias                         Real Interest Rate Bias


                                                    0.1                                    -0.05
            -0.1
                                                                                            -0.1
                                                   0.08
            -0.2
                                                                                           -0.15
                                                   0.06
            -0.3
                                                                                            -0.2
                                                   0.04
            -0.4                                                                           -0.25
                      r*=2 percent
                      r*=1.5 percent               0.02
                      r*=1 percent                                                          -0.3
            -0.5
                      Benchmark Calibration           0
                                                                                           -0.35
               0.6     0.8      1        1.2          0.6      0.8        1      1.2           0.6      0.8       1       1.2
            Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks

Figure 5: Macroeconomic distortions due the zero lower bound as the standard deviation of preference shocks varies
(x-axis) and for alternative values of the steady-state real rate of interest. Left graph: The inationary bias due to the
zero lower bound constraint. The red star denotes the calibrated value of the standard deviation of this shock. Center
graph: the same as the left graph but the bias is computed with respect to output (level). Right graph: the same as
the left graph but the bias is computed with respect to the real interest rate. Units: Ination and real interest bias is
measured in percentage points of annualized rates while the output bias and the standard deviation of the preference
shocks are in percent.



creases su¢ ciently, the long-term in    ation and output biases disappear. The intuition
is straightforward: when the long-term real interest rate is higher the central bank has
more room to counteract the de       ationary e¤ects of a contractionary shock and hence
is less likely to become constrained by the zero lower bound (see Figure 3).
    It is worth noting that a slightly lower real interest rate r than that of our bench-
mark calibration can lead to de    ationary spirals (the gray area). In such an unfavorable
state of the world, the central bank loses control over in      ation expectations because
the binding ZLB constraint becomes so pervasive that the central bank cannot prevent
in  ation expectations from being swallowed by the de        ationary spirals, as shown in
Section 3.
    Moreover, a higher real rate of interest r would make the function of the de      ation-
ary bias less steep and therefore would increase the threshold of the volatility of shocks
that triggers the de   ationary spirals. It is also interesting to notice that an increase
in the long-term real rate of interest of one percentage point more than halves the
de   ationary bias in our benchmark calibration, denoted by the red star in the graph.
    The size of the bias due to non-linearities in the model other than the ZLB does not
vary with the long-term real interest rate (not shown), suggesting that the long-term
macroeconomic biases linked to a low-interest-rate environment is entirely due to one
speci...c source of non-linearity in the New Keynesian model: the zero lower bound.
    To sum up, the de     ationary bias brought about by the presence of the ZLB can
generate ...rst-order distortions for a central bank that tries to stabilize ination around


                                                                     20
the target. Furthermore, we noticed that the combination of a low long-term real
interest rate, r , and moderate macroeconomic risk can trigger the long-run bias in
in ation and output or, even worse, deationary spirals.

The Unconditional Bias The previous section has shown that even when the econ-
omy is at the stochastic steady-state equilibrium and thus away from the zero lower
bound, a de    ationary bias arises because of the risk of encountering the zero lower
bound in the future. This, in turn, triggers a bias in the real interest rate, as the cen-
tral bank tries to lift in  ation closer to the target and drives a wedge between actual
output and optimal output. While the de         ationary bias can be de...ned and measured
within the context of a structural model, it cannot be directly measured in the data.
A concept of de    ationary bias that can be observed more directly in the data is the
unconditional deationary bias, which we de...ne as the di¤erence between the model'        s
unconditional mean of in     ation and in   ation at the deterministic steady-state equilib-
rium (i.e., the central bank'  s in ation target ). This alternative concept of gap does
not only re   ect the risk of hitting the ZLB but it also re    ects the in  ation outcomes
observed when ZLB episodes actually materialize. As such, the unconditional de            a-
tionary gap is more closely related to the bias shown in Figure 1 than the concept used
in the previous section.
    To compute the unconditional in        ation bias, we simulate the model for several
periods and then compute the mean of the variables of interest. Figure 6 reports the
average bias as the volatility of the preference shock varies. The bias is computed by
taking the mean of in    ation, output, and the real interest based on a simulation lasting
1,000,000 periods. We drop the ...rst 100,000 observations to minimize the e¤ects of
initial conditions. The biases are reported on the same scale used in Figure 4.
    The unconditional de     ationary bias is even larger than the de  ationary bias shown
in Figure 4. When computing the unconditional bias, the zero lower bound is not
a mere possibility, but an event that occasionally occurs and, in fact, depresses the
dynamics of in    ation. Thus, average in     ation is even further away from the desired
in  ation target because the economy experiences the de       ationary pressures associated
with the ZLB period.
    This behavior of in    ation seems consistent with what is reported in Figure 1. In
the late 1990s, the conquest of US in        ation was completed. The central bank was
successful in convincing agents about the 2% in       ation target. In terms of the model,


                                            21
                        Inflation Bias                                           Output Bias                                          Real Interest Rate Bias
                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                Deflationary Spirals
                                               Deflationary Spirals
            -0.1                                                       0.1                                                  -0.05




                                                                                                     Deflationary Spirals
            -0.2                                                      0.08                                                   -0.1

            -0.3                                                      0.06                                                  -0.15

            -0.4                                                                                                             -0.2
                                                                      0.04

            -0.5                                                                                                            -0.25
                                                                      0.02
                      ZLB Constraint
            -0.6                                                                                                             -0.3
                      No ZLB constraint                                 0
                      Benchmark Calibration
            -0.7                                                                                                            -0.35
               0.6    0.8      1         1.2                             0.6   0.8        1    1.2                              0.6      0.8      1      1.2
            Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks Standard Deviation of Preference Shocks

Figure 6: Average macroeconomic biases as the volatility of the preference shock varies. The bias is computed by taking
the mean of ination, output, and the real interest based on a simulation lasting 1,000,000 periods. We drop the ...rst
100,000 observations to minimize the e¤ects of initial conditions. The biases are reported on the same scale used in
Figure 3.



this event can be captured as convergence toward the stochastic steady state associated
with a 2% in    ation target. Such a low target, combined with the low natural rate of
interest leads to a de   ationary bias   even if the zero lower bound is not binding
and causes in   ation to drift down and away from the desired 2% target. In fact, during
those years the Federal Reserve was genuinely concerned about the risk of de       ation
(Krugman 2003). With the 2008 recession, the ZLB risk materialized. The model
predicts in this case a further reduction in in   ation, as in the data. Finally, as the
economy recovers, the model predicts that in      ation does not return to a 2% target,
but it stabilizes around a lower value corresponding to the stochastic steady state.
    When it comes to the behavior of output and the real interest rate, the bias is
largely gone. When looking at the average bias for the real interest rate, there is a
countere¤ect that pushes the bias to be positive. This countere¤ect is brought about
by the presence of the ZLB itself that truncates the left tail of the distribution of
the nominal interest rate. Thus, the negative bias that arises away from the zero
lower bound is compensated by the fact that at the zero lower bound the central bank
cannot further lower the interest rate, making the e¤ective real interest rate too high.
Importantly, the two phenomena are just the two sides of the same coin: The negative
bias away from the zero lower bound is generated by the de        ationary pressure that
arises exactly because at the zero lower bound the central bank is not able to lower the
interest rate to mitigate the fall in ination.




                                                                                     22
5     The Asymmetric Rule
We have shown that the de     ationary bias induced by the ZLB increases when the
natural interest rate r declines or macroeconomic volatility rises. We now turn our
attention to what the central bank can do to address the de ationary bias.


5.1    The Policy Proposal
In the academic literature and in policy circles, there has been an ample discussion
about the possibility of increasing the in   ation target as a way to avoid the perils of
the zero lower bound. An increase in the target would reduce the possibility of hitting
the zero lower bound and the associated bias, as shown by Coibion et al. (2012) and
Nakata and Schmidt (2016). However, Nakamura et al. (2018) show that standard
models are unreliable when it comes to assess the welfare implications for the optimal
in ation target. Moreover, policymakers have been quite reluctant to reconsider the
target of in  ation because they fear losses of reputation and argue that higher in  ation
is historically associated with more volatile in    ation. Another line of research has
proposed price or nominal GDP targeting or average-in       ation targeting (Mertens and
Williams 2019). However, such policies are perceived as risky because they may require
the central bank to engineer a de   ation over certain periods of time.
    In this paper, we are advocating a di¤erent approach that does not require the
central bank to explicitly aim at hitting a time-varying in     ation target. The central
bank can commit to react less aggressively to positive deviations of in  ation from target
than to negative deviations. We will show that embracing this asymmetric strategy
can e¤ectively remove the macroeconomic biases.
    The policy strategy that we propose implies a smaller response to in       ation when
in ation is above target. Speci...cally, we consider the following modi...ed policy rule:
                    " "                                           #                #
                                                                           Y
                                    t                         t       Yt
          Rt = max 1; 1     t<           + (1    1   t<   )                    R       (10)
                                                                      Y

where      denotes the response of in ation when in   ation is below target,    stands
for the response to in  ation when in ation is above target, and 1 t < is an indicator
function that is equal to one when in ation is below target ( t < ). In what follows,
we set    = 2 as in the benchmark calibration of Section 2.2 and study how the average
and stochastic steady state biases vary in response to changes in .

                                           23
                          Inflation Bias                           Output Bias                       Real Interest Rate Bias

            0.2                                      0.06
                                                                                                0
                                                     0.05
            0.1
                                                     0.04
              0                                                                              -0.05
                                                     0.03

            -0.1                                     0.02
                                                                                              -0.1
                                                     0.01
            -0.2
                                                        0
                                                                                             -0.15
            -0.3         Stochastic SS
                         Average                     -0.01
                         Symmetric Rule
            -0.4                                     -0.02                                    -0.2
                   1.4     1.6   1.8       2   2.2           1.4   1.6   1.8     2     2.2           1.4   1.6   1.8     2     2.2
                     Response to Inflation                     Response to Inflation                   Response to Inflation

Figure 7: Macroeconomic biases due to the ZLB constraint as the central bank varies its response to positive deviations
of ination from target. The ination bias (left plot), the output bias (center plot), and the real interest rate bias
(the right plot) are computed by taking the di¤erence between these variables at the stochastic steady state and their
value at the deterministic steady state (blue solid line). These biases are also computed as the di¤erence between the
unconditional mean of these three variables and their value at the deterministic steady state (red dashed-dotted line).
The response when ination is below target is always equal to 2 as in the benchmark calibration. The red star marks
the symmetric case in which the central bank responds with equal strength to ination or deation. Units: The ination
and the real interest rate biases are expressed in annualized percentage points and the output gap in percentage points.



    The asymmetric rule in equation (10) can be interpreted as a strategy according
to which the central bank promises to be slower in raising the rates when in           ation
goes above target. This strategy reduces the risk of encountering the zero lower bound
and its undesirable e¤ects. It is therefore particularly e¤ective in a low interest rates
environment, like the current one, in which the biases on key macroeconomic variables
can be sizable.
    Figure 7 shows how the macroeconomic distortions due to the zero lower bound vary
as the central bank promises to be less aggressive when in    ation is above its target. We
examine the behavior of the bias away from the zero lower bound (stochastic steady
state, blue solid line) and its unconditional mean (black dashed line). The red stars
denote the distortion under a symmetric rule with a response to in       ation equal to two,
as in the benchmark calibration.
    We observe that being less aggressive when in      ation is above target helps to mit-
igate all the three biases. Speci...cally, for a response     around 1.5, the ZLB-driven
macroeconomic distortions become negligible. In a nutshell, to remove the macro-
economic distortions due to the ZLB constraint, policymakers need to be willing to
tolerate in ation above the target for longer periods of time. By raising the long-run
in  ation expectations, the asymmetric strategy also makes the de       ationary spirals less
likely to happen. Graphically, this makes the gray areas in Figure 4 smaller. This is
an important point to which we will return in Section 5.3.


                                                                    24
    It is worth emphasizing that this policy e¤ectively reduces the probability of hitting
the ZLB. This is re  ected in the reduction of the distance between the in       ation target
(deterministic steady state) and the stochastic steady state of in      ation. As explained
above, in this case, the economy is currently away from the zero lower bound. The
reduction in the bias is therefore a result of a lower risk of hitting the zero lower bound
in the future.

The Asymmetric Strategy Is Not a Makeup Strategy The asymmetric strategy
proposed in this paper removes the de      ationary bias because raises the probability of
in  ation on the upside and, in doing so, o¤sets the downside risk due to the ZLB. Hence,
our strategy di¤ers from the so-called makeup strategies (e.g., price-level targeting, and
average in   ation targeting) that correct the de ationary bias by committing the central
bank to overheat the economy after the ZLB episodes. Consequently, makeup strategies
rely on history dependence which it is often argued makes these strategies hard
to communicate to the public.
    While both approaches require the central bank to make some sort of commitment,
the nature of the commitment is very di¤erent. The asymmetric strategy commits the
central bank to respond asymmetrically to current deviations of in     ation from the cen-
tral bank' s target with no account for the past dynamics of in    ation. The asymmetric
strategy never requires the central bank to engineer an overshooting in in       ation. In
Appendix C, this important property of the asymmetric strategy is illustrated using
a simulation exercise. The challenges in communicating the asymmetric strategy are
discussed in the next section.


5.2    Welfare Analysis
We evaluate the appeal of the asymmetric strategy by measuring its impact on house-
holds'welfare W0 , which reads as follows:

                                      X
                                      1
                                                  Ct1     Ht1+
                                            t d
                           W 0 = E0           t                                         (11)
                                      t=0
                                                  1       1+

    Figure 8 shows welfare Wt (left axis) and the ination bias (right axis). As the cen-
tral bank deviates from the symmetric strategy (the red star) by lowering the response
to above-target in  ation, welfare increases. When this response is around 1.6, the wel-
fare peaks and then it declines as the response to positive in    ation deviations from

                                              25
                -174.054

                                                                                                          0.2
                -174.056

                -174.058                                                                                  0.1




                                                                                                                 Inflation Bias
      Welfare




                 -174.06
                                                                                                          0
                -174.062
                                                                                                          -0.1
                -174.064

                                                                                                          -0.2
                -174.066
                            Symmetric Rule
                -174.068                                                                                  -0.3
                           1.3         1.4   1.5       1.6          1.7         1.8   1.9     2         2.1
                                                   Inflation Response above Target

Figure 8: Welfare and ination bias as the response to positive deviations of ination from target varies in magnitude.
Welfare is evalutated at the stochastic steady state and reported on the left axis. The ination bias is de...ned as
the di¤erence between the annualized percentage rate of ination at the stochastic steady state and the annualized
percentage rate of ination at the deterministic steady state and is reported on the right axis.



target is further decreased. It should be noticed that to close the de  ationary bias, the
central bank has to respond more weakly to in      ation than optimal. The asymmetric
strategy that completely removes the de    ationary bias, is suboptimal in that it allows
too large and persistent positive deviations of in  ation from the central bank'  s target.
To see this, note that the optimal asymmetric rule solves the following trade-o¤. On
the one hand, by tolerating some persistent positive deviations of in       ation from its
target the central bank manages to mitigate the de     ationary bias. On the other hand,
the central bank allows larger positive deviations of in   ation from its target.

Opportunistic Re       ation Announcing that the central bank will respond less ag-
gressively to in  ation when in   ation will be above target is time inconsistent if this
announcement is made when in         ation is below target. Therefore, the central bank
needs an opportunity to show the public its commitment to the new asymmetric rule.
The arrival of a shock that pushes in   ation above target is such an opportunity. We call
this scenario opportunistic re   ation. We now investigate the implications for welfare
and the macroeconomic outcomes of a central bank pursuing an opportunistic re        ation.
    Let us assume that the economy is initially at the stochastic steady state associated
with the symmetric rule when it gets hit by a positive preference shock that boosts
consumption and aggregate demand. The central bank receives now the opportunity to
show to the private sector that it is willing to commit to the optimal asymmetric rule by
responding less aggressively to the in    ation consequences of this shock. It is assumed
that by observing the muted response to in         ation, the private sector immediately
believes that the central bank will follow the asymmetric rule forever.

                                                              26
                         Welfare                          Output Gap                        Inflation Gap
                                                                                 1.4
        -174.055                                                                                 Asymmetric Rule
                                              0.8                                1.2             Symmetric Rule

                                                                                   1
         -174.06
                                              0.6                                0.8

        -174.065                                                                 0.6
                                              0.4
                                                                                 0.4
         -174.07
                                                                                 0.2
                                              0.2
        -174.075                                                                   0

                                                                                 -0.2
                                               0
                    5     10       15   20            5      10        15   20          5       10      15         20
                         Period                             Period                             Period

Figure 9: The dynamics of welfare, the output gap, and the ination gap after a two-standard-deviation positive
preference shock hits the economy in period 1. Two cases are reported: the case in which the central bank adopts the
optimal asymmetric rule and conducts an opportunistic reation of the economy (solid blue line) and the case in which
the central bank does not take this opportunity and sticks to the symmetric rule (red dashed-dotted line). In both
cases, the economy is initialized at its stochastic steady state. Units: Ination gap is measured in percentage points of
annualized rates while the output bias is expressed in percentage points.



     In Figure 9, we show the impulse response function of welfare and the macro-
economic gaps (in    ation and output) to a two standard deviation positive preference
shock under the symmetric rule and under the optimal asymmetric rule. The output
gap is measured in deviations from the       exible price economy whereas the in     ation
gap is expressed in deviations from the central bank'  s two-percent target. The optimal
asymmetric rule raises the output and in      ation gaps in the short run relative to the
symmetric rule whereas it mitigates the macroeconomic gaps in the longer run. Welfare
is reported in the left graph of Figure 9, which shows that the optimal asymmetric rule
raises welfare both in the short run and in the longer run.
     Why is welfare higher in every period when the central bank adopts the asymmetric
rule even though this rule causes output and in       ation gaps to widen more at the
beginning? Welfare does not depend only on the current in      ation and output gaps but
it is also a¤ected by the expected discounted stream of welfare gains that will be accrued
over time. The short-term responses of social welfare to a two-standard-deviation
positive preference shock implies that the long-term welfare gains associated with the
mitigation of the macroeconomic biases outweigh the short-term welfare losses.10
     The opportunistic re   ation involves a trade-o¤ between short-term and long-term
macroeconomic stabilization. Hence, a myopic central bank may refrain from seizing
  10
    Under the asymmetric rule, the weaker systematic response to in   ation raises agents' long-run
uncertainty about ination and hence, everything else being equal, lowers welfare in the long-run.
However, in our model these losses are dominated by the gains from removing the de   ationary bias.




                                                           27
                              10 -5            Myopic Central Banker                                          10 -3       Non-Myopic Central Banker
                                                                                                     5

                     5                                                                               4

                                                                                                     3

                     0                                                                               2
          Welfare




                                                                                           Welfare
                                                                                                     1

                     -5                                                                              0

                                                                                                     -1

                    -10                                                                              -2
                                      1 year       2 years       3 years
                                                                                                     -3
                          0           1        2     3       4      5      6     7                        0           1     2       3      4       5       6   7
                                          Size of the Inflationary Shock                                                  Size of the Inflationary Shock

Figure 10: Welfare gains/losses from carrying out an opportunistic reation as the size of the inationary shock varies
under di¤erent assumptions about how forward looking the central banker is. The left plot shows the myopic central
banker's case and the di¤erent lines refer to di¤erent degrees of myopia; that is, the horizon k the central banker
cares about when computing welfare gains/losses. The right plot shows the case of the benevolent central banker who
maximizes the households' utility and thereby cares about the welfare gains at all horizons. Welfare gains/losses are
computed as the di¤erence between the welfare associated with adopting the optimal asymmetric rule and the welfare
associated with sticking to the benchmark symmetric rule in the period when the inationary shock hits the economy.



this opportunity as welfare costs are mostly front-loaded.11 To further investigate this
issue, we tweak the welfare function (11) to study the behaviors of a myopic central
banker who only cares about the welfare gains accrued up to a ...nite time horizon k .
The welfare of the myopic central banker is denoted by Wf0k
                                                            , which is de...ned as follows:

                                                                           X
                                                                           k
                                                                                          Ct1                             Ht1+
                                                         f k = E0
                                                         W                       t d
                                                                                                                                                                   (12)
                                                          0                        t
                                                                           t=0
                                                                                          1                               1+

The left plot of Figure 10 shows the myopic central bank'  s welfare gains from carrying
out an opportunistic re   ation following a positive preference shock as the size of the
shock varies. The gains are computed by taking the di¤erence of the welfare under
the asymmetric rule and welfare under the benchmark symmetric rule at the time the
in ationary shock hits the economy. The level of asymmetry is the one we ...nd to
be optimal for the non-myopic central banker. The di¤erent lines are associated with
four degrees of the central banker' s myopia, which is captured by the relevant horizons
k = 4; 8; and 12 quarters. The shorter the horizon k , the more myopic the central
banker. The gains are shown as a function of the size of the shock. The myopic central
banker' s gains decline as the size of the preference shocks increases and, hence, the
short-run response of in   ation to the shock is more pronounced. The speed of this
decline increases as the myopia of the central banker becomes less severe.
  11
    In what follows, a myopic central bank can also be interpreted as a conservative central bank that
cares too much about the short-term in   ation consequences of its actions.


                                                                                     28
    If the relevant horizon is less or equal than four quarters (k 4), gains are negative
for all positive shock sizes. Such high levels of myopia dissuade the central bank from
seizing the opportunity of re     ating the economy as the policymaker is more allured
by the short-run welfare gains, which stem from mitigating the immediate in        ationary
consequences of the shock. If the myopic central bank has a horizon of two years, it will
opportunistically re   ate the economy if the standard deviation of preference shocks is
lower than two. Lower degrees of myopia (higher k ) lead the central bank to carry
out the opportunistic re    ation even when the magnitude of the shock is large and the
likely short-run in  ationary consequences of the shock are considerable.
    The right plot of Figure 10 shows the welfare gains from opportunistic re     ation for
the case of the non-myopic/benevolent central banker (k ! 1). In this case, the
optimal asymmetric rule dominates the symmetric rule if the size of the shock is less
than 6 times the calibrated standard deviations of the shocks (i.e., 100 d = 1:175). We
consider this value as fairly high, which suggests that opportunistic re    ation increases
the economy'   s welfare by removing the de     ationary bias, as long as the central bank
internalizes the long term bene...ts of the policy.
    Finally, if no opportunity to rein    ate the economy occurs, the central bank can
implement the asymmetric strategy by cutting the rate more aggressively when in       ation
is below target. This action shows to the public that the central bank has credibly
adopted an asymmetric strategy. Appendix D shows that this alternative asymmetric
strategy also removes the de     ationary bias by lowering the probability of hitting the
ZLB.


5.3    Asymmetric Rules and Deationary Spirals
As already discussed in Section 4, adopting an asymmetric strategy does not only re-
move the de   ationary bias but it also lowers the risk for the economy of experiencing
de  ationary spirals. Since in our model parameters are ...xed, welfare is not directly
a¤ected by this risk. Nevertheless, falling into a de ationary spiral may be very costly
for the economy. The gray areas in Figure 11 denote the values of the standard devi-
ation of preference shocks (upper panels) and the values of the long-term real interest
rate (lower panels) that trigger the de   ationary spirals for any given above-target re-
sponse to in  ation (left panels) and for any given below-target response to in    ation
(right panels). The bigger the asymmetry in the parameters of the rule, the bigger the
macroeconomic uncertainty (the smaller the real rate of interest) has to be to trigger

                                            29
                                                                            Asymmetric Rule and Deflationary Spirals

         St. Dev. of Preference Shocks                                                                                             1.45




                                                                                                   St. Dev. of Preference Shocks
                                         1.32
                                                                                                                                    1.4
                                                                     Deflationary Spirals                                                     Deflationary Spirals
                                          1.3
                                                                                                                                   1.35
                                         1.28
                                                                                                                                    1.3
                                         1.26
                                                  No Deflationary Spirals                                                                                    No Deflationary Spirals
                                                                                                                                   1.25
                                         1.24
                                                    1.4        1.6          1.8         2                                                 2           2.5               3     3.5         4
                                                     Inflation Response Above Target                                                              Inflation Response Below Target
         Long-Run Real Interest Rate




                                                                                                   Long-Run Real Interest Rate
                                         0.92
                                                                                                                                    0.9
                                                No Deflationary Spirals                                                                                         No Deflationary Spirals
                                         0.91
                                                                                                                                   0.85
                                          0.9
                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                         0.89
                                                                                                                                   0.75
                                         0.88                        Deflationary Spirals                                                 Deflationary Spirals
                                                                                                                                    0.7
                                         0.87
                                                                                                                                   0.65
                                                                                                                                                Benchmark Calibration
                                         0.86
                                                    1.4        1.6          1.8         2                                                 2           2.5               3     3.5         4
                                                     Inflation Response Above Target                                                              Inflation Response Below Target



Figure 11: Asymmetric Rule and Deationary Spirals. Upper left plot: the values of the standard deviation of preference
shocks above which deationary spirals arise as the above-target response to ination varies and the below-target
response is set to be equal to 2.0. Upper right plot: the value of the standard deviation of preference shocks above
which deationary spirals arise as the below-target response to ination varies and the above-target response is set to be
equal to 2.0. Lower left plot: the values of the real long-term interest rate below which deationary spirals arise as the
above-target response to ination varies and the below-target response is set to be equal to 2.0. Lower right plot: the
values of the real long-term interest rate below which deationary spirals arise as the below-target response to ination
varies and the above-target response is set to be equal to 2.0. The red stars mark the the thresholds for the standard
deviation of the preference shock and for the real interest rate under the benchmark calibration (symmetric rule).



de  ationary spirals. This is because asymmetric rules make the risk of encountering
the ZLB lower.
    Mertens and Williams (2019) study a rule according to which the Federal Reserve
enforces an upper bound on the federal funds rate to resolve the de    ationary bias. This
rule, while correcting the bias, would imply an increase in the probability of de ationary
spirals because e¤ectively monetary policy becomes passive when in        ation goes above
a certain level. Therefore, such a rule reduces the risk of de     ationary spirals at the
cost of increasing the risk of triggering in  ationary spirals. Instead, our asymmetric
rule always implies active responses to in   ation deviations from the target and hence
does not expose the economy to the risk of indeterminately large increases in in     ation.




                                                                                              30
6      Target Ranges
In a recent meeting, the FOMC focused on two classes of alternative proposals to revisit
the long-run monetary policy framework. The ...rst class involves dynamic strategies
that make up for periods of below-target in   ation. The second class is in line with what
advocated in this paper and it includes "those [strategies] that respond more aggres-
sively to below-target in  ation than to above-target in   ation,"(minutes of the FOMC
meeting, September 17­    18, 2019). According to the minutes, several FOMC members
also proposed a speci...c way to implement the asymmetric strategy: "In this context,
several participants suggested that the adoption of a target range for in      ation could
be helpful in achieving the Committee'   s objective of 2 percent in ation, on average, as
it could help communicate to the public that periods in which the Committee judged
in  ation to be moderately away from its 2 percent objective were appropriate." In
what follows, we show that the asymmetric strategy proposed in this paper can in fact
be implemented using target ranges as long as the target range is in itself asymmetric
around the in   ation objective.
    To illustrate this point, we consider the following policy rule:
              " "                          O                                       I
                                                                                       #                #
                                                                                                Y
                                       t                                       t           Yt
    Rt = max 1; 1       =[
                       t2    L;   H]
                                               + (1    1    =[
                                                           t2    L;   H]
                                                                           )                        R       (13)
                                                                                           Y

This policy rule prescribes a di¤erent response to deviations of in       ation from the ob-
jective depending on how far in          ation is from the desired level. Speci...cally, when
in  ation is inside the target range [ L ; H ], the central bank adjusts the interest rate
less aggressively than what it does when in     ation is outside the target range: I < O .12
Such a rule is arguably easy to communicate. For example, if the in-range response
 I
    is set to zero, the central bank could simply announce that levels of in      ation inside
the target range are not reason of concern. However, an asymmetric target range is
required to correct the de     ationary bias.
    In the left panel of Figure 12, we ...x the in-range response to in   ation to zero ( I =
0), while keeping the out-of-range response unchanged with respect to the benchmark
case ( O = 2). We then report the target ranges that remove the de              ationary bias
(the solid blue line). Speci...cally, for each value of the lower bound of the target range,
  12
    The target range rule could also be expressed in deviations from the boundaries of the target
range. We prefer this formulation because it nests both a standard Taylor rule and the asymmetric
rule presented above.


                                                  31
                                                                                                                                       H                    I
                               Optimal Target Range:   H
                                                           as function of   L                                  Optimal Target Range:       as function of
                         3.5
                                                                                                      5


                          3                                                                          4.5
          H




                                                                                       H
           Upper Bound




                                                                                       Upper Bound
                                                                                                      4
                         2.5

                                                                                                     3.5

                          2
                                                                                                      3


                         1.5                                                                         2.5
                               1            1.5                  2              2.5                        0          0.5          1            1.5             2
                                                             L                                                       In-Range Response to Inflation
                                            Lower Bound

Figure 12: The target range required to close the deationary bias. The left plot: the blue line shows the lower and
upper bounds of the range that closes the deationary bias when the central bank' s in-range response to ination is zero.
The dashed red line marks the bounds implied by the symmetric target range. The right plot: the blue line shows the
upper bound of the range as the central bank' s in-range response to ination varies on the horizontal axis. The lower
bound of the range is ...xed to 2 percent. The vertical red-dashed line is an asymptote that arises when the in-range
response to ination equals the above-target response to ination in the asymmetric rule that removes the deationary
bias.



  L, we report on the y-axis the upper bound, H ; that corrects the de      ationary bias.
Thus, the u-shaped line reported in the panel represents all the pairs [ L ; H ] such
that the de   ationary bias is fully corrected.
    We start with a lower-bound L equal to 1%. In this case the upper bound needs
to be only slightly larger than 3:5%, implying a modest level of asymmetry around the
2% objective. As the lower bound keeps increasing, the upper bound starts declining,
but the asymmetry always remains. For instance, a target range [1:5%; 2:85%] would
also allow the central bank to remove the de     ationary bias. To see this, note that the
solid blue curve is always above the red-dashed line that implies a symmetric target
range.
    When the lower bound reaches the 2% objective, the upper bound is around 2:7%:
Thus, a target region [2%; 2:7%] is necessary to achieve the 2% objective under the
assumption of an in-range response to in       ation equal to zero. To understand why,
it is worth emphasizing that a target region with a lower bound equal to the 2%
objective is conceptually very similar to the asymmetric rule presented in Section 5.
When in    ation is below the objective, the response of the policy rate is strong. When
in  ation is above the target the response is weaker, but in a piecewise fashion. In fact,
the rule presented in Section 5 can also be thought as a degenerate target range rule


                                                                                  32
in which the upper bound of the target range goes to in...nity. The advantage of the
target range is arguably that it preserves the message that excessively high levels of
in  ation will not be tolerated.
    The gray area of the graph denotes values of the lower bound L that are larger
than the objective 2%. While these target ranges also succeed in eliminating the
de  ationary bias, we believe that they are less interesting because they are not so
easy to communicate: The target range now excludes the in       ation objective ( L > ).
Nevertheless, we review this case for completeness. Once the lower bound become larger
than the in  ation objective, the upper bound of the target range starts increasing again.
This is consistent with the results presented so far. Recall that in order to correct the
de  ationary bias, a rule needs to feature more tolerance to high in    ation than to low
in  ation. When the target range is above the desired objective, higher and higher
levels of in ation become progressively acceptable.
    The right panel of Figure 12 shows that the amount of asymmetry required to
correct the de   ationary bias depends on the strength with which the central bank
responds to in   ation inside the target range. In this exercise, the lower bound of the
target range is ...xed to 2%. On the x-axis, we report di¤erent values of the in-range
response to in   ation I . For each of them, the y-axis reports the upper-bound H
required to remove the de    ationary bias. When the in-range response is equal to zero,
the upper bound is around 2:7%, implying only a mild level of asymmetry around
the 2% objective: [2%; 2:7%]. However, as the in-range response I increases, the
required level of asymmetry of the target range increases. For example, with an in-
range response I equal to 1, the required target range becomes: [2%; 3:06%]. This
pattern accelerates over time and the curve approaches a vertical asymptote. The
level of asymmetry goes to in...nity as the in-range response I approaches 1:47 and
the target range rule collapses to the asymmetric rule of Section 5 that removes the
de  ationary bias.
    Summarizing, a target range can be an e¤ective way to implement an asymmetric
policy strategy. However, the target range needs to be asymmetric around the desired
objective for in   ation. The extent of the asymmetry depends on the response to in-
  ation inside the target range. In the benchmark case of a zero response inside the
range, we show that the range needed to remove the de       ationary bias is only modestly
asymmetric. A target range also allows the central bank to preserve the message that
excessively high in   ation will trigger a strong policy response.


                                           33
7    Conclusions
In an environment in which monetary policy faces the risk of encountering the zero lower
bound, in   ation tends to remain persistently below target, even if monetary policy is
not constrained. This is because agents anticipate the possibility of low in  ation in the
future. We showed that an asymmetric policy strategy eliminates the macroeconomic
biases due to the ZLB. A strategy according to which the central bank reacts less
aggressively to positive deviations of in    ation from the 2% target than to negative
deviations can e¤ectively remove the macroeconomic biases, improve social welfare,
and reduce the risk for the economy to fall into highly costly de    ationary spirals.
    We argue that convincing agents that the central bank will abandon the old sym-
metric strategy to embrace the asymmetric one is non-trivial when in       ation is below
target. Once the central bank has removed the bias by announcing the asymmetric
strategy, it has an incentive to renege on its announcement and to stick to the symmet-
ric rule, which lowers the short-run volatility of in  ation. A way to address this time
inconsistency is to conduct an opportunistic re    ation. We show that an opportunistic
re  ation is welfare improving in a standard New Keynesian model. Nevertheless, the
welfare gains are back-loaded and hence the policymaker needs to be su¢ ciently for-
ward looking to be willing to conduct an opportunistic re      ation. Finally, we showed
that the asymmetric strategy can be implemented with a target range, as long as the
target range is in itself asymmetric. A target range is arguably easy to communicate
and allows the central bank to preserve the message that excessively high in    ation will
not be tolerated.




                                           34
References
Adam, K. and R. M. Billi (2007). Discretionary monetary policy and the zero lower
  bound on nominal interest rates. Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (3), 728 ­752.
Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2001). The Perils of Taylor Rules.
  Journal of Economic Theory 96 (1-2), 40­    69.
Bernanke, B. S., M. T. Kiley, and J. M. Roberts (2019, May). Monetary policy strate-
  gies for a low-rate environment. AEA Papers and Proceedings 109, 421­    26.
Clarida, R., J. Galí, and M. Gertler (2000). Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
  Stability: Evidence and Some Theory. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 147­
  180.
Coeurdacier, N., H. Rey, and P. Winant (2011). The Risky Steady State. American
  Economic Review 101 (3), 398­    401.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and J. Wieland (2012). The Optimal In       ation Rate
  in New Keynesian Models: Should Central Banks Raise Their In        ation Targets in
  Light of the Zero Lower Bound? Review of Economic Studies 79 (4), 1371­      1406.
Coleman, W. J. (1990). Solving the stochastic growth model by policy-function itera-
  tion. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 8 (1), 27­  29.
Eggertsson, G. B. and M. Woodford (2003). The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
  Optimal Monetary Policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34 (1), 139­      235.
Galí, J. (2008). Monetary Policy, Ination, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction
  to the New Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press.
Hills, T. S., T. Nakata, and S. Schmidt (2016). The Risky Steady State and the
  Interest Rate Lower Bound. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-9, Board
  of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US).
Judd, K. L. (1998). Numerical methods in economics. MIT press.
Kiley, M. T. and J. M. Roberts (2017). Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 48 (1 (Spring), 317­   396.
Krugman, P. R. (1998). It'   s Baaack: Japan'  s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity
  Trap. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 29 (2), 137­   206.
Krugman, P. R. (May 24, 2003). Fear of quagmire? The New York Times .
Laubach, T. and J. C. Williams (2003). Measuring the natural rate of interest. The
  Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (4), 1063­   1070.
Mertens, T. M. and J. C. Williams (2019). Tying down the anchor: Monetary policy
  rules and the lower bound on interest rates. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,

                                          35
  Working Paper 2019-14, 2019.
Nakamura, E., J. Steinsson, P. Sun, and D. Villar (2018, 08). The Elusive Costs of
  In  ation: Price Dispersion during the U.S. Great In   ation. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 133 (4), 1933­  1980.
Nakata, T. and S. Schmidt (2016). The risk-adjusted monetary policy rule. Finance and
  Economics Discussion Series 2016-061, Board of Governoes of the Federal Reserve
  System (U.S.).
Richter, A. W., N. A. Throckmorton, and T. B. Walker (2014). Accuracy, speed and
  robustness of policy function iteration. Computational Economics 44 (4), 445­ 476.
Shapiro, A. H. and D. Wilson (2019). Taking the fed at its word: A new approach to
  estimating central bank objectives using text analysis. Federal Reserve Bank of San
  Francisco Working Paper 2019-02.
Woodford, M. (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
  Policy. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.




                                         36
A       Non-linear Solution Method
Solving the representative household'
                                    s problem yields the Euler equation
                                                  "                                        #
                                                       d
                                                       t+1          Ct               1
                                      1 = Rt Et          d
                                                                                               ;                        (14)
                                                         t
                                                                   Ct+1              t+1


where    t   = Pt =Pt   1   is gross ination, and the labor supply

                                                  Wt = Nt ct ;                                                          (15)

     The ...rm j produces output with labor as the only input

                                                Yt (j ) = A Ht (j )                                                     (16)

where At denotes the total factor productivity, which follows an exogenous process.
The ...rm j sets the price Pt (j ) of its di¤erentiated goods j so as to maximize its
pro...ts:

                            Pt (j )      Yt                   Pt (j )                      '       Pt (j )
  Divt (j ) = Pt (j )                              mct                          Yt                             1 Yt ; (17)
                             Pt          Pt                    Pt                          2       Pt 1 (j )

subject to the downward sloping demand curve for intermediate goods. The parameter
' > 0 measures the cost of price adjustment in units of the ...nal good.
   The ...rst order condition is
                                                                       1
              Pt (j )       Yt              Pt (j )                        Yt             Pt (j )                 Yt
 (      1)                     =      M Ct                                        '                       1                 +
               Pt           Pt                Pt                           Pt             Pt 1 (j )             Pt 1 (j )
                                          Pt+1 (j )                        Pt+1 (j ) Yt+1
                               'Et t;t+1                           1                                                    (18)
                                            Pt (j )                          Pt (j ) Pt (j )

where the stochastic discount factor                  t;t+1   is
                                                      "                !                   #
                                                              d
                                                              t+1              Ct
                                       t;t+1   = Et             d
                                                                                                                        (19)
                                                                t
                                                                              Ct+1

In equilibrium all ...rms choose the same price. Thus, the New Keynesian Phillips curve




                                                          37
is

            t+1          t                                                         t+1       t+1   Yt+1
 Et '              1         = (1    )+        M Ct + 'Et      t;t+1                     1                (20)
                                                                                                    Yt

   The monetary authority sets the interest rate Rt responding to ination and output
from their corresponding targets. The monetary authority faces a zero lower bound
constraint. The policy rule reads as follows
                                          "                                #
                                                                       Y
                                                          t    Yt
                             Rt = max 1; R                                     :                          (21)
                                                               Y

where and Y denote the in        ation target which pins down the in  ation rate in the
deterministic steady state and the natural output level, which is the level output that
would arise if prices were  exible.
   The resource constraint is
                                      "                   #
                                                        2
                                            '    t
                              C t = Yt 1             1                             (22)
                                            2

    The model is solved with global methods. The agents take the presence of the
zero lower bound into account and form their expectations accordingly. Therefore,
the possibility of hitting the zero lower bound in the future a¤ects potentially the
equilibrium outcome in times of unconstrained monetary policy. We use time iteration
(Coleman 1990 and Judd 1998) with piecewise linear interpolation of policy functions
as in Richter et al. (2014).13 Expectations are calculated using numerical integration
based on Gauss-Hermite quadrature.
    The state variable is dt , while the policy variables are t and labor Ht :



                                                t   = g1( d
                                                          t)                                              (23)
                                              Ht = g 2 ( d
                                                         t)                                               (24)

where g = (g 1 ; g 2 ) and g i : R1 ! R1 . To solve the model, we approximate the unknown
     13
    This approach can handle the non-linearities associated with zero lower bound. Richter et al.
(2014) demonstrate that linear interpolation outperforms Chebyshev interpolation, which is a popular
alternative, for models with zero lower bound. The kink in the policy functions is more accurately
located which gives a more precise solution.




                                                     38
                                                 ~i that can be written as:
policy functions with piecewise linear functions g

                                            t    ~1 ( d
                                                =g    t)                                                                         (25)
                                               ~2 ( d
                                          Ht = g    t)                                                                           (26)

The time iteration algorithm to solve for the policy functions is summarized below:
                                                                                               d            d           d
  1. De...ne a discretized state grid [ d
                                        t;
                                                   d
                                                   t]   and integration nodes                      =[   t       ;   t       ].

                                                  ~( d
  2. Guess the piece-wise linear policy functions g  t ).

                                                                                  d
  3. Solve for all time t variables for a given state vector                      t.     The policy variables are:

                                                   t     ~1 ( d
                                                        =g    t)                                                                 (27)
                                                                   d
                                                     ~2 (
                                                Ht = g             t)                                                            (28)

     so that the remaining variables are given as:

                              Yt = AHt1                                                                                          (29)
                                                                        2
                                                           t
                              Ct = Yt (1           '               1        =2)      g                                           (30)
                                               "                                      #
                                                                                     Y
                                                               t            Yt
                              Rt = max 1; R                                                                                      (31)
                                                                            Y
                              Wt = Nt ct                                                                                         (32)
                                                         Wt
                              M Ct =                                                                                             (33)
                                          (1            )AHt (j )

     Calculate the state variable for period t + 1 at each integration node i:

                                 i;d                                          i; d
                                 t+1   = exp              log( d
                                                               t) +           t+1


                                  i;d
     For each integration node    t+1 ,   calculate the policy variables and solve for output




                                                   39
       and consumption:

                                   i                i;d
                                   t+1       ~1 (
                                            =g      t )                                                       (34)
                                                    i;d
                                 Hti+1 = g
                                         ~2 (       t )                                                       (35)
                                                       1
                                 Yti
                                   +1 =         AHti+1                                                        (36)
                                                                   i             2
                                                                   t+1
                                 Cti+1 = Yti
                                           +1 (1              '          1           =2)    g                 (37)

       Calculate the errors for the Euler Equation and the New Keynesian Phillips curve

                             h   d
                                            Ct          1 i
                                 t+1
       err1 = 1     R t Et         d
                                                           ;
                                   t
                                           Ct+1         t+1

                   t+1                 t                                                            t+1        t+1   Yt+1
       err2 = '              1               (1     )         M Ct (1    )           Et '   t;t+1         1               :
                                                                                                                      Yt

       where the expectations are numerically integrated across the integration nodes.
       The nodes and weights are based on Gaussian-Hermite quadrature.

    4. Use a numerical root ...nder to minimize the errors for the equations.

    5. Update the policy functions until the errors at each point of the discretized state
       are su¢ ciently small.


B      A Model with Binary Realizations of the Shock
In this binary case, we treat the Taylor rule in the good state and all the other remaining
equilibrium equations separately. Using di¤erent candidates of in        ation for the good
state ( H ), we calculate two nominal interest rates for the good state RH 1 ( H ) and
RH 2 ( H ). The ...rst one stems from the Taylor rule, while the other one results from
the other remaining equations.
    The candidate for the nominal interest rate RH 1 ( H ) resulting from of the Taylor
rule in the good state reads as follows:
                                                         "                   #
                                                                    H
                                           H1
                                       R        = max 1; R


This equation corresponds to the red line in Figure 2.


                                                           40
    The other equilibrium equations in the good state give another solution for the
nominal interest conditionally on H . The remaining equations in the good state are
given as:
               h                           d
                                                   CH                   1         1 i
                                           L
       1 = RH 2 (1                 p)      d
                                                                            +p              ;                               (38)
                                           H
                                                   CL                   L          H


       Y H = A(H H )1                  ;                                                                                    (39)
       (1        )M C H A = HtH cH ;                                                                                        (40)
                                               H                2
       C H = Y H (1            '                    1               =2)                                                     (41)
             H                 H
       '              1                = (1             ) + M C H (1                            )                           (42)
             "                                                                                                          #
                               d
                               L           CH                       L                  L
                                                                                                YL          H       H
        +'       (1       p)   d
                                                                            1                      +p           1
                               H
                                           CL                                                   YH

Since the good-state equilibrium outcomes depend on the bad state, we have to solve
for the equilibrium in the bad state. An equilibrium in the bad state satis...es the
following equations:
                          "                             #
                                               L
       RL = max 1; R                                                                                                        (43)

             h                             d
                                                   CL               1             1 i
                                           H
       1 = RL (1               q)          d
                                                                            +q          ;                                   (44)
                                           L
                                                   CH                H            L


       Y L = A(H L )1              ;                                                                                        (45)
       (1        )M C L A = HtL cL ;                                                                                        (46)
                                           L                2
       C L = Y L (1            '                    1           =2)                                                         (47)
             L                 L
       '              1            = (1                 ) + M C L (1                        )                               (48)
             "                                                                                                          #
                               d
                               H           CL                       H                   H
                                                                                                    YH      L       L
        +'       (1       q)   d
                                                                            1                          +q       1
                               L
                                           CH                                                       YL

Equations (38) to (43) give us a solution for the nominal interest rate RH 2 ( H ). The
nonlinear root solver is applied at this step as this system cannot be solved analyt-



                                                                             41
                            Nominal Interest Rate                                 Inflation
             3                                                       2

            2.5
                                                                   1.5
             2

            1.5                                                      1

             1
                                                                   0.5
            0.5

             0                                                       0
                                                                                              Asymmetric Rule
           -0.5
                                                                                              2% Inflation Target
                                                                   -0.5
                  0     5            10             15   20               0   5      10            15               20
                                   Period                                          Period

Figure 13: Simulations of ination and nominal interest rate during an arti...cial recession. The economy is at its
stochastic steady state in period 0, 1, and 2. From period 3 through period 8, the economy is hit by a one-standard-
deviation negative preference shock in every period. Starting from period 9 no more shocks occur and the economy
evolves back to its stochastic steady-state equilibrium. Units: percentage points of annualized rates.



ically.14 The mapping of H to RH 2 corresponds to the blue solid line in Figure 2.
To calculate a hypothetical economy without a zero lower bound in the bad state, we
we assume that the ZLB constraint is not binding in that state. This gives us the
dash-dotted blue line in Figure 2.
    An equilibrium for the economy exists for a given in   ation in the good state H if
RH 1 ( H ) = RH 2 ( H ). This corresponds to an intersection of the red and the blue line
in Figure 2. Looping over H allows to check the existence of equilibria and ...nd all
possible solutions of the economy with binary realizations of the preference shock.


C       The Asymmetric Strategy is Not a Makeup Strat-
        egy
In this appendix we will show that the asymmetric strategy does not require the central
bank to engineer an overshooting in in  ation after a ZLB episode as makeup strategies
(e.g., price-level targeting, average in ation targeting. etc.) do. To this end, we
simulate the economy under a sequence of negative shocks large enough to bring the
economy to the zero lower bound for a certain number of periods. We assume that
the central bank is following the asymmetric rule that removes the de   ationary bias.
  14
    To handle the kink in the Taylor rule in the low state, we use a guess and verify approach in
practice. First, we solve the whole system assuming that the Taylor rule is not binding in the bad
state. We keep the results if the result does not violate the zero lower bound in the bad state. Then,
we guess that zero lower bound is binding in the bad state and keep the results if this is indeed the
bad-equilibirum outcome.


                                                              42
Figure 13 shows the path for the endogenous variables in the three cases. We assume
that the economy is initially at its stochastic steady states and the size of the each
shock is one standard deviation. In period 3, a sequence of negative demand shocks
hits the economy. Starting from period 9 no more shocks occur and the economy slowly
goes back to the stochastic steady state.
    In the left plot of Figure 13, the ZLB is binding when the negative preference
shocks hit the economy. After the ZLB period, no more shocks hit the economy and
the central bank lifts the nominal interest rate o¤ the ZLB constraint. In the right plot
of Figure 13, the dynamics of in   ation in the simulation is reported. In  ation falls as
the economy is hit by the negative preference shocks. As the e¤ects of these shocks fade
away, the in  ation rate converges to the desired two-percent in  ation target. Note that
in ation converges to the desired target from below because the central bank does not
try to overshoot its in  ation target as it would have done if it had adopted a makeup
strategy.


D      Strategic Interest Rate Cuts
We showed that if the central bank seizes the opportunity of re     ating the economy by
adopting an asymmetric rule after an in     ationary shock arises, social welfare generally
increases. If no opportunity to re    ating the economy arises, the central bank can still
remove the de     ationary bias and improves welfare by cutting more aggressively the
interest rate if in  ation is below target while clarifying that the response to in  ation
above target is unchanged.
    This alternative asymmetric rule also eliminates the macroeconomic biases. The
upper panels of Figure 14 report the behavior of the macroeconomic biases de...ned with
respect to the stochastic steady state (blue solid lines) and the observable averages
(red dashed lines) as the response to below-target in     ation, , varies. The response
to positive deviations of in   ation from the target is the same as in the symmetric rule
( = 2). The red star denotes the distortions under a symmetric rule ( =               = 2)
as in the baseline calibration. The response to in     ation below target that zeroes the
biases is approximately three.
    The e¤ects of adopting this asymmetric rule on the probability of hitting the ZLB
and the frequency of ZLB episodes is ambiguous ex ante. On the one hand, lowering
more vigorously the nominal interest rate to ...ght against de   ationary pressures could


                                            43
                                  Inflation Bias                                                       Output Bias

              0                                                                 0.08

                                                                                0.06
            -0.2
                                                                                0.04

            -0.4                                                                0.02

                                                   Stochastic SS
                                                                                   0
            -0.6                                   Average
                                                   Symmetric Rule
                                                                                -0.02
                   2        2.5            3           3.5             4                2        2.5          3         3.5   4
                           Response to Inflation                                                Response to Inflation

                        Expected Frequency of ZLB                                           Probability of Hitting the ZLB
             21
                                               Asymmetric Rule
                                                                                  15
             20                                Benchmark Calibration
                                                                                  14
             19

             18                                                                   13

             17                                                                   12

             16                                                                   11

             15                                                                   10

             14                                                                    9

                   2        2.5            3           3.5             4                2        2.5          3         3.5   4
                           Response to Inflation                                                Response to Inflation




Figure 14: Macroeconomic biases due to risk of hitting ZLB under the asymmetric rule. The biases are computed
relatively to the stochastic steady state (blue solid line) or the average ination (red dashed-dotted line) and are shown
in the upper panels. The output gap is expressed in percentage points and ination gap is expressed in percentage
points of annualized rates. The lower panels show the risk of hitting the ZLB in the next period (left) and the expected
frequency of the ZLB (right) as the response to ination below target varies. The frequency is in percentage points
and it is computed as the ratio between the number of periods spent at the zero lower bound and the total sample size
(300,000). The probability of hitting the zero lower bound in the next period is conditional on being at the stochastic
steady state in the current period and is expressed in percentage points.



increase the probability of hitting the zero lower bound. On the other hand, com-
mitting to respond more aggressively to negative deviations of in    ation from target
eliminates the de ationary bias and thereby raises the long-term nominal interest rate.
Higher nominal rates cause the likelihood of hitting the ZLB to fall. As shown in the
lower panels of Figure 14, the asymmetric rule that allows the central bank to remove
the macroeconomic bias ( = 3) lowers the probability of hitting the ZLB and the
expected frequency of ZLB episodes.




                                                                           44
