                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      LIQUIDITY DEFLATION AND LIQUIDITY TRAP UNDER FLEXIBLE PRICES:
                SOME MICROFOUNDATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS

                                     Guillermo A. Calvo

                                     Working Paper 26277
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26277


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




I am thankful to Ricardo Caballero, Sara Calvo and Martín Uribe for useful comments on a
previous version. Errors and omissions are exclusively mine. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Guillermo A. Calvo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity Deflation and Liquidity Trap under Flexible Prices: Some Microfoundations and
Implications
Guillermo A. Calvo
NBER Working Paper No. 26277
September 2019
JEL No. E31,E4,E41,E5,E52

                                         ABSTRACT

The paper discusses simple microfoundations for Liquidity Deflation (Calvo 2016, Chapter 2),
which gives rise to liquidity trap under perfectly flexible prices/wages. Unlike Keynes (1936),
this is a Supply Side Liquidity Trap, SSLT, not resolved by a fall in prices /wages, or massive
helicopter increase in liquid government liabilities. However, escaping SSLT could be achieved
by low policy interest rates on money (unless ZLB holds) and, more interestingly, higher inflation
driven by administered prices/wages. Moreover, contrary to (Friedman 1969), under Liquidity
Deflation the Optimal Quantity of Money does not call for liquidity satiation, and may be
dangerously close to SSLT.


Guillermo A. Calvo
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
420 West 118th St, Room 1303B
MC3332
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gc2286@columbia.edu
    LIQUIDITY DEFLATION AND LIQUIDITY TRAP UNDER FLEXIBLE PRICES
                 Some Microfoundations and Implications

                                   Guillermo Calvo
                                   September 3, 2019



                                 I. INTRODUCTION

Several recent papers suggest that shortage of very liquid (also called safe) assets
could be a central explanatory factor for the deep and long-lasting Great Recession
that followed the Lehman crisis. This is traced back to the massive destruction of
safe assets associated with the Lehman crisis (see Calvo 2012, Caballero, Farhi and
Gourinchas 2016 and 2017), which gave rise to large demand for and insufficient
creation of safe assets due to constraints like the Zero Lower Bound on policy
interest rates, ZLB, and sterilized intervention. The ZLB is hard to bypass because it
involves thorny operational problems but, in principle, unsterilized intervention,
like helicopter money, should be less problematic. Therefore, part of the difficulty
could be attributed to governments' reluctance to utilize unsterilized intervention.
But the effectiveness of helicopter money is not free from critics. Keynes (1936), for
instance, raised some doubts about the effectiveness of unsterilized intervention by
conjecturing that there exists a positive nominal interest rate at which the demand
for money becomes infinitely elastic -- a situation labeled Liquidity Trap. However,
Keynes's conjecture is hard to justify in conventional models since, given the price
level, helicopter money could increase real wealth without bound and, if there is no
consumption satiation, utility maximization should eventually lead to a rise in
aggregate demand that matches full capacity output (as implied by the Pigou effect).
This criticism to Keynes's conjecture, though, is due to an assumption that is taken
for granted in conventional macro models, namely, that the liquidity services
provided by money are proportional to the stock of real monetary balances. This
assumption sounds reasonable in normal circumstances, away from Liquidity-Trap
type episodes, but it may be questionable when, as in the Great Recession, the
velocity of circulation of monetary aggregates (e.g., M1 and M2) in the US, has fallen
to levels not seen in more than half a century. 1

In recent work I have explored the possibility of a disconnect between real safe
assets (i.e., the nominal supply of safe assets divided by the price level), and their
liquidity or transaction services -- and argued that beyond a certain point an
increase in real safe assets may fail to increase total liquidity in the same
proportion. I labeled this phenomenon Liquidity Deflation. As shown in Calvo (2016
a and b) and discussed below, Liquidity Deflation helps to validate Keynes's

1 In this paper I will indistinguishably speak of safe, highly liquid assets and money.
The focus is on assets that are essential for trade and financial transactions,
including assets that are employed for credit collateral. Their composition is not
central for the present discussion, and will be largely ignored.
conjecture even though expansion of monetary aggregates is triggered by helicopter
money, and the interest elasticity of the demand for money is bounded.

The ideas behind Liquidity Deflation are straightforward, but I have encountered
some intellectual resistance in considering its relevance. Part of the reason for this
is that in macroeconomics the concept of "money" is associated with an object which
liquidity is tarnished by nothing except "inflation". In particular, increasing the
supply of "reserve assets," (i.e., assets employed by central banks as international
reserves, like US Treasury obligations) is rarely associated in models with a loss of
their "liquidity" or transaction services. Thus, I believe that time is high for
discussing the microfoundations of Liquidity Deflation and, on that basis, get new
insights on macro policy around Liquidity Trap episodes. These are the central
issues tackled in the present paper.

To motivate the discussion, I will first briefly present in plain English two related
Liquidity Deflation scenarios. Then I will spell out a formal model, which will allow
us to discuss the mechanics of Liquidity Deflation in greater detail and show, under
conventional assumptions, that Liquidity Deflation could completely crowd out the
liquidity-enhancing impact of an increase in money supply. Moreover, the model
shows that operating near the complete-crowd-out equilibrium is also problematic.
Under those conditions, even a slow-paced return to normality may bring about a
sharp and unwelcome increase in the price level.

As a bonus, and to insert Liquidity Deflation at the core of conventional monetary
theory, I examine the Optimal Quantity of Money, OQM, issue originally discussed in
Friedman (1969, Chapter 1). I show that, unlike Friedman's OQM, Liquidity
Deflation does not call for reaching liquidity satiation and that the new OQM is
located dangerously close to the new Liquidity Trap concept developed in this
paper.

In the closing remarks I present a short and tentative extension of these ideas to
Emerging Market economies, EMs, in which domestic assets could hardly be
classified as safe. Arguably, however, the search for yield triggered by low-interest-
rate of safe assets may have turned some EM assets safer (perhaps due to higher
turnover), helping to explain the noticeable recent downward trend in EM inflation
(see Ha et al 2019).
                             II. LIQUIDITY DEFLATION

a. Intuitive Scenarios

    1) Consider an atomistic representative-individual economy in which carrying
       cash to the mall saves shopping time (see Végh 1989). However, time saved
       declines as cash held by the other mall customers goes up: a congestion
       effect. Therefore, from the point of view of each atomistic agent, in
       equilibrium the time-saving impact of cash holdings increases less than in
       proportion to cash held--a phenomenon I label Liquidity Deflation.

    2) Alternatively, and more in line with popular narratives of the Great
       Recession (see Gorton 2010), consider the case in which a highly liquid asset
       (e.g., US Treasury bond) is used as credit collateral. The collateral value of
       those bonds depends on the amount of goods and services that the US
       government could seize by, say, raising emergency taxes. Therefore, if the
       latter has an upper bound, in equilibrium the value of Treasury bonds as
       collateral may increase less than in proportion to the increase in the (real)
       market value of Treasury bonds: another example of Liquidity Deflation.

Remark I. The above examples assume that liquid government liabilities are safe.
However, this assumption is highly debatable for economies, like Japan and the US,
that exhibit large fiscal deficits and debt-to-GDP ratios (especially, if unfunded social
security benefits are taken into account). Keynes (1936) offers an alternative
explanation, which I labeled the Price Theory of Money, PTM, in Calvo (2016 b). 2 The
conjecture is based on the observation that sticky prices provide an unintended
output backing to money, even if the public sector offers none. Keynes's
rationalization is independent of government's money backing, and its appeal is
thus enhanced under current conditions in which, otherwise, currencies like the US
dollar and the yen would have to be backed by fiscally fragile governments. Notice
that under the PTM, if real monetary balances are `small' relative to the value of
transactions subject to sticky prices, money offers safe liquidity, e.g., free from
'runs.' 3 However, safety may deteriorate as the stock of real monetary balances
becomes large, for the simple reason that, realistically, the flow of real transactions
subject to sticky prices has an upper bound.




2 To quote the master (emphasis mine): "[...] the fact that contracts are fixed, and
wages are usually somewhat stable in terms of money, unquestionably plays a large
part in attracting to money so high a liquidity-premium" Keynes 1936, Chapter 17.
3 This helps to explain why currencies that are employed for invoicing and units of

account across world economy, like the US dollar, become stronger in terms of
output during a Liquidity Crunch episode.
b. Parsimonious Microfounded Flexible Prices Model

Suppose a standard infinite-horizon, representative-individual open-economy
model in which instant utility index satisfies:

                                         ( ) -  ,                                    (1)

where c stands for consumption, u is twice-continuously differentiable over the
positive real line,  > 0, " < 0, and l is labor required to consume c, e.g., shopping
time (see Végh1989). I assume that shopping time increases with consumption and
declines with the holdings of real monetary balances. The latter provide
transactions services and thus save on shopping time. However, the effectiveness of
money to provide those services declines as market holdings of real monetary
balances increase, in line with the above examples. In example II.a.1 the effect can
be interpreted as "congestion," while in example II.a.2 it can be interpreted as a
decline in money's collateral value. 4

I assume that

                   =  -  + ( ),   > 0,  < 0,  < 0,   0,                              (2)

where V and Z are, respectively, the timesaving and Liquidity Deflation functions;
both are twice-continuously differentiable over the positive real line, and m and 
are, respectively, the representative individual's holding of real monetary balances
and market equilibrium real monetary balances (individuals are atomistic and total
population is normalized to 1). Thus, in equilibrium,  =  . Individuals can
single-handedly determine m, but, since they are atomistic, are constrained to take
 as given.

For simplicity, I will assume an open economy, rational expectations (= perfect
foresight because there is no uncertainty), no trade barriers and perfect capital
mobility. The representative individual has a constant endowment, y, of
(perishable) exportables that are not consumed at home. On the other hand,
consumption c is entirely composed of (perishable) importables. The relative
international price between importables and exportables is constant and equal to
unity. Moreover, the international real interest rate is positive, equals the
representative individual's subjective rate of discount, , and (importantly for our



4 It is worth noting that, strictly speaking, the Price Theory of Money does not apply
if prices are perfectly flexible. However, I assume price flexibility here to show that,
granted Liquidity Deflation, price stickiness is not indispensable for existence of
Liquidity Trap. Extensions to sticky prices are straightforward, but, at this juncture,
would cloud the analysis with superfluous details. For an attempt in that direction,
see Calvo (2018).
discussion here) exchange rate and prices are perfectly flexible. Thus, the budget
constraint of the representative individual in terms of tradable goods satisfies:
                                
                              0 [ +  -  -   ] -   0,                                  (3)

where, without loss of generality, initial wealth is set equal to zero, and i and s stand,
respectively, for the market instantaneous nominal interest rate and government's
lump-sum subsidies to rebate seigniorage from money creation. We abstract from
other government activities and, therefore, assume that other taxes and
expenditures are set equal to zero. The government sets nominal money supply at
each moment of time. 5
                                                                   
Plugging equation (2) into equation (1), maximizing utility (= 0 [( ) -  ] - ])
with respect to c and m subject to budget constraint (3), and focusing on interior
solutions, i.e.,  > 0,  > 0, we get:

                                       ( ) - 1 = ,                                    (4)

and

                                          )
                                      + (   =  ,                                      (5)

where  stands for the Lagrange multiplier, which is constant over time and
determined by equality between present discounted value of endowment and
consumption. All of these assumptions are standard in monetary models aimed at
highlighting fundamental monetary phenomena -- in the present case Liquidity
Deflation.

To rule out consumption satiation, I will assume  () > 1. Thus, by (4) and (5), we
get equilibrium consumption  = , and (dropping time subscripts):

                                         +( )
                                            ()-1
                                                      =  ,                            (6)

Thus, by equation (6), and recalling that   < 0, there exists a function (, ), such
that

                           = (, ) - ( ),  < 0,  > 0,                                  (7)


5 As is well known (Olivera 1970, Sargent and Wallace 1975), when prices are
perfectly flexible and fiscal constraints are not binding, as in the present model,
setting i does not anchor the price level. However, I will extend the model to the
case of interest-bearing "money," where the latter could be identified with the policy
interest rate, as in Calvo and Végh (1995).
Equation (7) is a IS/LM familiar expression for equilibrium in the money market,
except for the term ( ). Clearly, by (7), recalling that  < 0, the demand for
money increases with the equilibrium real stock of money, a conventional
"network" effect (see, e.g., Uribe 1987). Thus, although the Z function is here
associated with a novel form of externality (i.e., liquidity deflation), the effects
would be similar if Z is interpreted as a more familiar network externality.

At equilibrium in the money market we have  =  , implying, by (7),

                             + () = ( , ),  < 0,  > 0.                                 (8)

Therefore, recalling expression (2), transactions services, i.e.,  + (), may
increase with real monetary balances despite the Liquidity Deflation effect, but the
model does not preclude the possibility that, beyond a certain point, transactions
services decline. Condition (8) is depicted in Figure 1, where  is assumed to
maximize  + () with respect to  (hence ( ) = -1). The slope of the
equilibrium transaction-services equilibrium condition is downward sloping with
respect to the nominal interest rate to the left of  , as in conventional models that
ignore the Z component. However, the slope becomes positive to the right of  .
Notice that  is associated with   in Figure 1. Moreover, if  >   , there may be
two values of real monetary balances that are consistent with full equilibrium. This
is illustrated in Figure 1 by  =  ', at which point the equilibrium real monetary
balances can settle at 1 or 2. Thus, given nominal money supply, the price level
may be undetermined. Moreover, I will show in Appendix A that there exists a
continuum of equilibrium paths converging to m2, even if the rate of expansion of
money supply is constrained to be constant over time. 6 This shows that Liquidity
Deflation can bring about equilibrium indeterminacy, a major complication for the
design of monetary policy. Despite this, however, full capacity utilization is still
reachable. However, I will show next that full capacity utilization may not be
reachable if  <   , due to the existence of a new type of Liquidity Trap.

Consider the case in which the nominal interest rate equals " <   (see Figure 1).
By equation (8) and Figure 1,  + ( ) < ( " , ). Hence,  " is incompatible with
general equilibrium. If full capacity utilization holds, i.e.,  = , for instance, the
money market would exhibit excess demand, a situation that is not resolved by a fall
in the price level or increase in money supply (given  = "), because Liquidity
Deflation prevents the relevant liquidity concept from rising. Thus, if for some
reason i is stuck at  " , the economy would display characteristics akin to a Keynesian
Liquidity Trap, except that the latter would be generated by liquidity supply




6The math involved here is very similar to that in the Optimum Seigniorage
problem.
phenomena. I will correspondingly call it Supply Side Liquidity Trap, SSLT. 7 Next I
will discuss situations in which it may be difficult for the economy to get rid of SSLT,
and even cases in which equilibrium displays some kind of capacity
underutilization.

Prior to the Great Recession, a dominant view was that deflation and Liquidity Trap
problems could be cured by increasing money supply and raising inflation
expectations in a credible manner (see, e.g., Krugman 1998). In the present model
this would correspond to being able to raising the nominal interest rate such that
    . True, Liquidity Deflation can still cause equilibrium multiplicity but, as noted,
full capacity utilization is not beyond reach. How to get there? By equation (6), in
steady state equilibrium we have  =  + , where  is the (constant) rate of
expansion of money supply. Hence, all it takes to move the economy out of SSLT is
to set  such that  +     . In words, all it takes is high enough inflation
expectations, which may be achieved by jacking up the rate of expansion of money
supply in a credible manner (as proposed in Krugman 1998). Unfortunately, as I
argue next, Liquidity Deflation could make the Krugman proposal hard to
accomplish.

To simplify the discussion, consider the case in which  + () =  + ( ), for
all    . 8 This situation is depicted in Figure 2, where the solid curve is now flat
for all    , and m2-type equilibrium on Figure 1 is ruled out (see graphical
proof in Appendix B). Notice that the solid curve looks like the typical textbook
Keynesian Liquidity Trap, which, after a critical point ( in the present case),
becomes infinitely elastic with respect to the interest rate. Suppose that the
increase in  fails to change inflation expectations. Hence, given rationality, at
steady state the representative individual should expect inflation to be constant
over time, and such that  = " - . Thus, if  > " - , then m will increase without
bound, but it would fail to change the relevant liquidity concept (which will remain
constant at  + ( )). Excess demand for money would continue to prevail, a
situation that may plausibly lead agents to expect that, if anything, inflation will fall,
making money more attractive -- a situation that would look as if a Liquidity
Deflation "black hole" is swallowing the entire expansion of money supply!

I will show next that by modifying the equilibrium concept in a simple but not
implausible manner, the model could exhibit capacity underutilization or inefficient
allocation of resources, without violating transversality conditions and, thus,
qualifying as a rational expectations equilibrium. I will assume that under SSLT and
excess money demand, individuals divert their attention to finding/developing
alternative liquid assets (e.g., crypto-currencies, searching for yield, etc.) in
detriment of their endowments, . Moreover, these negative effects on output do
not stop until effective endowment shrinks and restores equilibrium in the money

7 See Figure 1, where the set of non-negative interest rates associated with SSLT are
indicated.
8 This holds if ( ) = -1, for all     .
market. 9 Thus, if the economy is stuck at  =  " , the equilibrium effective
endowment, denoted by y', must satisfy:

                                  + () = (", ).                                      (9)

Clearly, y' < y and    . The higher is , the higher will be . Consider the case,
depicted in Figure 2, in which  =  and, therefore,  attains its maximum value
subject to  =  " ( but still   <  ). 10 This excess capacity equilibrium is not affected
by changes in  . To be sure, if  > , m will grow without bound but, as pointed out
before, this does not violate transversality conditions because the stock of relevant
liquidity will remain constant at  + ( ). Since output stays constant and m
increases without bound, velocity falls over time. 11 This is in line with what
happened during the Great Recession, as the velocity of circulation exhibited a steep
decline in reserve-currency economies. Admittedly, the present model is still quite
unsophisticated and should greatly benefit from plausible dynamic extensions, but I
would be surprised if its central results could be easily overturned. 12

Remark II. It is worth keeping in mind that if the rate of expansion of money
supply,  , is high enough, there exists a full capacity utilization equilibrium. Thus,
recalling Figure 1, it would be correct to say that full capacity utilization could be
achieved by credibly manipulating money supply so that (in steady state)    .
However, the discussion also reveals that if, for some reason, the economy is stuck
at  <   , it may not be possible to achieve full capacity utilization by large infusions
of money supply, if the representative individual expects low inflation and
equilibrium  <   . In that situation, there will be excess demand for money
combined with excess supply of full capacity utilization output,  -- which the
model assumes will lead agents to divert their attention to unproductive activities
aimed at increasing the supply of liquid assets. This is an interesting implication of
the model, because it offers a new rationale for why it might be hard to have agents
believe that inflation will be high enough and generate full capacity utilization.
Krugman (1998) made important strides in that direction by claiming that the
problem in Japan was that, for some reason, the government was perceived by


9 This is akin to demand-determined output assumption in Keynesian models,
although supply factors are at work!
10 In the standard IS/LM apparatus the adjustment mechanism is parallel to the one

assumed here, but relies on sticky prices and demand-determined output. See Calvo
(2018) for an analysis of Liquidity Deflation in terms of a New Keynesian model
with those characteristics.
11 It is worth noting that the same type of SSLT equilibrium would hold if the curve

in Figure 1 becomes flat at some  >  or, in other words, if there exists some
 =  >  , such that the liquidity of m, i.e.,  + (), becomes constant for all
 >  .
12 For a New Keynesian Macroeconomics model in which Liquidity Deflation brings

about a fall in the velocity of circulation, see Calvo (2018).
agents as being strongly inflation averse, which conspired against credibility and
hence effectiveness of an inflationary strategy. The present model offers another
reason: if agents' inflation expectations are "too low," the central bank may be
unable to jack up inflation because the economy will be stuck at a SSLT where
monetary policy is ineffective. It is not the government's inflation aversion that is at
stake here, it is the excessively low inflation expectations of the representative
individual -- expectations that turn out to be rational -- giving rise to excess supply
of full capacity output and an insatiable demand for liquidity!

However, recalling Figure 1, the model implies that full capacity utilization could be
achieved if the government couples monetary policy with regulations and
arrangements that ensure that inflation is such that  =  +  >   or, equivalently,
that  >   - . This involves heterodox procedures that many policymakers try,
quite understandably, to avoid. But when all the orthodox procedures have failed,
price guidance looks increasingly attractive. Besides, controlling just a handful of
prices, e.g., those of public sector services and some large private enterprises, may
be enough. This has occasionally been tried in economies facing the opposite
problem: stopping chronic inflation. 13 

Remark III. SSLT shows the possibility of persistent excess demand for liquidity at
full capacity utilization, which in the present model induces unproductive search for
alternative forms of liquidity. I suspect that here rests a wealth of new insights that
could be found by, on one end, studying empirically plausible endogenous
mechanisms of private-sector liquidity creation -- and, on the other end, modeling
realistic policymakers' response functions in Liquidity Trap crisis episodes. As to
the latter, it is not unusual for policymakers to "fight the last war," and take
measures (i.e., reaction functions) that are counterproductive in the short run. The
Great Recession, for instance, has induced tighter banking and financial regulations
that some observers see as having exacerbated liquidity shortage. Moreover, the
very existence of rational expectations SSLT equilibrium may lead the central bank
to prematurely stop pursuing QE and debilitating the effectiveness of QE if
resumed. 14 

Remark IV. I guess that Keynes would have been pleased by these results. He
spent much of Chapter 19 on his General Theory discussing several instances in
which even downward flexible wages would fail to achieve full capacity utilization.
Unfortunately, he utilizes arguments that are absent in the previous sections of the
book. The lack of microfoundations helps to explain why popular Keynesian models
assume price stickiness and ignore the case in which unemployment arises under
flexible prices/wages. However, the PTM (recall footnote 3, above) shows that

13See Bruno et al 1991.
14Recently, the ECB and the BOJ appear to have given up fighting deflation by means
aggressive QE and switched instead to low interest rates. Opinion in the financial
press was unanimous in concluding that QE had run out of steam, an additional
factor militating against the effectiveness of QE.
Keynes was trying to find a microfoundations for the positive value of (fiat) money
based on the existence of output collateral that money holders could attach if there
is a run on money. The PTM relies on collateral based on price/wage stickiness. But
the collateral could be provided by other means, e.g., government commitment to
exchange money for public services/goods at a given nominal price, except if their
supply hits bottom. This is how the Gold Standard worked under normal
circumstances. Once a collateral principle for the value of money is assumed -- and
the collateral is, realistically, finite -- it is a natural corollary that money's liquidity
services must have an upper bound. This implies that a phenomenon like Liquidity
Deflation must eventually become operative and set an upper bound to the liquidity
generated by money. Hence, in line with the above model, a SSLT could take place
without private sector price/wage stickiness, the result that I believe Keynes was
trying to get. 

Remark V. Although, as pointed out in footnote 6, inflation targeting based on the
management of a short-run interest rate results in price level indeterminacy, the
model could be extended to the case in which the central bank pays interest on m,
and m is identified with an aggregate of highly liquid assets. Denote the interest rate
on m by im. 15 It is easy to show that the money-market equilibrium condition (7)
would become:

                   + () = ( -   , ), -  < 0,  > 0.                                     (10)

Clearly, lowering   reduces the demand for liquidity services and pushes the
economy towards full capacity utilization. 16 However, this policy may not be
feasible or give rise to problems of its own. For instance,   < 0 may lead to
devising crypto-currencies without an effective Lender of Last Resort, and
eventually generate severe liquidity crises. 17 

The Optimal Quantity of Money: A Digression. Friedman (1969) shows that
abstracting from tax distortions, and assuming that the marginal nominal cost of
issuing non-interest-bearing money is nil, the optimum quantity of money -- i.e.,
real monetary balances that maximize social welfare -- must be such that the
opportunity cost of holding money, i.e., the market nominal interest rate, is equal to



15 For a related model, see Calvo and Végh (1995). Variable   could also be
interpreted as central bank's interest on bank reserves.
16 Changes in   have effects on the government's consolidated (including the

central) fiscal balance and may have an impact on the Liquidity Deflation function,
(). However, can be ignored here given that government's deficits/surpluses are
financed with lump-sum taxes/subsidies.
17 It is worth noting that a negative   is equivalent to an inflation tax, which has

stimulated Currency Substitution, particularly in economies suffering from Chronic
Inflation.
zero, i.e.,  = 0 in the above notation. I will show that this does not necessarily holds
under Liquidity Deflation (or network externality).

I will focus on steady state. By equations (1) and (2), the social planner maximizes:

                         ( ) -  + ( + ())                                             (11)

with respect to   , and   0. Since  () > 1, optimal consumption  = . The
first-order condition with respect to m satisfies:

                            + ()[1 + ()]] = 0.                                        (12)

In absence of Liquidity Deflation, the OQM requires money satiation, i.e.,   = 0,
which holds, recalling equation (6), if i = 0. This is Friedman's result. 18 Notice that
since at steady state  =  + , in this static model the OQM calls for deflation. More
precisely,  = -.

Consider now the case in which Liquidity Deflation holds. Thus, since by expression
(2),   > 0 everywhere, it follows that the OQM calls for setting 1 +   () = 0,
which, recalling Figure 1, holds at  =  . Thus, by equation (6), decentralizing the
OQM calls for setting the nominal interest rate such that (recalling Figure 1)  =   ,
where

                           +( )
                            ()-1
                                       =   =  +  > 0.                                 (13)

Hence, if    , the OQM would call for inflation, not deflation as in Friedman's
OQM. Moreover, if money yields a rate of return   , equation (13) becomes:

                       +( )
                         ()-1
                                   =   =  -   =  +  -   ,                             (14)

implying that the OQM is achieved if

                                  =   -  +   .                                        (15)

Thus, the inflation rate is free to take any value as long as it satisfies equation (15).

However, as pointed out above, starting from a SSLT may make it hard for the
central bank to implement the OQM. Besides, the OQM  =  seats at the
borderline to the SSLT region (see Fig. 1), too close for comfort! In more general
terms this result suggests that policies that generate abundant liquidity services could


18It is worth noting that Friedman's result is not well defined if there is no liquidity
satiation, as assumed in equation (2).
get the economy at the brink of Liquidity Trap, where the benefits of large liquidity
may be offset by output loss and inefficiency. 

Remark VI. Thus far, our discussion has focused on the limit case in which
Liquidity Deflation completely emasculates the impact of QE (Quantitative Easing).
However, Liquidity Deflation problems may still be relevant near the limit, where
QE is still capable of increasing liquidity supply. For the sake of concreteness, let us
go back to the case of non-interest-bearing m and rewrite equation (7) as

                                 + () = (, ),   0,                                  (16)

and consider the effect of a slight drop in parameter  . If () < 0, i.e., Liquidity
Deflation is at work, a smaller  amounts to lowering the drag implied by Liquidity
Deflation and, therefore, can be interpreted as a shift towards "normality." Since, by
assumption, QE still works but it is "small" implies that the derivative of  + ()
with respect to m is positive but  0. Hence, recalling that () < 0, one can easily
show that a fall in parameter  implies a "large" contraction in equilibrium real
monetary balances m. Thus, given nominal money, a fall in parameter  would result
in a "large" increase in the price level. This gives some analytical grounds for the
concerns expressed by market analysts that are afraid that regularization of present
conditions in which policies like QE seem to be getting out of steam may bring about
spike in the price level/inflation. 
                                III. CLOSING REMARKS

Having reached this point, the reader may feel that, if one is ready to assume
Liquidity Deflation, the above results are trivial (in the pejorative sense of the
word). I beg to disagree. Results are indeed trivial -- as it happens with any
logically consistent theory -- but important. Firstly, because Liquidity Deflation
unveils a new type of Liquidity Trap (SSLT) from which it is much harder to escape
compared to the textbook case, and helps to rationalize some of the key problems
faced by policymakers in the recovery from the Great Recession. Secondly, because
it brings up to the surface results that clash with the pre-crisis conventional
wisdom. For instance, if you ask your "representative" economist (especially prior
the Great Recession): "What happens if money supply displays a large increase in a
short period of time?" the answer will likely be something like "prices will take a big
jump." In symbols, a big increase in M will result in a big increase in P. In contrast,
the above discussion focuses on the possibility that a big increase in M will provoke
a big fall in the "quality" of M -- here identified as a big fall in the "liquidity of M."
Thus, in a situation like that, a marginal increase in M may have no effect on P or in
the "real value of M/P, adjusted for liquidity services." Thirdly, because Liquidity
Deflation -- a simple addendum to standard models -- might help to develop a
"New Synthesis" from which more realistic and complex models will grow (see
Calvo 2018). In turn, the opposite strategy, i.e., developing models with a variety of
idiosyncratic shocks and assumptions, may actually leave macro theory in limbo,
unable to reach professional consensus, and thus making it of little use for
policymaking.

The SSLT phenomenon is especially relevant for reserve currencies in economies
that have undergone a severe bout of Liquidity Crunch. Until 2008, this was not the
case for EMs because Liquidity Crunch of EM assets, drove agents away from
domestically denominated assets -- a kind of Anti-Liquidity Trap -- causing a sharp
spike in exchange rates and triggering high inflation (see Calvo 2016 b). The reason
for this is that a deterioration of EM assets' liquidity did not have a negative impact
on the liquidity of global safe assets. This caused portfolio shifts against EM assets.
However, this situation started to change with the Lehman crisis and ensuing long
period of low interest rates in Advanced Market economies, AMs. A 'search for
yield' followed, increasing capital flows towards EM assets, conceivably increasing
their liquidity and transforming them into closer substitutes for AM safe assets. As a
result, monetary conditions in some EMs started to look like those in AMs. Israel is
an interesting case in point. In the 1980s Israel was struggling to get rid of chronic
inflation, occasionally reaching staggering levels (e.g., over 350 percent in 1985). At
present, however, Israel is facing the opposite problem: deflation! Inflation is below
the central banks' inflation target by a wide margin, and is perilously teetering
around zero. This could, of course, be due to prudent fiscal and monetary policy.
But even so, the external conditions may have contributed to increasing the liquidity
of Israel liabilities, putting downward pressure on inflation rates, possibly pushing
the economy into a SSLT.
In closing, it is worth reiterating that the SSLT phenomenon is associated with
situations in which it is hard for policymakers to increase the stock of liquid assets
to levels compatible with full capacity utilization. The phenomenon is likely to lose
its relevance as economies recover and find new Safe Assets. Once 'normality' is
recovered, the old ghost of inflation is likely to revive, and take our attention away
from Liquidity Trap, as it was the case after the 1930s. This could be a serious
mistake if the genie is out of the bottle and the financial sector continues generating
new forms of global liquid assets, not protected by a Lender of Last Resort.
                                    Appendix A

The analysis in the body of the paper focused on steady-state equilibria. I will
sketch out an extension to the general case, but ruling out explosive equilibrium
solutions, a conventional assumption in rational expectations models. Moreover, I
will constrain the attention to non-interest-bearing money.

Dropping time subscripts, and recalling that nominal money stock is assumed to
grow at a constant rate  , we have

                                      
                                      
                                         =  - .                                  (A1)

Moreover, since this is an economy subject to perfect capital mobility, no trade
barriers, and that international relative price between importables and exportables
is constant over time, it follows that the nominal interest rate satisfies Fisher's
equation, i.e.,

                                       =  + .                                    (A2)

Hence, by equations (6) and (A2), at equilibrium we have

                                          +( )
                               - =  -       ()-1
                                                     .                           (A3)

This is a representative-individual economy in which, at equilibrium,  =  . Thus,
plugging (A3) in equation (A1), we have

                                               +()
                                 
                                  =  +  -       ()-1
                                                         .                       (A4)

Therefore, at steady state (where  = 0), we have

                                       "(+())[1+()]
                               
                                  =-      ()-1
                                                    .                            (A5)

Let us examine the steady states m1 and m2 in Figure 1. Since the curve is
downward sloping at m1, it follows that "( + ())[1 + ()] < 0. Therefore,
    / > 0, and m1 is locally unstable. But the same procedure leads to the
conclusion that m2 is stable and gives rise to a continuum of equilibrium paths
converging to m2. Liquidity Deflation is behind this indeterminacy, even though these
equilibrium paths do not display Liquidity Trap. This is interesting because as in
Remark VI the presence of Liquidity Deflation can generate macroeconomic
irregularities, even out of the area where full capacity can hold.

Notice that uniqueness of equilibrium would hold, if, for instance,  >   , and
 + () = ( + ( )), for all    , as assumed in Figure 2.
               Appendix B



Figure B1. Graphical Derivation of Figure 2
                                   REFERENCES

Bruno, Michael, Stanley Fischer, Elhanan Helpman, and Nissan Liviatan, with Leora
(Rubin) Meridor, 1991. Lessons of Economic Stabilization and Its Aftermath;
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Emmanuel Farhi, 2014. "The Safety Trap," NBER WP
19927.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2016. "Safe
Asset Scarcity and Aggregate Demand," American Economic Review, May, pp. 513-
518

Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2017. "The
Safe Assets Shortage Conundrum," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer, Vol.
31, No. 3, pp. 29-46.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 2012. "The Price Theory of Money, Prospero's Liquidity Trap,
and Sudden Stop: Back to Basics and Back," NBER Working Paper 18285.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 2016 a. "From Chronic Inflation to Chronic Deflation: Focusing
on Expectations and Liquidity Disarray Since WWII," NBER WP 22535.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 2016 b. Macroeconomics in Times of Liquidity Crises: Searching
for Economic Essentials; Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 2018. "Liquidity Deflation: Supply-Side Liquidity Trap,
Deflation Bias and Flat Phillips Curve," September 24, in
www.columbia.edu/~gc2286.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Végh, 1995. "Fighting Inflation with High Interest
Rates: The Small-Open Economy under Flexible Prices," Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking 27, pp. 49-66.

Fisher, Irving, 1933. "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,"
Econometrica 1 (4), pp. 337-357.

Friedman, Milton, 1969. The Optimum Quantity of Money, and Other Essays, Chicago,
IL: Aldine Publishing Company.

Gorton, Gary, 2010. Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007; Oxford
University Press.
Ha, Jongrim, M. Ayhan Kose, and Franziska Ohnsorge, 2019. Inflation in Emerging
and Developing Economies, The World Bank.

Krugman, Paul R., 1998. "It's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return of the Liquidity
Trap," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 137-187.

Olivera, Julio H.G., 1970. "On Passive Money," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 78, 4,
Part 2: Key Problems of Economic Policy in Latin America, pp. 805-814.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace, 1975. "Rational Expectations, the Optimal
Monetary Policy Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of
Political Economy, 83, April, pp. 241-254.

Uribe, Martín, 1997. "Hysteresis in a Simple Model of Currency Substitution,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 40, pp. 185-202.

Végh, Carlos A., 1989. Government Spending and Inflationary Finance: A Public
Finance Approach, Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, Vol. 36, No. 3, pp. 657-
677.
