                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    UNDERSTANDING DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO BENEFIT-BASED TAXATION

                                       Robert Scherf
                                      Matthew Weinzierl

                                     Working Paper 26276
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26276


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




This research was supported by the Division of Faculty Research and Development at Harvard
Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Robert Scherf and Matthew Weinzierl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Understanding Different Approaches to Benefit-Based Taxation
Robert Scherf and Matthew Weinzierl
NBER Working Paper No. 26276
September 2019
JEL No. H2,H41

                                         ABSTRACT

The normative principle of benefit-based taxation has exerted substantial influence on many areas
of public finance, but it has been largely set aside in the modern theoretical approach to optimal
income taxation, where welfarist objectives dominate. A prerequisite for that gap to close is the
clarification of what benefit-based income taxation would mean, specifically in a first-best
setting. This paper seeks to provide clear, accessible descriptions and novel graphical
representations of four major approaches to first-best benefit-based taxation, explain how these
approaches relate to each other, and apply them within the Classical Benefit-Based framework for
optimal income taxation of Smith (1776).


Robert Scherf
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
rscherf@hbs.edu

Matthew Weinzierl
Harvard Business School
277 Morgan
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mweinzierl@hbs.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26276
    Understanding Di¤erent Approaches to Bene...t-Based Taxation
                                 Robert Scherf                  Matthew Weinzierl

                                                  August 15, 2019



                                                       Abstract

          The normative principle of bene...t-based taxation has exerted substantial inuence on many areas of
      public ...nance, but it has been largely set aside in the modern theoretical approach to optimal income
      taxation, where welfarist objectives dominate. A prerequisite for that gap to close is the clari...cation
      of what bene...t-based income taxation would mean, speci...cally in a ...rst-best setting. This paper seeks
      to provide clear, accessible descriptions and novel graphical representations of four major approaches
      to ...rst-best bene...t-based taxation, explain how these approaches relate to each other, and apply them
      within the Classical Bene...t-Based framework for optimal income taxation of Smith (1776).



1     Introduction
While the normative principle of bene...t-based taxation has exerted substantial inuence on many areas of
public ...nance (as we describe below), its inuence has been more limited in the ...eld of optimal income
taxation, where welfarist objectives such as utilitarianism dominate. We believe this divide is problematic,
and that the bene...t-based principle ought to be one of a set of normative criteria used to design and
evaluate tax policy.1 But our goal in this paper is not to overcome readers'hesitancy to upend the prevailing
normative approach to income taxation and replace it with bene...t-based thinking. Instead, we try to ful...ll
a prerequisite for bene...t-based taxation even to be considered as an alternative, complementary policy
objective: namely, the clari...cation of what bene...t-based income taxation would mean, speci...cally in a
...rst-best (full-information) setting.
    Therefore, this paper has simple goals: to provide clear, accessible descriptions and novel graphical
representations of four major approaches to ...rst-best bene...t-based taxation (Lindahl (1919), Moulin (1987),
Brennan (1976a), and Hines (2000)); to explain how these approaches relate to each other; and to apply
them within the Classical Bene...t-Based framework for optimal income taxation of Smith (1776). We use
the highly stylized but justly famous two-type analytical and graphical framework introduced by Lindahl,
and we stress intuition-building. We hope that, by providing greater clarity on what bene...t-based thinking
means, we will encourage greater appreciation and study of it among those not already convinced of its
relevance as a normative principle for optimal income taxation.
     Scherf: Bonn Graduate School of Economics and Harvard Business School, rscherf@hbs.edu; Weinzierl: Harvard Business
School and NBER, mweinzierl@hbs.edu. We thank the referees and the editor for helpful suggestions.
   1 The idea of "normative diversity", in which policy evaluation depends on a combination of principles, is discussed in

Weinzierl (2014) and Saez and Stantcheva (2016).




                                                            1
2       The bene...t-based principle and optimal income taxation
Bene...t-based taxation­the idea of basing tax liabilities on how much an individual bene...ts from the activities
of the state­has appealed to tax theorists for centuries, perhaps most prominently as a normative principle
in Smith (1776) and as a positive prediction in Lindahl (1919). And recent research has shown that it is also
popular among the public (see Weinzierl (2016))
     It is not surprising, therefore, that bene...t-based thinking has both exerted substantial inuence on many
areas of public policy and been fertile territory for academic research working out its implementation. In
particular, the bene...t-based principle is the standard lens through which local taxation is viewed, and it is
more generally prominent in the theory of public ...nance for subnational governments, where many public
goods are provided.2 For similar reasons, the study of so-called club goods has long centered on bene...t-
based thinking.3 A large body of work has sought ways to overcome real-world obstacles to implementing
bene...t-based taxation, especially that an individual'
                                                      s bene...t from­and thus willingness to pay for­public
goods is private information.4 And, related, bene...t-based thinking is central to a large and active literature
on the optimal level of public goods in a setting with distortionary taxes.5
     Despite its broad inuence and appeal, bene...t-based taxation has been sidelined in the modern theoretical
approach to optimal income taxation. The classic public ...nance textbook by Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980) and
the modern taxation treatise by Louis Kaplow (2008) each allocate only a few (in the latter case, skeptical)
pages to bene...t-based taxation; moreover, bene...t-based taxes are entirely absent from the textbook on the
economics of taxation by Salanié (2011) and the optimal tax survey of Boadway (2012).
     In part, this omission reects specialization of e¤ort: bene...t-based taxation has been used in areas where
heterogeneous preferences for public goods seem most important, while the optimal income tax literature
spawned by Mirrlees (1971) has emphasized heterogeneity in income-earning abilities. One might argue that
the two ...elds are properly disjoint. We believe, however, that optimal income tax theory can bene...t from
engaging with bene...t-based thinking. Why? Because it is implausible to assume that the level and mix of
public goods provided by a government are irrelevant for the distribution of income-earning abilities of its
taxpayers or, therefore, those taxpayers' preferences over public goods. And as recent work by one of us
(Weinzierl (2017a)) has argued, these implausible assumptions can be overcome by incorporating Smith'
                                                                                                    s
view of bene...t-based taxation into the modern Mirrleesian optimal income tax structure. Smith's Classical
Bene...t-Based Taxation directly challenges the modern specialization of e¤ort by making income-earning
abilities­and thus preferences­depend on public goods themselves.
     The greatest divide, however, between bene...t-based taxation and modern optimal income tax theory
is normative. The Mirrleesian approach has roots in John Stuart Mill'
                                                                    s (1871) ability-based principle for
optimal taxation, where the heart of the tax problem is distributive. That is, it centers on balancing the
tradeo¤ between equality in after-tax incomes­which is desirable given assumptions about concave social
(or individual) utility­and e¢ ciency (which can be compromised by distortionary taxation). In other words,
modern optimal tax theory is an analysis of "endowment taxation" with a utilitarian social objective. In sharp
contrast, bene...t-based taxation views the tax problem as one of coordination, where taxes should correspond
    2 SeeFischel (2001) for an especially relevant example of the voluminous literature building on the work of Tiebout (1956).
    3 SeeSandler and Tschirhart (1980) and the references therein.
   4 Most prominently, the Vickrey-Clarke-Groves mechanism developed in Vickrey (1961), Clarke (1971), and Groves (1973)

provided a way to elicit true preferences. Re...nements included Groves and Ledyard (1977) and Hylland and Zeckhauser (1979),
and a recent contribution is Buterin, Hitzig and Weyl (2018). Our focus on the ...rst-best, normative, meaning of di¤erent
approaches to bene...t-based taxation allows us to set aside the complexities of its implementation explored by these papers.
   5 See, for example, Hylland and Zeckhauser (1979), Boadway and Keen (1993), Kaplow (1996), Kreiner and Verdelin (2012),

and Hendren (2019).



                                                              2
to what individuals would voluntarily contribute to the funding of the activities they have democratically
decided to pursue collectively (through the state) rather than privately. Endowments of ability are irrelevant
to bene...t-based taxation unless they a¤ect how much the activities of the state contribute to an individual'
                                                                                                             s
well-being.6 In other words, bene...t-based taxation departs from the redistributive utilitarianism underlying
most modern optimal tax theory in favor of a more libertarian view.7 As Feldstein (1976) noted in a critique
of the (then-new) Mirrleesian approach, "Nozick (1974) has recently presented an extensive criticism of the
use of utilitarian principles to justify the redistribution of income and wealth...In this context, the principle
of bene...t taxation or of tax schedules that impose equal utility sacri...ce have an appeal that is clearly lacking
in the utilitarian framework".
     We believe that the normative view underlying bene...t-based taxation is worth greater consideration by
optimal tax theorists for both philosophical and practical reasons. Philosophically, there is in fact sub-
stantial exibility within bene...t-based taxation with regards to its distributional implications. As shown
in Weinzierl (2017a), Smith's classical bene...t-based taxation is consistent with highly progressive taxation
under plausible speci...cations of the interaction between public goods and innate individual abilities, and
Moulin'
      s general bene...t-based approach (which can be applied to Smith'
                                                                      s speci...cation) explicitly embraces
egalitarian motivations in its allocation of the surplus of total bene...t over costs. Pragmatically, political
rhetoric and popular opinion surveys indicate that bene...t-based reasoning is an important ingredient in
prevailing thinking about taxation. To the extent that tax theory'
                                                                 s relevance depends on it speaking to the
concerns and priorities of citizens, this evidence suggests that tax theory should make room for bene...t-based
thinking as a component of a diverse set of criteria for policy evaluation and design.8
     But, again, our point in this paper is not to convince readers that bene...t-based thinking is the right
approach to optimal income taxation. Instead, we focus on a simpler task: clarifying what it would mean in
the context of income taxation. Confusion over the many ways to specify ...rst-best bene...t-based taxation is
not surprising. After all, criticism of Lindahl'
                                               s pioneering approach has led to a variety of alternatives, and
the relationships among them are di¢ cult for all but specialists to appreciate.


3       Four approaches to bene...t-based taxation
Most students of bene...t-based taxation would, we venture, agree that it is the idea that taxes are to be
seen­and assessed­as payment for bene...cial government activities, and thus each taxpayer's liability should
correspond to that taxpayer's bene...t. Turning those words into a rigorous algorithm has proven more
di¢ cult, with a range of suggestions for how to calculate the income-equivalent value of an individual's
bene...t from the activities of the state. All four of the suggested solutions we discuss below implement taxes
that exactly cover the total cost of the e¢ cient level of government spending on public goods, as de...ned by
the Samuelson (1954) rule, but they di¤er on how to allocate those taxes across individuals.9
    6 SeeWeinzierl (2017a) for a formal elaboration of this point.
    7 Note that this more libertarian view also helps explain why bene...t-based taxation limits the government'   s role to allocating
the bene...ts from public goods, leaving alone the distribution of private-sector surplus.
   8 Weinzierl (2016) provides positive arguments for a renewal of interest in bene...t-based taxation as a guide to income taxation.

At a broader level, Weinzierl (2017b) proposes a justi...cation for the use of non-welfarist rules in optimal tax theory. Saez and
Stantcheva (2016) and Weinzierl (2014) argue that conicts between the ...rst-best recommendations of optimal tax models and
public attitudes toward taxes merit greater attention to the theory'   s normative assumptions.
   9 The ideas behind these four approaches may be applied even if the Samuelson rule is not satis...ed, but using one­     Lindahl' s­
requires some adjustment in that case. As will be explained, Lindahl assigns tax prices based on marginal valuations, which can
be done at any level of public goods, but away from the e¢ cient level there is no guarantee that those tax prices will exactly
pay for the public goods. That is, the Samuelson rule is de...ned by the sum of the marginal valuations equaling the marginal
cost of provision. The shortfall or surplus of revenue must be dealt with in such a scenario, and Lindahl'      s approach does not



                                                                  3
     The four approaches we consider below are chosen both for their prominence in the literature and their
wide conceptual variation. Lindahl (1919) is the foundational formal treatment of bene...t-based taxation,
and it is both the starting point for all other approaches and likely the only one familiar to most readers.
Brennan (1976a) challenges the heart of the Lindahl approach and its supporters, taking a sharply opposed
perspective that tax-bene...t neutrality means charging uniform prices for public goods. Both Lindahl's
and Brennan' s approaches were meaningfully developed by the two later works we consider: Moulin (1987)
wrestled with how to account for the bene...t individuals obtained from the full suite of public goods, not
just on the margin as in Lindahl; Hines (2000) recast the uniform-price neutrality Brennan sought in a more
rigorous way. Together, these four contributions provide a sweeping view of what ...rst-best bene...t-based
taxation can mean, depending on one's preferred interpretation.10
     In this section, we ...rst provide concise descriptions of the four leading approaches to bene...t-based
taxation with a limited use of formalism and a focus on intuition. We then present (what we believe are)
novel complementary graphical representations of these approaches that substantially facilitate comparisons
of them. In both the verbal and graphical explanations, we build on the elegant two-taxpayer analysis of
Lindahl (1919).


3.1      Conceptual comparisons
To ease comparison across the four cases, we consider an economy with two individuals H; L, and a level of
public goods spending G with constant marginal cost equal to 1.

3.1.1       Lindahl'
                   s marginal bene...t approach

Lindahl'
       s (1919) method measures bene...t with an individual'
                                                           s marginal willingness to pay for the activities
of the state. It funds the e¢ cient level of public goods by charging more from individuals who are willing
to pay more for marginal public goods. Roughly stated, the concept behind this method is that those who
would demand greater activities of the state should pay for them.
     Formally, Lindahl's model has the tax authority assign shares of the total tax burden                         H   to H and
 L   = (1      H ) to L. Individuals maximize utility, which depends on private consumption and the quantity
of public goods provided, subject to the budget constraint that their incomes must pay for their private
consumption and their share of the public goods expenditure. Public goods are produced at constant unit
costs.11 Denote with GH (          H)   and GL (   L)   the quantities of the public goods that would maximize the
utilities of H and L, respectively, given their speci...ed tax shares; that is, the quantities H and L would
demand at their personalized "prices."
     Lindahl'
            s equilibrium is de...ned by a level of public goods provision G and tax shares                     H, L   such that
GH (    H)   = GL (   L)   = G . That is, the tax shares are chosen so that H and L both demand the same level
of public goods provision. Because each individual's utility is maximized at this level of public goods and
tax shares, we know that the tax shares they pay correspond to their marginal rates of substitution between
determine how.
  1 0 As noted in the Introduction, we focus on ...rst-best settings in this analysis. In a Mirrleesian optimal income tax setting,

for example, our analysis could therefore be described as characterizing either ...rst-best income taxes or ability taxes. The
translation of these approaches to second-best settings, where individuals hold private information on their bene...t from public
goods, is not relevant for understanding how these approaches di¤er from a normative perspective.
  1 1 None of this paper's analysis depends on this assumption of constant returns to scale in the production of G; in fact, all of
the analysis uses expenditure on G as the relevant measure of the activities of the state. To the extent that we could generate
a more meaningful measure of units of public goods and estimate the returns to scale in their production, departing from the
use of expenditure (or, equivalently, the assumption of constant unit costs), may be fruitful.



                                                                4
public and private goods. And because these shares sum to one, this correspondence means that the sum of
these individuals'marginal rates of substitution equals the social marginal cost of public goods, so that the
G on which they agree satis...es the Samuelson (1954) rule for the e¢ cient level.
   Lindahl'
          s method is strongly supported by Aaron and McGuire (1970), who argue that it constitutes "the
logically correct" method of calculating the income value of public goods because of its strong resemblance
to how the income values of private goods are typically calculated. That is, since we calculate the income
value of private goods as the product of the individual's marginal rate of substitution (the price) and the
quantity consumed, so too should we calculate the income value of public goods. As each individual pays
exactly this valuation in the Lindahl equilibrium, Aaron and McGuire argue that Lindahl'
                                                                                       s solution involves
"zero redistribution in income-equivalent terms." In other words, they claim that the introduction of public
goods ...nanced by Lindahl taxes matches bene...t to cost for each individual, satisfying the central idea of
bene...t-based taxation.

3.1.2    Brennan'
                s equal shares proposal

Brennan (1976a) o¤ered a challenge to the Lindahl approach, arguing that the assignment of di¤erent "prices"
for public goods to di¤erent persons is inconsistent with matching bene...ts to taxes. His key conceptual
point is that only if we charge individuals the same price for a good can we be sure that the good a¤ects all
individuals'opportunities equally.
   Brennan uses an analogy to private goods to make his point. Suppose only apples are available, and
two persons purchase the same number of apples, but we then introduce oranges. If our goal is to have the
introduction of oranges be distribution-neutral, should we charge a higher price for oranges to the person
who has a relative preference for oranges? Brennan says we should not, and he extends the idea to public
goods for which, as we have discussed above, Lindahl's solution would charge more from those persons who
relatively prefer them. To Brennan, that solution distributes away from those with a relative taste for public
goods.
   Brennan infers from this analogy that "the most appropriate income-equivalent measure" of the bene...t
from public goods is "probably" to tax each individual an equal unit price (in our two-person example, equal
to 0.5) for the provision of G . After all, if we had a common market price for the services provided by the
public goods, all individuals would purchase them up to the point where their marginal rates of substitution
were equal to that price. If, instead, we follow Lindahl and charge according to marginal rates of substitution
at a ...xed quantity, we will be charging more from those who have a stronger preference for public goods.
   To Brennan, the Lindahl solution errs because it forces those who desire more public goods provision to
pay more simply because they are paired with persons who want less public goods provision. Might we not,
in fact, feel that the former are being denied bene...t they would obtain were they to determine the role of
the state? As we will see, Hines (2000) pursues this line of thinking further.
   Aaron and McGuire (1976) respond to this critique, and Brennan responds to their response in Brennan
(1976b). At the crux of their disagreement is whether, as Aaron and McGuire state, "the proper framework
for considering the valuation of public goods is one in which the publicness constraint is recognized for what
it is, sui generis." In other words, can public goods be thought of as private goods (with a di¤erent cost),
as Brennan suggested they could? Or, given that all individuals must consume the same quantity of public
goods, is Lindahl correct in using willingness to pay as our best guide to individuals'bene...t from them?




                                                      5
3.1.3   Moulin'
              s focus on inframarginal bene...ts

Moulin (1987) critiques Lindahl'
                               s approach from another angle, arguing that we should focus not on indi-
viduals'marginal valuations of public goods but on their inframarginal valuations. Moulin'
                                                                                         s key conceptual
innovation is to have individuals pay taxes tied to the bene...t they'
                                                                     ve obtained from all the activities of the
state, not just the bene...t they would obtain (and thus be willing to pay for) from the "marginal" activity.
Moulin thus breaks Lindahl'
                          s link between tax shares and marginal rates of substitution, but in exchange he
can claim to have matched taxes to a more informative measure of bene...ts.
   Moulin'
         s method uncovers what might be called the "excess bene...t puzzle." The total value (across all
individuals) of the inframarginal bene...t Moulin measures typically will be greater than the total cost of
the public goods (see Kaplow (2008) for a related discussion). How should this excess be allocated under a
bene...t-based tax system? The answer to this question clearly requires a value judgment. Note that Lindahl
avoids this problem by ignoring inframarginal valuations: after all, the Samuelson rule that determines the
e¢ cient quantity of public goods and the Lindahl equilibrium are both based on marginal valuations.
   To implement his modi...cation of Lindahl and solve this excess bene...t puzzle, Moulin'
                                                                                          s "egalitarian
equivalent solution" relies on the identi...cation of a crucial quantity of public goods: g . Moulin measures an
individual'
          s bene...t from the activities of the state as the total (inframarginal) bene...t from the last (G   g )
units of public goods, where g is chosen so that the sum of this bene...t across all individuals exactly equals
the cost of G . In other words, he allocates the excess bene...t from the activities of the state by giving
everyone their bene...t from g units of public goods "tax free." By taxing away the income-equivalent value
of each individual'
                  s inframarginal bene...ts from the last (G      g ) units of public goods consumption, Moulin
makes an "egalitarian" value judgment when solving the excess bene...t puzzle, thereby giving each individual
the same level of utility as if they had freely received the hypothetical level g of public goods.
  Another way to summarize Moulin' s approach is that it measures the bene...t from public goods as the
money amount needed to compensate an individual for receiving only g instead of G for free, where g is
chosen so the sum of individuals' bene...ts equals the total cost of the public goods. Thinking in terms of
compensation will be useful in our discussion of Hines (2000).
   Moulin'
         s modi...cation of Lindahl can have substantial e¤ects on the assignment of taxes if individuals'
bene...ts from the activities of the state decline at di¤erent rates, especially around G . In particular, Moulin
motivates his modi...cation of Lindahl by noting that a decrease in the marginal cost of public goods provision
could theoretically leave one individual worse o¤ under Lindahl taxation. Such a decrease in cost would
increase the equilibrium level G and could thus increase one individual's tax share if the other person'
                                                                                                       s
marginal bene...t drops dramatically after G . Moulin'
                                                     s solution avoids this result, as lower marginal costs
result in a higher g and thus higher utility for both individuals.

3.1.4   Hines's inclusion of extramarginal bene...ts

Hines (2000) o¤ers an alternative solution that, like Brennan'
                                                             s, gives priority to charging all individuals a
common price for public goods. As markets charge a uniform price across individuals, Hines seeks a way
to do the same with public goods. His key conceptual innovation accomplishes this goal by funding public
goods in a way that leaves all individuals exactly as well o¤ as they would be if they could purchase public
goods in a private market at a common price. That is, even though the services of the public goods are
provided publicly, there is no redistribution (in terms of well-being) from the hypothetical state in which the
same services were provided privately.



                                                         6
    More formally, analogous to Moulin'
                                      s key quantity g , Hines'
                                                              s method relies on the identi...cation of a
key price    at which individuals could (hypothetically) purchase public goods. Hines measures the bene...t of
public goods provision as the increase between each individual'
                                                              s well-being if public goods could be purchased
at price     and that individual'
                                s well-being if the level of public goods G were produced tax-free (to the
individual). Hines then taxes each individual an amount equal to that bene...t, choosing                       so that the tax
revenue funds the total cost of G .
    One way to understand how Hines'
                                   s approach di¤ers from Moulin'
                                                                s, with which it shares important
features12 , is how they answer a central question of bene...t-based taxation: Bene...t relative to what? Moulin'
                                                                                                                s
approach measures bene...t relative to a setting in which the public goods in question are not provided; Hines's
approach measures bene...t relative to a setting in which the individual'
                                                                        s preferred level of public goods are
provided. Moulin is led to this approach because the central problem he wants to solve is "selecting an
equitable production level and cost sharing of a single public good," so it is natural for him to focus on "an
agent's global increment of utility between the optimal level and the (...ctitious) egalitarian-equivalent level"
as a guide to that individual'
                             s share of the costs. Hines, in contrast, wants to "allocate taxes in a manner
akin to market prices for public services," so it is natural for him to focus on achieving the same distribution
of utilities as would result in the hypothetical private market for the activities of the state.
    Despite its achievements, Hines'
                                   s method produces a result that even he found potentially troubling: tax
shares may be lower for those who more prefer public goods. But this result has a straightforward intuition
behind it and can be seen as an extension of Brennan'
                                                    s thinking. In a private market, some individuals might
have demanded, at price ; more public goods than G . When public goods provision is limited to G , these
individuals lose out on bene...t they would have obtained in the private market, and Hines's approach thus
includes compensation for these foregone "extra-marginal" bene...ts. In other words, Hines may tax those
who most value public goods less than he taxes others because the former are harmed by the low level of
public goods agreed to in equilibrium.13


3.2     Graphical comparison
Graphical representations of these approaches to bene...t-based taxation can reveal, with more simplicity
than can words or equations, how they relate to each other. In this section, we extend Lindahl'
                                                                                              s graphical
approach to the four approaches described above, uncovering what we believe are novel visual connections
(and distinctions) between them.
    As in the previous section, we assume an economy with two individuals H; L, and a level of public goods
provision G with constant marginal cost equal to 1. We plot the level of public goods provision on the
horizontal axis. On the vertical axis, we plot the share of the costs of public goods paid for by individual H ,
or equivalently the share not paid for by individual L (whose share can be read starting from the top of the
vertical axis).14
    The central feature of these ...gures is a pair of demand curves, one for each individual, that trace out
the individuals'preferred levels of public goods provision across the range of cost shares. We will focus on
the intersection of these curves as well as the areas of various shapes created by them to help illustrate the
  1 2 Both, for example, are in the core and satisfy the appealing condition that reductions in the cost of public goods provision

cannot make anyone worse o¤. See Moulin (1987) and Hines (2000) for details.
  1 3 In this way, Hines's approach may be seen as relating to discussions of coercion in public ...nance; see Martinez-Vazquez
and Winer (2014).
  1 4 Readers familiar with Lindahl' s analysis will notice that we have ipped the axes relative to the conventional depiction,
putting price on the vertical axis and quantity on the horizontal, to better ...t with modern economists' graphical intuition.
Thanks to a referee for this suggestion.



                                                                7
four approaches to bene...t-based taxation. Throughout, we assume the individual with stronger preferences
for public goods is H , so thinking of H and L as representing "high" and "low" taste for public goods may
facilitate intuition-building.
   The ...gures are substantially simpler to interpret if we assume that individual demand for public goods
provision is linear (and decreasing) in the individual'
                                                      s cost share and that there are no income e¤ects of
taxation on demand. We use the following demand functions:

                                        GH =     5    H   + 5;
                                         GL =     6   L   +4=6   H   2:

This functional form for demand is restrictive, and we will relax it in the next section where we provide some
rough quantitative illustrations, but it is has substantial pedagogical value.

3.2.1   Lindahl'
               s marginal bene...t approach

Figure 1 shows Lindahl'
                      s (1919) original illustration of how to distribute the cost of public goods. The
                                                                                 Lindahl
intersection of the two curves is the Lindahl equilibrium: at the tax share      H         = 0:64, both individuals
demand the same level of public goods provision G = 1:82.




                                        Figure 1. Lindahl'
                                                         s equilibrium

   To compare the four approaches, we will examine not only the equilibrium tax shares              H   and   L   but
also what we will call the "surplus" for each individual. Conceptually, an individual'
                                                                                     s surplus is simply that
individual'
          s bene...t from public goods less that individual's share of the total cost. Graphically, in Figure 1,
we measure surplus with the area "below" an individual'
                                                      s demand curve­which traces the marginal bene...t
the individual receives from each increment of public goods­and "above" that individual's equilibrium tax



                                                          8
share (for H , the triangle with cross-hatching in Figure 1; for L, the shaded triangle, keeping in mind that
"below" and "above" apply in the opposite direction for L). We then calculate the ratio of these shapes'
areas to their sum, yielding the result that H obtains 54% of the total available surplus in this scenario'
                                                                                                          s
Lindahl equilibrium.

3.2.2   Brennan'
               s equal shares proposal

Figure 2 depicts Brennan'
                        s proposal, where all individuals equally share in the cost of the e¢ cient level of
                   Brennan       Brennan
public goods, so   H         =   L         = 0:5. As a result, the individual with a stronger taste for the public
goods (H ) pays a smaller tax share (of the same G = 1:82) than in the Lindahl equilibrium.




                             Figure 2. Brennan'
                                              s equilibrium

   We indicate individual surplus largely as in the previous ...gure, but Brennan'
                                                                                 s equilibrium concept gen-
erates one important di¤erence. Individual L incurs negative surplus­its marginal bene...t falls below its cost
share of 0:5­once the level of public goods provision rises above 1:0. We depict this negative surplus with
the bold-outlined small triangle, and L'
                                       s surplus is the shaded triangle less this bold-outlined triangle. Note
that this bold-outlined triangle is also cross-hatched because it is part of the surplus obtained by H . In
other words, L is subsidizing H in Brennan's solution, such that L receives only 5% of the total surplus.

3.2.3   Moulin'
              s focus on inframarginal bene...ts

Figures 3a and 3b depict Moulin's egalitarian equivalent solution, where taxes are set equal to each indi-
vidual'
      s inframarginal bene...ts from the last (G        g ) units of public goods and g is pinned down by the
requirement that these taxes exactly pay for G .



                                                          9
                         Figure 3a. Moulin'
                                          s equilibrium, measuring bene...t



                                  s and shade L0 s inframarginal bene...t from the last (G
   In Figure 3a, we cross-hatch H '                                                            g ) units of the
public good as we shaded net surplus of bene...t over cost in previous ...gures (note that these trapezoids do
not indicate surplus of bene...t over cost, as we have yet to determine cost shares, so they are just the areas
below the individuals'marginal bene...t curves). These trapezoids overlap in the shaded and cross-hatched
triangle, an area that is received as tax revenue twice, once from H and once from L. This triangle is the
"excess bene...t" identi...ed in the previous section as a puzzle for Moulin's approach, and as discussed above
Moulin'
      s solution was to distribute this excess bene...t equally to all through a tax-free grant of g public
goods. We indicate this grant with the dark-shaded rectangle in Figure 3a, inspection of which reveals that
it has the same area as the triangle of bene...t that both individuals obtain. Equating these two areas is what
pins down, in this example, the level g = 0:38:




                                                      10
                           Figure 3b. Moulin'
                                            s equilibrium, tax and surplus shares

   In Figure 3b we calculate the tax and surplus shares that correspond to Moulin'
                                                                                 s approach in this example.
Moulin has taxes correspond to inframarginal bene...ts from the last (G                g ) units of public goods, so tax
shares equal the shares of total inframarginal bene...ts. In graphical terms, M
                                                                              H
                                                                                oulin
                                                                                      equals the ratio of the
cross-hatched trapezoid in Figure 3a to the sum of the cross-hatched and shaded trapezoids. In our numerical
           M oulin
example,   H         = 0:62. With this tax share, we can calculate and shade the areas of surplus in Figure 3b
                                                            M oulin       Lindahl
as we did in Figures 1 and 2. As in Figure 2, because       H         <   H       ,   L incurs a (very) small triangle of
negative surplus (outlined in bold). In the end, H claims 60% of the total surplus.
   Readers may note that Lindahl and Moulin'
                                           s approaches yield quite similar results in this case. This is
generally the case when the individuals'relative marginal bene...ts at the e¢ cient level of public goods G
are similar to their relative marginal bene...ts at lower levels of public goods provision, as is the case with
these linear demand curves.

3.2.4   Hines's inclusion of extramarginal bene...ts

Figures 4a and 4b depict Hines'
                              s solution, where bene...t is measured by the di¤erence between an individual'
                                                                                                           s
surplus from receiving G for free and from being able to purchase the public goods at a common price                   in
a private market. As with Moulin'
                                sg ,        is chosen such that the sum of these individual bene...ts equals the
total cost of G .




                                                       11
                         Figure 4a. Hines'
                                         s equilibrium, measuring bene...t

   In Figure 4a, we want to visually identify inframarginal bene...ts as before, but the appropriate areas
di¤er substantially from those in the other ...gures because Hines'
                                                                  s approach di¤ers so substantially from
the others. Consider H ' s bene...t. In our example, = 0:53. H would purchase 2:35 units of G at this
price, as shown by the intersection of H 's demand curve and the horizontal line at H = 0:53 = . Thus,
the amount that H would consume in this private market is greater than G = 1:82. Receiving G for
free rather than at price   results in a bene...t of G = 0:97, shown as the cross-hatched rectangle. Hines'
solution, however, also compensates H for the "extra-marginal" bene...t from those 0:53 (= 2:35     1:82) units
of public goods that H would have purchased in a private market in excess of the equilibrium quantity G .
This compensation is shown as the triangle outlined in a dashed bold line. Thus, H '
                                                                                   s total bene...t under
Hines'
     s de...nition equals the cross-hatched rectangle less the triangle outlined in a dashed bold line. L'
                                                                                                         s case
is simpler, as L would consume less than G in a private market with unit price         = 0:53 (as shown by the
intersection of L'
                 s demand curve and the horizontal line at     H   = 0:47;   L   =   = 0:53). Hence, L requires
no compensation for extramarginal units of the public goods, and L'
                                                                  s total bene...t of receiving G for free
rather than at price   is depicted by the shaded pentagon.
   The most novel piece of Hines'
                                s solution is . Its value is set so that the sum of the individuals'bene...ts
(that is, the sum of the cross-hatched rectangle and shaded pentagon minus the triangle outlined in a dashed
bold line) equals the total cost of the public goods G . Another way to see this in Figure 4a is that the small
trapezoid in which the cross-hatched rectangle and the shaded pentagon overlap has the same area as that
of the triangle outlined in a dashed bold line plus its twin, adjacent empty triangle. These two triangles are,
respectively, counted against and not counted as part of H '
                                                           s bene...t, despite being under H '
                                                                                             s demand curve,
because H would have liked to purchase a greater level of public goods than is being provided in equilibrium.



                                                      12
If we were to increase , these triangles would shrink (because H would purchase less at a higher price),
and the area of overlap would expand. When the level of         is found at which these areas cancel out, the
bene...t-based tax precisely funds G .




                          Figure 4b. Hines'
                                          s equilibrium, tax and surplus shares

    In Figure 4b, we show how this solution translates into tax shares and, thus, the distribution of surplus.
                                                                                                    Hines
As with Moulin, tax shares under Hines equal the shares of total bene...ts. In graphical terms,     H       equals
the ratio of the area of the cross-hatched rectangle less the triangle outlined in a dashed bold line in Figure
                                                                                               Hines
4a to the sum of that area and the shaded pentagon's area. In our numerical example,           H       = 0:51, as
shown in Figure 4b. With this tax share, we can calculate and shade the areas of surplus. We ...nd that H
claims a remarkable 92% of the total surplus, even though H has a stronger taste for public goods, as L
incurs the bold-outlined triangle of negative surplus that nearly o¤sets its shaded triangle of positive surplus.
This result is due to the compensation Hines'
                                            s approach provides H for the "extra-marginal" bene...t from
the units beyond G that H would have consumed in a private market.
    In the online appendix to this paper, the reader can ...nd code (written in R) that will re-create Figures
1 through 4 for di¤erent numerical examples.


4     Application to Smith'
                          s "Classical" Bene...t-Based Taxation
Bene...t-based taxation is a natural approach to the funding of marginal public goods, such as a single
infrastructure project. But a persistent concern has been how to apply it beyond the case of incremental
public goods to the full suite of the state'
                                           s activities.
    Smith (1776) provided an early solution to this problem by arguing that an individual's bene...t from the


                                                       13
activities of the state is given by the state'                          s ability to earn income.15 Smith'
                                             s impact on that individual'                                s ...rst
maxim of income taxation states that individuals should be taxed "as near as possible, in proportion to their
respective abilities; that is in proportion to the revenue which they respectively enjoy under the protection
of the state." Musgrave (1959) called this Smith'
                                                s (1776) "classical" view of bene...t-based taxation, and it
provides a natural logic for the application of bene...t-based thinking to the optimal income tax problem.
   Moreover, Smith'  s approach can be seen as a way to address an implausible simplifying assumption of
modern optimal income tax theory: namely, that the level and mix of public goods provision is irrelevant
for the distribution of income-earning abilities that is at the center of Mirrleesian analysis. To be clear, the
optimal tax literature has addressed the optimal level and funding of public goods from its modern beginning
(see Diamond and Mirrlees 1971), but such questions are generally treated as separable from the core question
of optimal income taxation, either because optimal taxation is welfarist, not bene...t-based (so the ...rst-best
income tax depends on the realized ability distribution, whether or not it depends on public goods), or
because individuals' abilities are seen as una¤ected by public goods (instead, individuals are assumed to
be heterogeneous in their consumption tastes for public goods).16 The relatively few exceptions within the
literature share much of this paper'
                                   s motivation, though they pursue quite di¤erent (if complementary)
goals.17 If we adopt the view that the activities of the state matter to individuals primarily because of their
e¤ects on the individuals' productive ability, the application of bene...t-based thinking to income taxation
becomes natural.
    Smith did not formalize his maxim, leaving room for multiple approaches to how classical bene...t-based
taxation could be operationalized, so in this section we will apply the di¤erent bene...t-based solutions
described above to Smith'
                        s classical bene...t-based taxation. We follow Weinzierl (2017a) and model individual
income-earning ability as a function of both innate talent and spending on public goods. The bene...t that
an individual derives from the activities of the state is then given by the extent to which expenditure on
public goods increases that individual'
                                      s ability to earn income.
    Speci...cally, consider an economy of two individuals i = H; L who di¤er only in their innate talents
ai 2 faH ; aL g with aH > aL . An individual of type ai has preferences

                                                                           yi
                                                  ui = ci     v                     ;
                                                                       f (ai ; G)

where yi and ci denote i0 s pre-tax and after-tax income, i'
                                                           s ability to earn income f (ai ; G) is a function of
                                                                                            yi
innate ability ai and spending on public goods G, labor e¤ort is therefore               f (ai ;G) ,   and the disutility of labor
  1 5 See Weinzierl (2017a) for a discussion of the counterfactual state o¤ of which bene...ts are calculated. Specifying such a

counterfactual is the classic challenge skeptics pose to bene...t-based theorists, but Smith's approach o¤ers an answer.
  1 6 Many optimal tax analyses have allowed for public goods to enter the individual utility function in a fully general way.

For example, in our notation, one might use the form u (c; G; y; a), of which our utility function c v (y=f (a; G)) is simply a
speci...c case. Thus, the most general optimality conditions (such as those in Diamond and Mirrlees (1971)) take into account
the possibility that public goods a¤ect income-earning ability. Nevertheless, more detailed analysis of that possibility­  and its
implications for optimal tax­   has been largely neglected. A related but distinct line of study has been of the optimal public
provision of (at least partially) private goods: see Blomquist and Micheletto (2016) and Bastani and Micheletto (2017).
  1 7 Among the analyses that consider productive public goods and bene...t-based taxation, early work by Sandmo (1972) and

Manning and McMillan (1985) take a di¤erent approach to ours, allowing public goods to enter as intermediate inputs to private
sector production, as does Feehan and Matsumoto (2000). Two other papers (of which we are aware) depart from the norm in
having public goods augment income-earning ability in the Mirrleesian optimal tax model: Matsumoto (2001) and Bassetti and
Greco (2015). Note that both assume the objective of policy is welfarist, not bene...t-based. Most recently, Scherf (2019) takes
another perspective, studying the voting equilibrium in a model where ability depends on public goods as speci...ed here. On
the debate over the level and funding of public goods­    speci...cally, whether the Samuelson (1954) rule applies in the presence
of distortionary income taxation, see the papers cited earlier, especially Kaplow (1996) and his discussion of the literature.
Kaplow also discusses the bene...t-based principle, though he clearly states that he views it as applying to only marginal public
goods that do not a¤ect income-earning ability.



                                                                  14
function v ( ) is such that v 0 ( ) > 0 and v 00 ( ) > 0. We also consider a special case of these preferences:

                                                            1     yi
                                              ui = ci                           ;                                 (1)
                                                                 ai G

where the disutility of labor function is iso-elastic and the ability production function takes the Cobb-Douglas
form. This will allow us to calculate a numerical comparison of the di¤erent bene...t-based solutions. As in
Section 3, G is produced at unit cost, and the e¢ cient level of government spending, denoted G ; is de...ned
by the Samuelson rule that the sum of marginal bene...ts from the public goods should equal the marginal
cost of the public goods:
                                      X yi fG (ai ; G )               yi
                                                        v0                             = 1:
                                         f (ai ; G )2             f (ai ; G )
                                     i=H;L

If income-earning ability takes the Cobb-Douglas form in (1), the Samuelson rule implies that total spending
on G should equal
                                                                X
                                                 G =                  yi ;
                                                            i2fH;Lg

that is, a share   of total income. Given G , individuals will choose to earn income yi satisfying

                                               1                yi
                                                      v0                        = 1;
                                          f (ai ; G )       f (ai ; G )

or, given our more speci...c functional form in (1):

                                                 yi = (ai G )           1
                                                                            :

   We can now apply to this economy all four of the approaches to bene...t-based taxation­that is, to
determining how G will be funded through taxes on individuals i = H; L­that we discussed in the previous
sections.


4.1     Analytical results
First, we derive expressions for the tax shares under each approach.

4.1.1   Lindahl'
               s marginal bene...t approach

Lindahl'
       s solution would assign to each individual a share of the cost of G equal to that individual'
                                                                                                   s marginal
bene...t from the last dollar of public spending. The resulting tax shares in this setting are given by

                                              Lindahl       fG (ai ; G )
                                              i         =                y :
                                                             f (ai ; G ) i

As shown in Weinzierl (2017a), whether Lindahl'
                                              s taxes are progressive in this setting depends on the extent
to which innate talent and government spending are complements in determining individual income-earning
ability. If the ability production function is Cobb-Douglas as in (1), then Lindahl'
                                                                                   s solution assigns to each
individual a at income tax rate equal to :

                                                  Lindahl
                                                  i       G      = yi :                                           (2)



                                                            15
4.1.2    Brennan'
                s equal shares proposal

Brennan'
       s proposal would split the total tax burden equally between all individuals:

                                                   Brennan
                                                   i                  = 0:5 , i = H; L:                                                       (3)

Equal tax shares yield a regressive income tax schedule.

4.1.3    Moulin'
               s focus on inframarginal bene...ts

Moulin'
      s solution sets each individual'
                                     s tax burden equal to that individual'
                                                                          s inframarginal bene...t from the
last G    g units of public goods spending, leaving each individual as well o¤ as if g were provided tax-free.
Stating this approach formally, individual tax shares in this setting are given by:
                                                       Z    G
                                M oulin       1                       fG (ai ; G) 0                yi
                                i         =                      yi               v                            dG;                            (4)
                                              G         g             f (ai ; G)2               f (ai ; G)

                                                                                                                              M oulin
where g is chosen such that the sum of these bene...ts equals the cost of the public goods:                                   H       + M
                                                                                                                                        L
                                                                                                                                          oulin
                                                                                                                                                  =
1. To set the stage for the upcoming numerical calculations, the expression for i'
                                                                                 s tax share in (4) can be
rewritten as follows using our more speci...c functional form in (1):
                                          "Z                                                #
                                                  G
                      M oulin       1                           yi              1
                      i         =                                                       dG
                                    G         g                 ai          G1+
                                          "                                                 #
                                                                                    G
                                    1                  yi                   1
                                =
                                    G                  ai                   G       g

                                    1         1        yi               1               1
                                =
                                    G                  ai             g             G
                                    1                       1          yi                                 1      yi
                                =                 yi                                             yi                       :                   (5)
                                    G                                ai G                                      ai g

In other words, (5) shows that the individual tax payments under Moulin'
                                                                       s solution are equal to the di¤erence
between the individual'
                      s utilities from receiving G and g for free. The ...rst term inside square brackets is
the utility for i when G is provided tax-free; the second term is the utility when g is provided tax-free.
By taxing i an amount ( i G ) equal to the di¤erence between these terms, Moulin'
                                                                                s solution leaves each
individual exactly as well o¤ as if g were provided tax-free.

4.1.4    Hines's inclusion of extramarginal bene...ts

Hines suggests taxing individuals on the di¤erence between the bene...t they would obtain from the tax-free
provision of G and the bene...t they would obtain from purchasing public goods at the private-market price
 . Formally, tax shares in this setting would be given by:
                                                            Z                                                         !
                                                                G
                          Hines     1                                    fG (ai ; G) 0                   yi
                          i       =           Gi +                    yi             v                             dG ;                       (6)
                                    G                           Gi       f (ai ; G)2                  f (ai ; G)




                                                                        16
where Gi is what individual i would demand if public goods could be purchased privately at a unit price :

                                                                                          yi
                                     Gi = arg max yi                 G        v                      ;
                                                      G                                f (ai ; G)

                                                                                             Hines           Hines
and   is chosen such that the sum of the bene...ts equals the cost:                          H       +       L       = 1.
   As with Moulin'
                 s solution, the individual bene...t according to Hines's solution can be broken into two
parts. First, each individual gains an amount Gi that they would have paid to purchase public goods in
the private market. Second, while L receives inframarginal bene...t from the additional G > GL units that
the government provides, H loses the "extra-marginal" bene...t from the GH                                     G units that H would have
demanded in the private market. Using once again our speci...c functional forms in (1), we can transform
expression (6) into a form that makes these two parts clear:
                                 "          Z                                           #
                                                G
                 Hines       1                             yi             1
                 i       =           Gi +                                         dG
                             G              Gi             ai        G1+
                                 "                                                     #
                                                                                  G
                             1                   yi                  1
                         =           Gi +
                             G                   ai                  G            Gi

                             1              1       yi              1                1
                         =           Gi +
                             G                      ai            (Gi )            (G )
                             1              1           yi                                               1        yi
                         =           yi                                           yi        (Gi )                           :        (7)
                             G                      ai (G )                                                   ai (Gi )

The ...rst term inside square brackets in expression (7) is the utility for i when G is provided tax-free; the
second term is the utility when i can purchase public goods at the hypothetical price . By taxing i an
amount ( i G ) equal to the di¤erence between these terms, Hines'
                                                                s solution leaves each individual exactly
as well o¤ as if they could obtain public goods at price                  in the private market.


4.2    Numerical comparison of results
To make these applications more tangible, we simulate these results under speci...c parameter values and the
spec...cation of preferences in (1). We set           = 5 to give a labor supply elasticity of 0:25: Recall that with
this preference speci...cation the e¢ cient size of government according to the Samuelson rule is given by a
constant share    of the total output. We set             = 0:2; as this roughly corresponds to the ratio of government
expenditures to GDP in the United States. We further choose aH and aL so that the ratio of H '
                                                                                             s income to
L'
 s equals four, approximately the ratio of average incomes of the top versus bottom half of the U.S. income
distribution according to data from the Congressional Budget O¢ ce. Given these preferences, we can derive
                                                           h          i 1+1
                                                              yi
the individual demand curves for government spending Gi =     ai    i
                                                                            ; which are log-linear in i and
                                                          1
which exhibit constant elasticity of demand          1+       .
   In Table 1, we present the four di¤erent approaches' solutions­for our functional form and parameter
speci...cations­as stated in the numbered equations above.




                                                                   17
   We learn several lessons from Table 1. First, the Lindahl and Moulin solutions coincide under this
speci...cation; as discussed earlier, these approaches will often yield similar results when relative demand for
public goods is similar at di¤erent levels of G, as is the case when we assume the Cobb-Douglas form in
(1). Second, using Lindahl or Moulin, Smith'
                                           s classical bene...t-based taxation implies a proportional tax
in this case: that is, each individual pays the same constant marginal (and thus average) tax rate, equal to
  = 20%: In contrast, both Brennan's and Hines's solutions result in regressive taxes. For Brennan, the
reason is simply that his approach levies uniform taxes in levels. As noted earlier, for Hines the reason is that
his approach compensates H for the "extra-marginal" bene...t from the additional public goods H would like
society to provide but must forego (note that H would have bought nearly twenty percent more G than G
at price ). We can see these di¤erent perspectives reected in the tax shares under each approach, which are
equal to the shares of the total bene...t (as de...ned by that approach) for each individual. While Lindahl and
Moulin assign bene...ts proportional to income under this speci...cation, Brennan and Hines assign (precisely
and roughly, respectively) equal bene...ts to H and L despite H having four times the income of L: The utility
levels under each approach capture succinctly the distributional implications of these di¤erent perspectives.
   Smith'
        s writings suggest that his intuition was closest, conceptually and quantitatively, to Moulin's. He
emphasized the state as a protector of property rights and assets, and he endorsed proportional taxation
above a minimum. See Weinzierl (2017a) for more on Smith'
                                                        s maxim and its interpretation.




                                                       18
5     Conclusion
How we might choose to apply bene...t-based thinking to the theory of optimal income taxation reects what
we see as the heart of its appeal. If bene...t-based taxation is appealing because it charges people for what
the state has made possible for them, we are likely to ...nd Moulin's re...nement of Lindahl most appropriate.
If bene...t-based taxation is appealing because it gets us as close as possible to funding public goods the way
private goods are purchased, we are likely to side with Hines'
                                                             s development of Brennan'
                                                                                     s approach. Our
simple hope with this paper is to clarify these di¤erent views and, thereby, encourage a renewal of interest
in and the study of bene...t-based taxation in the context of optimal income tax theory, where we believe its
application is natural. Many questions remain to be studied and answered, but given bene...t-based taxation'
                                                                                                           s
substantial conceptual, historical, and empirical appeal, we believe the e¤ort is well justi...ed by the potential
bene...t.

Disclosure statement

The authors have no ...nancial arrangements that might give rise to conicts of interest with respect to the
research reported in this paper.



References
Aaron, Henry, and Martin McGuire. 1970. "Public goods and income distribution." Econometrica.
Aaron, Henry, and Martin McGuire. 1976. "Reply to Geo¤rey Brennan, "The Distributional Implica-
 tions of Public Goods"." Econometrica.
Bassetti, T., and L. Greco. 2015. "Optimal Taxation and Productive Social Expenditure." Dipartimento
 di Scienze Economiche, Marco Fanno Working Paper (No. 0196).
Bastani, S., Blomquist S., and L. Micheletto. 2017. "Child care subsidies, quality, and optimal income
 taxation." Working paper.
Blomquist, S., Christiansen V., and L. Micheletto. 2016. "Public Provision of Private Goods, Self-
  Selection, and Income Tax Avoidance." The Scandinavian Journal of Economics.
Boadway, Robin, and Michael Keen. 1993. "Public Goods, Self-Selection and Optimal Income Taxa-
 tion." International Economic Review.
Brennan, Geo¤rey. 1976a. "The Distributional Implications of Public Goods." Econometrica.
Brennan, Geo¤rey. 1976b. "Public Goods and Income Distribution: A Rejoinder to the Aaron-McGuire
 Reply." Econometrica.
Buterin, Vitalik, Zoe Hitzig, and E. Glen Weyl. 2018. "Liberal Radicalism: A Flexible Design for
 Philanthropic Matching Funds." working paper.
Clarke, E.H. 1971. "Multipart pricing of public goods." Public Choice.
Diamond, P.A., and J.A. Mirrlees. 1971. "Optimal taxation and public production II: Tax rules." The
 American Economic Review.
Feehan, J.P., and M. Matsumoto. 2000. "Productivity-enhancing public investment and bene...t taxation:
  the case of factor-augmenting public inputs." Canadian Journal of Economics.
Feldstein, M. 1976. "On the theory of tax reform." Journal of Public Economics.


                                                       19
Fischel, William A. 2001. "Homevoters, municipal corporate governance, and the bene...t view of the
  property tax." National Tax Journal.
Groves, Theodore. 1973. "Incentives in Teams." Econometrica.
Groves, Theodore, and John Ledyard. 1977. "Optimal Allocation of Public Goods: A Solution to the
 'Free Rider'Problem." Econometrica.
Hendren, Nathaniel. 2019. "E¢ cient Welfare Weights." NBER Working Paper 20351.
Hines, James R. 2000. "What is Bene...t Taxation?" Journal of Public Economics.
Hylland, Aanund, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1979. "The E¢ cient Allocation of Individuals to Posi-
 tions." Journal of Political Economy.
Kaplow, Louis. 1996. "The optimal supply of public goods and the distortionary cost of taxation." National
 Tax Journal.
Kaplow, Louis. 2008. The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics. Princeton.

Kreiner, Claus Thustrup, and Nicolaj Verdelin. 2012. "Optimal provision of public goods: A synthe-
 sis." Scandinavian Journal of Economics.
Lindahl, Erik. 1919. "Just taxation­a positive solution, in Classics in the theory of public ...nance."168­176.
Manning, Richard, James Markusen, and John McMillan. 1985. "Paying for public inputs." Amer-
 ican Economic Review.

Martinez-Vazquez, J., and S.L. eds. Winer, ed. 2014. Coercion and social welfare in public ...nance:
 Economic and political perspectives. Cambridge University Press.
Matsumoto, Mutsumi. 2001. "Public Input Provision in an Optimal Income Tax Model." FinanzArchiv.

Mirrlees, James. 1971. "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation." Review of Economic
 Studies.
Moulin, Herve. 1987. "Egalitarian-Equivalent Cost Sharing of a Public Good." Econometrica.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2016. "Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights for
  Optimal Tax Theory." American Economic Review.

Samuelson, Paul. 1954. "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure." Review of Economics and Statistics.
Sandler, Todd, and John T. Tschirhart. 1980. "The Economic Theory of Clubs: An Evaluative Survey."
  Journal of Economic Literature.
Sandmo, Agnar. 1972. "Optimality rules for the provision of collective factors of production." Journal of
  Public Economics.
Scherf, Robert. 2019. "Voting over Public Good Provision and Nonlinear Income Tax Schedules." Disser-
  tation Chapter 1, Bonn Graduate School of Economics.
Smith, Adam. 1776. Wealth of Nations. Prometheus Books.

Tiebout, Charles M. 1956. "A pure theory of local expenditure." Journal of political economy.
Vickrey, William. 1961. "Counterspeculation, Auctions, and Competitive Sealed Tenders." Journal of
 Finance.
Weinzierl, Matthew. 2014. "The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation: Normative Diversity and a role
 for Equal Sacri...ce." Journal of Public Economics.



                                                      20
Weinzierl, Matthew. 2016. "Popular Acceptance of Inequality due to Brute Luck and Support for Classical
 Bene...t-Based Taxation." Journal of Public Economics.
Weinzierl, Matthew. 2017a. "Revisiting the Classical View of Bene...t Based Taxation."Economic Journal.
Weinzierl, Matthew. 2017b. "A Welfarist Role for Nonwelfarist Rules." NBER WP 23587.




                                                  21
