                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     BUSINESS CYCLES AND CURRENCY RETURNS

                                       Riccardo Colacito
                                      Steven J. Riddiough
                                          Lucio Sarno

                                      Working Paper 26299
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26299


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019



We are grateful for comments and suggestions to Antje Berndt, Magnus Dahlquist, Pasquale
Della Corte, Antonio Gargano, Federico Gavazzoni, Michael Halling, Kai Li, Matteo Maggiori,
Nelson Mark, Thomas Maurer, Michael Moore, Anella Munro, Dagfinn Rime, Maik Schmeling,
Bill Schwert, Thomas Stolper, Andrea Tamoni, Raman Uppal, Adrien Verdelhan, Mungo Wilson,
Josef Zechner and to other participants at presentations held at: 2018 American Finance
Association; 2017 Auckland Finance Conference; 2017 China International Conference in
Finance; 2017 Wellington Finance Summit; 2017 FIRN Annual Conference; 6th Workshop on
`Financial Determinants of Exchange Rates,' Bank of England; 2016 Australian National
University Annual Summer Camp; the 9th INQUIRE Business School Workshop, Cass Business
School; BI Norwegian Business School, Oslo; University of Geneva; University of Melbourne.
We also thank Sidharth Dube, Harvey Huang and Rachel Quan for excellent research assistance.
Steven Riddiough gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Faculty of Business and
Economics, University of Melbourne. The paper was the recipient of the CFA Institute Best
Paper Prize 2017 FIRN Annual Conference, and the Runner-up Best Paper Prize 2017 Vienna
Symposium on Foreign Exchange Markets. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Riccardo Colacito, Steven J. Riddiough, and Lucio Sarno. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Business Cycles and Currency Returns
Riccardo Colacito, Steven J. Riddiough, and Lucio Sarno
NBER Working Paper No. 26299
September 2019
JEL No. F31,G12,G15

                                          ABSTRACT

We find a strong link between currency excess returns and the relative strength of the business
cycle. Buying currencies of strong economies and selling currencies of weak economies generates
high returns both in the cross section and time series of countries. These returns stem primarily
from spot exchange rate predictability, are uncorrelated with common currency investment
strategies, and cannot be understood using traditional currency risk factors in either unconditional
or conditional asset pricing tests. We also show that a business cycle factor implied by our results
is priced in a broad currency cross section.

Riccardo Colacito                                              Lucio Sarno
Kenan-Flagler Business School                                  Cass Business School
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill                    106 Bunhill Row
Campus Box #3490                                               London, EC1Y 8TZ, UK
Chapel Hill, NC 27559                                          United Kingdom
and NBER                                                       lucio.sarno@city.ac.uk
ric@unc.edu

Steven J. Riddiough
Department of Finance
University of Melbourne
Level 12, 198 Berkeley Street
Melbourne, VIC 3010
Australia
steven.riddiough@unimelb.edu.au
1     Introduction
A core issue in asset pricing is the need to understand the relationship between fundamental
macroeconomic conditions and asset market returns (Cochrane, 2005, 2017). Nowhere is this
more central, and yet consistently difficult to establish, than in the foreign exchange (FX) market,
in which currency returns and country-level fundamentals are highly correlated in theory, and
yet the empirical relationship is typically found to be weak (Rossi, 2013). A recent literature in
macro-finance has documented, however, that the behaviour of exchange rates becomes easier to
explain once exchange rates are studied relative to one another in the cross section, rather than in
isolation (Lustig et al., 2011; Lustig and Richmond, 2019; Verdelhan, 2018). This insight offers the
tantalizing prospect that new empirical tests focusing on relative macroeconomic conditions across
countries could reveal a stronger relationship between currency market returns and macroeconomic
fundamentals.
    In this paper, we take this empirical step by investigating the cross-sectional properties of
currency returns to provide novel evidence on the relationship between currency returns and
country-level macroeconomic conditions. We focus on the broadest measure of aggregate macroe-
conomic conditions ­ the business cycle ­ which constitutes a key building block in theoretical
models of exchange rates. We find that business cycles are a key driver and powerful predictor of
both currency excess returns and spot exchange rate fluctuations in the cross section, and that
this predictability can be understood from a risk-based perspective. This allows us to connect
our findings to a broad literature that has analyzed the linkages between macro fundamentals
and currency risk premia (see, inter alia, Colacito and Croce, 2011; Hassan, 2013; Gabaix and
Maggiori, 2015; Ready et al., 2017; Berg and Mark, 2018; Colacito et al., 2018).
    We measure macroeconomic conditions using the output gap, defined as the difference between
a country's actual and potential level of output, for a broad sample of 27 developed- and emerging-
market economies. Since it is not directly observable, we measure the output gap using industrial
production data and apply several commonly adopted methods in the literature, including the
filters proposed by Hodrick and Prescott (HP, 1980) and Baxter and King (1999), the quadratic
time trend used by Clarida et al. (1998), and the linear projection method recently introduced by


                                                 1
Hamilton (2018). We define the relative strength of the economy based on its position within the
business cycle, i.e. whether it is nearer the trough (weak) or peak (strong) in the cycle. Using
monthly data from 1983 to 2016, we find that sorting currencies into portfolios on the basis of
the differential in output gaps relative to the US generates a monotonic increase in excess returns
as we move from portfolios of `weak' to `strong' economy currencies. Thus our results imply that
currency excess returns are higher for strong economies, a finding that we document to be robust
to various ways of constructing currency portfolios.
   Importantly, the predictability stemming from business cycles is quite different from other
sources of cross-sectional predictability observed in the literature. Sorting currencies by output
gaps is not equivalent, for example, to the currency carry trade that requires sorting currencies by
their differentials in nominal interest rates. We highlight this point in Figure 1 using two common
carry trade currencies ­ the Australian dollar and Japanese yen. The interest rate differential is
highly persistent and consistently positive between the two countries in recent decades. A carry
trade investor would have thus always been long the Australian dollar and short the Japanese yen.
In contrast the output gap differential varies substantially over time, and an output-gap investor
would have thus taken both long and short positions in the Australian dollar and Japanese yen as
their relative business cycles fluctuated. Moreover, we find that the cross-sectional predictability
arising from business cycles stems primarily from the spot exchange rate component, rather than
from interest rate differentials. That is, currencies of strong economies tend to appreciate and
those of weak economies tend to depreciate over the subsequent month. This feature makes the
returns from exploiting business cycle information different from the returns delivered by most
canonical currency investment strategies, and most notably distinct from the carry trade, which
generates a negative exchange rate return.
   We initially calculate output gaps using the full time-series of industrial production data ob-
served in 2016. This exercise allows us to carefully document the relationship between relative
macroeconomic conditions and exchange rates by exploiting the longest sample of data to formu-
late the most precise estimates of the output gap over time. Indeed, in the international economics
literature it has been difficult to uncover a predictive link between macro fundamentals and ex-
change rates even when the econometrician is assumed to have perfect foresight of future macro


                                                 2
Figure 1: Output Gap and Interest Rate Spreads between Australia and Japan
The figure plots the interest-rate- and output-gap-spread between Australia and Japan. The interest rates
reflect one-month euro-deposit rates, while the output gaps are calculated using the Hodrick-Prescott
filter. When a series is above the origin, it indicates the Australian value is higher (i.e. either a higher
interest rate or output gap).


fundamentals (Meese and Rogoff, 1983). However, the use of two-sided filters and revised data
in the long sample also raises questions as to whether the relationship is exploitable in real time.
We explore this question using a shorter sample of `vintage' data beginning in 1999 and find that
the results are qualitatively identical. The `vintage' data mimics the information set available
to investors and thus sorting is conditional only on information available at the time. Between
1999 and 2016, a high-minus-low cross-sectional strategy that sorts on relative output gaps across
countries, which we denote as GAPCS , generates a Sharpe ratio of 0.72 before transaction costs,
and 0.50 after costs. The result also holds when assigning linear or rank weights (and thus trading
all currencies simultaneously), which reassures us that the cross-sectional results are not driven by
a few outlier currencies but apply generally to the broader cross section. Moreover, a time series
strategy, which goes long (short) currencies issued by countries with output gaps above (below)
the US, denoted as GAPT S , generates a Sharpe ratio of 0.65 before costs and 0.50 after costs.


                                                     3
    The two strategies, GAPCS and GAPT S , exhibit a correlation of around 35% and thus the
investment performance increases further once these strategies are combined.1 Furthermore, the
time series correlations between the output gap strategies and the currency carry trade are found
to be essentially zero, while the correlations with other canonical currency investment strategies
­ including "dollar carry" (Lustig et al., 2014), momentum (Menkhoff et al., 2012b), and value
(Menkhoff et al., 2017) ­ are also low and close to zero.2 This apparent lack of correlation implies
that the output gap strategy offers useful diversification gains to an investor who adds it to a
conventional menu of currency portfolios, and we quantify these gains in the empirical analysis.
    We investigate whether the returns of output-gap-sorted portfolios reflect compensation for
risk. Specifically, we test the pricing power of conventional risk factors using a battery of linear
asset pricing models, and do not find evidence that these pricing kernels can price the cross section
of currency returns sorted on output gaps. We then consider the possibility that business cycles
proxy for a priced state variable as implied by many macro-finance models, giving rise to a `GAP
risk premium'. To do so, we consider the pricing power of a business cycle factor, taken to equal
the returns on the GAPCS strategy, and test whether it is priced in the cross section of currencies.
We find that the pricing power of the factor is strong and not confined to portfolios sorted on
output gaps, extending to other popular currency cross sections, including portfolios sorted on
carry (interest rate differentials), momentum, and value.
    We analyze these empirical findings in the context of the international long-run risk model of
Colacito and Croce (2011). We make two assumptions concerning the correlation of the shocks in
the model. First, we allow for an imperfect degree of correlation between shocks to volatility and

   1
      Moskowitz et al. (2012) study the performance of a time-series momentum strategy, while Baz et al. (2015)
consider combinations of time-series and cross-sectional strategies across asset classes using carry, value, and mo-
mentum signals. Goyal and Jegadeesh (2018) show that, unlike cross-sectional strategies, time-series strategies are
not zero-cost and that once scaled, cross-sectional portfolio performance is substantially stronger.
    2
      Lustig et al. (2014) propose a "dollar carry trade" strategy which trades a basket of currencies against the US
dollar on the basis of the average forward discount relative to the US. Their strategy is different from the standard
carry trade, and the returns compensate US investors for taking on aggregate risk by shorting the dollar in bad
times, when the US price of risk is high. Our strategy is distinct conceptually ­ in that it directly sorts on relative
business cycles across all countries rather than on interest rate (forward discount) information relative to the US ­
and empirically we document that the returns of the dollar carry trade are only mildly correlated with the returns
to our strategies. Furthermore, we also show that our strategy returns are virtually uncorrelated with the returns
from strategies that sort on Taylor rule-implied interest rates, which are instead highly correlated with carry trade
returns.

                                                          4
shocks to the predictive components of consumption, which we take as our proxy for the cyclical
components within each country. Second, we assume that the correlation of the output gap of
any country with the output gap of the US is decreasing in the level of that country's output gap.
This model delivers sharp predictions that allow us to speak to the novel empirical evidence that
we set forward in our analysis. Indeed, we show that, in the model, sorting currencies by interest
rates is not the same as sorting by output gaps. Furthermore, a currency GAP premium arises
in equilibrium in this economy. While this setup abstracts away from trade in the consumption
goods market, it illustrates the properties of the consumption process that are necessary in a
successful fully-fledged general equilibrium model, whose analysis we leave to future research.
    The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses related literature. Section 3
describes the data and defines the currency portfolios studied in the empirical analysis. Section 4
reports results on the predictive information content of business cycles for currency excess returns
and on the performance and diversification gains from incorporating information on relative busi-
ness cycles. Section 5 reports the results for asset pricing tests designed to explore whether the
returns to output-gap-sorted portfolios can be understood as compensation for risk, and whether a
business cycle risk factor implied by our results is priced in the cross section of currencies. Section
6 provides a theory that can explain the returns from output-gap-sorted strategies in terms of
compensation for business cycle risk. Section 7 concludes. An Internet Appendix reports addi-
tional results, theoretical proofs, and some technical details on the asset pricing tests and on the
construction of the output gap measures.


2     Related Literature
This paper contributes to several related strands of literature at the intersection of international
macro-finance and empirical asset pricing. First, we contribute to the growing body of research
documenting predictability in the cross-section of currency excess returns. This strand of the
literature has shown that cross-sectional predictability in currencies can be exploited using various
investment strategies, including carry (Lustig and Verdelhan, 2007; Lustig et al., 2011; Menkhoff
et al., 2012a), momentum (Menkhoff et al., 2012b; Asness et al., 2013), value (Asness et al., 2013;



                                                  5
Menkhoff et al., 2017), `good' carry (Bekaert and Panayotov, 2018), strategies which combine
carry with other signals (Jord`
                              a and Taylor, 2012; Barroso and Santa-Clara, 2015), information in
the volatility risk premium (Della Corte et al., 2016a), and optimal dynamic currency strategies
(Maurer et al., 2018). Our contribution to this literature is to uncover an economically distinct
source of predictive information for the cross-section of currency excess returns stemming from
the relative state of business cycles across countries, and to illustrate the economic mechanism
through which this predictability arises as compensation for business cycle risk.
   In related work, Dahlquist and Hasseltoft (2019) propose a currency strategy based on economic
momentum, defined on the basis of eight economic variables that capture interest rate, price,
industrial production, and unemployment information. This broad information set is combined to
generate signals of countries which are growing more strongly (long position) and countries which
are growing the least (short position), based on past trends that range from one to 60 months.
Their results suggest that the strategy generates high risk-adjusted returns and subsumes the
carry trade. Instead, we focus on a single proxy for business cycles, the output gap, which allows
us to connect our empirical findings to macro-finance models and thus provide a direct economic
interpretation. The simple model we propose also allows us to understand why the predictive
information in output gaps is different from the predictive information in interest rates, and
thereby we provide an economic mechanism to account for the difference between our strategy
and the carry trade.
   A second strand of the literature attempts to explain cross-sectional currency return pre-
dictability by theoretically and empirically investigating whether the returns generated by these
investment strategies are compensation for risk. A series of recent papers find evidence in support
of a variety of risk factors, including `global' exchange rate risk (Lustig et al., 2011; Colacito et al.,
2018), unanticipated global volatility risk (Menkhoff et al., 2012a), downside risk (Lettau et al.,
2014), global imbalance risk (Della Corte et al., 2016b), and correlation risk (Mueller et al., 2017),
among others. We contribute to this literature by further bridging the gap between the set of
factors that explain the cross-section of currency risk premia and macroeconomic fundamentals.
   Our results document that a business cycle risk factor is priced in the cross-section of currency
excess returns and that the factor can be rationalized in terms of an international macro-finance


                                                    6
model with long-run risk as in Colacito and Croce (2011), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2012), Lustig
and Richmond (2019), and Kremens and Martin (2019). The model abstracts away from trade in
the consumption goods' market and delivers closed form solutions for most equilibrium objects of
interest. In the interest of space, we leave the analysis of our empirical findings in the context of
a fully-fledged general equilibrium models to future research.
      A third strand of related literature focuses on predicting exchange rate changes using informa-
tion on macro fundamentals (Meese and Rogoff, 1983; Mark, 1995; Engel et al., 2007; Molodtsova
et al., 2008; Rossi, 2013). Our empirical approach in this paper is very different in that we move
away from traditional forecasting of bilateral exchange rate movements using time-series regres-
sions and statistical metrics of forecast evaluation. Instead we focus on the role of business cycles
in predicting the cross-section of currency excess returns in a multicurrency portfolio setting that
is typical of the empirical asset pricing literature.3


3       Data and Currency Portfolios
This section describes the main data employed in the empirical analysis as well as the construction
of output gaps.

3.1     Data on Spot and Forward Exchange Rates

We collect daily bid, mid, and ask spot and 1-month forward exchange rates vis-`
                                                                               a-vis the US dollar
from Barclays and Reuters via Datastream. The empirical analysis uses monthly data obtained
by sampling end-of-month rates from October 1983 to January 2016. Our sample comprises 27
countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Czech Republic, Germany, Fin-
land, France, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, and the United


    3
      While the output gap is a common measure of business cycle conditions in the macroeconomics literature, it
has received comparatively little attention in financial economics. Cooper and Priestley (2009) provide a notable
exception, finding that the output gap can help predict future stock returns for the US and other G7 countries
both in-sample and out-of-sample. In international macroeconomics, Molodtsova et al. (2008) show that `Taylor
rule' models that incorporate output gap and inflation information display predictive power for spot exchange rate
changes in time series regressions for three major exchange rates, although this result was challenged by Rogoff
and Stavrakeva (2008), who argue the predictability is not robust across different subsample periods.

                                                        7
States. The sample period for each currency differs and thus the number of countries in our sam-
ple fluctuates over time. We replace Germany with the euro area in January 1999, while countries
that join the euro area drop out of the sample upon entry into the single currency. We provide
full details of the source and availability of currency data in Table A1 of the Internet Appendix.

3.2     Currency Excess Returns

We define spot and forward exchange rates at time t as Spott and F wdt . Exchange rates are
defined as units of US dollars per unit of foreign currency such that an increase in Spott indicates
an appreciation of the foreign currency. The excess return on buying a foreign currency in the
forward market at time t and selling in the spot market at time t + 1 is computed as
                                               (Spott+1 - F wdt )
                                     RXt+1 =                      ,                                  (1)
                                                     Spott
which is equivalent to the spot exchange rate return minus the forward premium
                                       Spott+1 - Spott F wdt - Spott
                             RXt+1 =                  -              .                               (2)
                                            Spott          Spott
      According to the Covered Interest Parity (CIP) condition, the forward premium approximately
equals the interest rate differential (F wdt - Spott ) /Spott    it - i                  
                                                                       t , where it and it represent the

US and foreign riskless rates respectively, over the maturity of the forward contract. If CIP
holds, then the currency excess return is approximately equal to the exchange rate return (i.e.
(Spott+1 - Spott ) /Spott ) plus the interest rate differential relative to the US (i.e., it - it ). As a

matter of convenience, throughout this paper we refer to f dt = (Spott - F wdt ) /Spott  it - it

as either the forward discount or interest rate differential relative to the US dollar. However, it is
important to note that, while CIP held closely in the data prior to the global financial crisis (e.g.
Akram et al., 2008), recent evidence has highlighted that post crisis deviations from CIP have
become more pronounced (e.g., Du et al., 2018; Andersen et al., 2019), in which case the forward
discount captures both interest rate differentials and CIP deviations. As we show below, the
results in this paper are driven largely by spot exchange rate predictability, whereas the forward
discount plays a negligible role in accounting for the returns of the strategies we propose. This
feature is in stark contrast with carry trade returns, which are entirely driven by the forward
discount. Thus, our results do not depend on whether CIP holds.

                                                   8
3.3     The Output Gap and Data on Economic Activity

The output gap is defined as the logarithm of the difference between actual (yt ) and `potential' (¯
                                                                                                   yt )
output, gapt = yt - y
                    ¯t . A country's potential output is not directly observable and must therefore
be estimated. Numerous statistical methods have been proposed to measure potential output y
                                                                                          ¯t ,
with the principal aim being to decompose output into its trend and cyclical components. The
trend component can be viewed as the economy's natural or potential growth path, from which
growth cyclically deviates. The cyclical component is thus a measure of short-term deviations and
serves as our empirical proxy for the output gap.
      To measure economic activity we collect industrial production data from the OECD's Original
Release Data and Revisions Database. The database provides monthly `vintages', which reflect the
precise time-series available to market participants each month, and is thus free of any subsequent
revisions or forward looking information.
      The full sample analysis uses the April 2016 vintage of data. The full series of monthly
industrial production data begin at various dates across countries. The earliest start date is
January 1960, and the sample ends in January 2016 to coincide with the last industrial production
data point that was available for the majority of countries in April 2016. We estimate output gaps
using various statistical techniques to extract a cyclical component from macroeconomic data: (i)
the linear projection method of Hamilton (2018), (ii) the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) (1980, 1997)
filter, (iii) the Baxter-King (1999) filter, and the quadratic trend specification used by Clarida
et al. (1998).4 Hamilton (2018) provides a quantitative analysis of the main drawbacks of the HP
filter and suggests an alternative procedure for detrending output and measuring the output gap.
Although the focus is to improve on the HP filter out-of-sample, Hamilton's analysis and criticisms
are relevant for all other filters commonly used in this literature. Therefore, we use the Hamilton
procedure in our real-time analysis, implementing the procedure recursively conditioning only on
data available at the time of sorting.
      For the real-time analysis, we use the full set of monthly industrial production vintages from
December 1999 until January 2016. While the first `vintage' is in December 1999, the industrial

   4
    We provide further details of the parameters and functional forms of these statistical techniques in the Internet
Appendix.

                                                         9
production series within each vintage span back to 1960 (i.e., in December 1999, an investor
could observe US industrial production data from January 1960 to October 1999).5 Each monthly
vintage records the industrial production data available to an investor in that particular month. In
the out-of-sample analysis, we construct output gap estimates using each monthly vintage in turn,
applying the linear projection method of Hamilton (2018), and therefore the resulting estimate at
time t is conditioned only on information available at that time.
      The linear projection methodology requires the estimation of the following time-series regres-
sion:

                                                   11
                                     yi,t = i +         i,s yi,t-24-s + i,t                                (3)
                                                  s=0

where yi,t is the (log) value of industrial production for country i available at time t. We regress
time-t values on their corresponding value from two-years (24-months) earlier, and include 12 lags
in total following the suggestion of Hamilton (2018). If industrial production is only available
at quarterly intervals we use four lags beginning eight-quarters earlier. We measure the cyclical
component as ct = yt - y
                       ^t , where y
                                  ^t is the fitted value from the regression in (3). Our real-time
measure is therefore purely backward-looking, making no use of either revised data or forward-
looking information.

3.4     Output Gap Portfolios

At the end of each month t, we sort currencies into five portfolios based on the difference between
each country's output gap and the US output gap. Portfolio 5 corresponds to countries with the
highest output gap relative to the US, whereas Portfolio 1 comprises countries with the lowest
output gap relative to the US. We calculate portfolio returns as the equal weighted (1/Nk ) return
across the Nk currencies within portfolio k . We refer to the zero-cost dollar-neutral strategy that
takes a long position in Portfolio 5 (P5 ) and a short position in Portfolio 1 (P1 ) as the GAPCS
strategy, which is a tradeable investment portfolio that exploits the relative cross-sectional spread
in business cycle conditions around the world.
   5
     The data is available from February 1999 onwards; however the early months in the dataset have unusually
short samples and missing observations. We therefore begin the analysis with the most complete dataset starting
in December 1999.

                                                        10
   In addition, we also report results for trading strategies that trade all currencies with linear
weights equal to
                                         wj,t+1 = ct (xj,t - xt ) ,                                           (4)

where xj,t denotes the signal for currency j in month t (i.e., the output gap of country j minus
the US output gap) and xt = Nt-1 N
                                 j =1 xj,t denotes the cross-sectional average of the signal (across
                                   t



countries, Nt ). ct is a scaling factor such that the absolute sum of all portfolio weights equals
unity, that is, ct = 1/    j   |xj,t - xt |. Currencies with a signal value above the cross-sectional
mean receive positive portfolio weights, whereas currencies with a signal value below the average
                                                                                    Nt
receive negative weights. The portfolio return is then given by rxp
                                                                  t+1 =             j =1   wj,t+1 rxj,t+1 . In the
implementation of this approach we rebalance the portfolios at the end of each month.
   Finally, we report returns of rank portfolios, where weights are given by
                                                          Nt
                           wj,t+1 = ct    rank(xj,t ) -          rank(xj,t )/Nt .                             (5)
                                                          j =1

   The scaling factor ct is analogous to the case of linear weights above (but uses ranks of signals
instead of actual signals) and ensures that we are one dollar long and one dollar short as in
Asness et al. (2013). The procedures based on linear weights and rank portfolios are useful for
a comparison with the GAPCS strategy because they trade all currencies in every period, and
thereby are less reliant on currencies with extreme output gaps. This translates into a lower cross-
sectional standard deviation of the weights for linear and rank portfolios relative to the GAPCS
strategy. Given the relatively small number of assets in the corner portfolios traded with the
GAPCS strategy, these strategies provide some reassurance that results from the GAPCS strategy
are not driven by just a few currencies.
   Finally, it is important to note that all of the cross-sectional strategies are unaffected by time-
series trends in the US dollar since they take long and short positions in the US dollar of equal
amount by construction.

3.4.1   Time Series Portfolio

At the end of each month t, we form a 1/Nt (equally weighted) strategy that takes long positions
in the currencies of countries with output gaps above the US output gap and short positions in the

                                                    11
currencies of countries with output gaps below the US. The strategy thus invests in all currencies
available at each point in time, under the expectation that countries with higher (lower) output
gaps than the US should subsequently offer higher (lower) currency excess returns. In the out-of-
sample analysis, we refer to this portfolio strategy as GAPT S . Unlike the cross-sectional strategies
described above, the GAPT S strategy is not dollar neutral because the number of currencies with
output gaps above the US varies over time. The strategy is therefore exposed to any (macro)
factor that impacts the evolution of the US dollar over time.


4       Business Cycles and Currency Returns
In this section we explore if business cycles can predict currency excess returns. Our benchmark
approach is based on a cross-sectional portfolio sort, in which currencies are sorted into five bins
(P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 , P5 ) based on quintiles of the cross-sectional distribution of relative output gaps
from the weakest to the strongest economy currencies.

4.1     Full Sample Performance

In Table 1, we present the average excess returns of the five output-gap-sorted portfolios, which
display an increasing pattern from P1 to P5 for all four of the output gap measures. Furthermore,
the spread in returns between P1 and P5 is sizeable, ranging from 4.56% to 6.66% per annum,
which are all statistically different from zero at the 1% level.
      Further scrutiny of the results in Table 1 reveals that the predictability of the cross-section
portfolio (P 5-P 1) and the time series portfolio are mainly driven by predicting spot exchange
rate returns (see row denoted f x), whereas the return from the forward premium (equal to the
interest rate differential under CIP) contributes comparatively little to the return (see row denoted
ir). This finding contrasts with the currency carry trade strategy, in which returns are entirely
driven by exploiting forward premia across countries ­ the exchange rate component of the excess
return is typically negative.6 The last three rows in Table 1 report the currency turnover and
the spread in both forward premia and output gaps in each of the five portfolios. The turnover

    6
     For comparison, we present the equivalent descriptive statistics for forward-premia-sorted (carry) portfolios
in Table A2 of the Internet Appendix.

                                                       12
measure is slightly higher than that reported in the literature for carry trade strategies but lower
than momentum strategies (see, e.g. Menkhoff et al., 2012a,b). We note that a tendency exists
for forward premia to increase as we move from P1 to P5 , albeit non-monotonically; however,
the spread is low, consistent with the returns being driven largely by the spot exchange rate
component.
    The results in Table 1 are qualitatively identical for all four measures of the output gap consid-
ered, indicating that they lead to comparable portfolio sorts (i.e., similar rankings of countries by
the state of the business cycle). In Table A3 of the Internet Appendix, we report evidence on the
correlation across portfolio sorts obtained by the different output gap measures. While the corre-
lations are not perfect, they are sizeable, and in a range between 0.41 to 0.65. Furthermore, we
report the results from a principal component analysis applied to the four output gap estimates.
The average percentage of cross-sectional variation explained by the first principal component is
a hefty 86%, indicating that the output gap measures have a very strong common component.
    In Table 2, we present the results from a principal component decomposition of the returns of
the five portfolios sorted on relative output gaps. The results indicate a strong factor structure in
currency portfolio returns sorted by relative output gaps. The first principal component accounts
for most of the variation in portfolio returns, but the loadings appear to be almost identical across
the five portfolios, suggestive of a `level' factor, as also documented by Lustig et al. (2011). The
second principal component is instead a `slope' factor and the loadings of the five portfolios on
this principal component display a tendency to increase (monotonically for two of the output
gap measures) from negative values for P1 to positive values for P5 . Therefore, it is the second
principal component that is key to understanding the cross-sectional difference in excess returns.7
    We also compare the results from sorting on output gaps to a strategy that sorts on Taylor
rule fundamentals. Specifically, we consider the standard Taylor rule with coefficients of 1.5 on
inflation and 0.5 on the output gap respectively. We then use the differential in interest rates
implied by the Taylor rule to sort currencies. The results, presented in Table 3, suggest that
   7
     These features of the factor structure resemble the features displayed by carry portfolios sorted on interest
rate differentials, where the `slope' factor is key to understanding carry trade excess returns. However, we also find
that the second principal component for portfolios sorted on output gaps is orthogonal to the analogous HM LF X
factor documented by Lustig et al. (2011), confirming that sorting currencies on output gaps is very different from
sorting currencies on interest rates.

                                                         13
sorting on Taylor-rule implied interest rates generates large Sharpe ratios both in the cross section
(Sharpe ratio of 0.90) and the time series (Sharpe ratio of 0.65). However, sorting on Taylor rules
also generates excess returns that display high correlations with the HM LF X factor of Lustig
et al. (2011) (0.84 and 0.51), whereas sorting on relative output gaps provides excess returns that
are not (or only) mildly correlated with Taylor rule-sorted portfolios. The difference between the
Taylor rule-sorted portfolios and the portfolios sorted on relative output gaps is also apparent by
noticing that all of the predictability in the Taylor rule portfolios stems from the forward premia
component, consistent with the returns from carry trade portfolios. The desirable correlation
properties of portfolios sorted on output gaps are an important feature that we explore further in
the paper, specifically when we investigate the diversification benefits of adding a trading strategy
that sorts on output gaps to a conventional menu of currency investment strategies.8
      Overall, these initial results suggest a strong link exists between the relative state of the
business cycle and future currency excess returns, which is mainly driven by spot exchange rate
predictability and is thus distinct from the predictability found in either carry- or Taylor-rule-based
currency portfolios.

4.2     Real-time Performance

In Panel A of Table 4 we report the gross returns from implementing in real time the GAPCS
strategy as well as the linear and rank weight cross-sectional portfolios. We also report the
returns from implementing the time-series variant of this strategy, GAPT S , and combinations of
the GAPT S strategy with the cross-sectional strategies. We observe that each investment strategy
generates a statistically significant return at conventional significance levels. The Sharpe ratio
of GAPCS is 0.72, the same as when using rank weights, while it is slightly higher at 0.74 when
using linear weights.9 GAPT S generates a Sharpe ratio of 0.65 out of sample, and the Sharpe
   8
      In Table A4 of the Internet Appendix, we also present statistics for portfolios sorted on the basis of deviations
in interest rates from the Taylor-rule implied rates. These deviations capture movements in short-term rates
not captured by systematic monetary policy (Taylor-rule reaction functions) including, for example, liquidity
fluctuations in money markets or movements in interbank risk. We find these deviations do not generate a spread
in returns that is statistically different from zero, suggesting that currency excess returns are not driven by the
non-systematic component of short-term rates.
    9
      In Table A5 of the Internet Appendix we report evidence on the minimum and maximum weights for all
three cross-sectional strategies. Clearly, for the high-minus-low strategy, they are -20% and 20%, given that the
corner portfolios have at most 5 currencies and this strategy employs equal weights. The cross-sectional standard

                                                          14
ratio always increases when the cross-sectional strategies are combined with the GAPT S strategy,
reaching 0.82. This higher Sharpe ratio is due to the fact that the correlation between GAPCS
and GAPT S is positive but far from perfect.
    Figure 2 plots the cumulative returns to both GAPCS and GAPT S currency strategies. Specif-
ically, the figure shows the out-of-sample cumulative returns (left-hand plot), the equivalent in-
sample cumulative returns obtained using the Hamilton (2018) linear projection applied to revised
data (middle plot), and combination strategies COMGAP , COMLIN , and COMRN K (right-hand
plot). Returns are normalized so each series has the same volatility of 6% annualized, which makes
it straightforward to compare the cumulative returns. The shaded bars in Figure 2 are the NBER
recession periods, which occur twice during this sample. It seems natural to examine whether the
returns from our strategy are different across booms and recessions in the US, particularly in light
of the recent paper by G´
                        omez-Cram (2018) that shows expected stock returns are predictively
negative in the first four-to-six months after the onset of a recession, but are high thereafter. The
graphs in Figure 2 show the steady performance of the GAPCS strategy, in which returns do not
display different behavior across booms and recessions regardless of whether the cross-sectional
strategy is implemented in- or out-of-sample. This is not surprising given the GAPCS strategy is
dollar neutral, and hence it is not obvious why or how US business cycles should be related to
the GAPCS excess returns. However, for the GAPT S strategy, which is not dollar neutral, there
is evidence that its returns drop during the recession associated with the global financial crisis
and take a long time before returning to their previous peak, therefore displaying a very differ-
                                                       omez-Cram (2018).10 By construction,
ent behavior to that recorded for US stock returns by G´


deviation is 28%. The largest weights remain modest for linear and rank portfolios, with a minimum of -25%
and a maximum of 25%, but with considerably lower cross-sectional standard deviations (9% and 16%) given that
these strategies trade all currencies and not just those in the extreme quintiles of the cross-sectional distribution
of output-gap-sorted portfolios.
   10
      In Table A6 of the Internet Appendix, we present summary statistics on the returns to the GAPCS and
GAPT S portfolios during expansions and NBER recession periods. The GAPCS strategy generates similar returns
in both periods (4.75% during expansions and 5.94% during recessions), while the GAPT S portfolio generates a
positive return of 3.90% during expansions but a -3.99% return in recessions. This result is driven by taking cyclical
positions in the US dollar, which results in a large negative return during recessions when the dollar appreciates.
In the final row we present the US dollar exposure ­ measured as the over or under exposure to the dollar, in which
a value of zero indicates a dollar-neutral portfolio, while a value of -1 indicates a `dollar portfolio' that is long all
foreign currencies against the US dollar. During expansions the GAPT S portfolio has a positive dollar exposure of
0.26, but this flips to -0.27 during recessions.

                                                           15
Figure 2: Cumulative Returns to GAP Strategies
The figure plots the cumulative returns to GAP currency strategies. The left-hand plot shows the out-of-
sample cumulative returns for the GAPCS and GAPT S strategies. The middle plot shows the equivalent
in-sample cumulative returns using the Hamilton (2018) linear projection. The right-hand plot shows
the three combination strategies, COMGAP , COMLIN , and COMRN K . Returns are normalized so each
series has the same volatility of 6% annualized. The shaded bars reflect NBER recession periods.


the GAPT S strategy is more likely to be long the US dollar during US expansions and short the
US dollar during US recessions. The poor performance of the GAPT S strategy during the reces-
sion induced by the global financial crisis likely occurs because of the sharp dollar appreciation
against most currencies in the world (with the exception of other safe haven currencies such as
the Japanese yen and the Swiss franc) observed during the crisis. This safety premium effect is
typically explained by the special reserve currency status of the US dollar, which makes the US
the recipient of large capital flows at times of major negative global shocks (e.g., Maggiori, 2017).
Finally, the graphs of the combination strategies show a striking similarity, suggesting that the
specific method for assigning weights to long and short positions in GAPCS has little bearing on
the final return outcome and that, for each combination, the losses incurred by GAPT S during the
global financial crisis are substantially mitigated by combining it with the GAPCS strategy.
   In Panel B of Table 4 we report results in the same format as Panel A for returns net of
transaction costs, i.e. accounting for bid-ask spreads. We incorporate transactions costs using


                                                  16
bid-ask (b-a) spreads, such that the return on a long position is calculated as

                                                      Spotb         a
                                                          t+1 - F wdt
                                           RXtnet
                                              +1    =                                                             (6)
                                                          Spotmt

    The bid-ask spread data available are for quoted spreads and not effective spreads. Since it
is known that quoted spreads are much higher than effective spreads, we follow earlier work (e.g.
Goyal and Saretto, 2009; Menkhoff et al., 2012a, 2017), and employ 50% of the quoted bid-ask
spread as the actual spread.11
    The Sharpe ratio for GAPCS goes down from 0.72 to 0.50 when adjusting for bid-ask spreads,
and the Sharpe ratio for GAPT S reduces from 0.65 to 0.50, while the combination of GAPCS and
GAPT S generates a Sharpe ratio of about 0.60. In short, transaction costs do not wipe out the
performance of strategies that sort on output gaps out of sample, and the Sharpe ratios remain
attractive even after accounting for bid-ask spreads.12
    The results in Table 4 also confirm that the predictive power stems mainly from spot rate
predictability rather than interest rate differentials: approximately 90% of the total return is
delivered from the spot component across all portfolios considered. Therefore the basic features
of exchange rate predictability recorded in the full sample hold in the real-time analysis.13

4.2.1    Relationship with Other Strategies and Diversification Gains

In addition to analyzing the real-time performance of currency strategies that sort on output gaps,
we also compare the returns arising from these strategies to a number of other portfolio strategies.
This analysis is useful to assess whether sorting on output gaps simply recovers returns that can be

   11
      Even this number seems conservative: Gilmore and Hayashi (2011) find transaction costs due to bid-ask
spreads are likely much lower than our 50% rule, while Gargano et al. (2019) find a rule of 25% is more appropriate
since 2011.
   12
      In Table A7 we again consider portfolios obtained from sorting currencies on the basis of interest rates implied
by Taylor rules, exactly as for Table 3 but using real-time data for the out-of-sample period. While the results
confirm the strong investment performance of the Taylor rule strategy, they also confirm the in-sample result that
the strategy is very highly correlated with the HM LF X factor, while being only modestly correlated with the
GAPCS strategy.
   13
      Up to now we have taken the perspective of a US investor by calculating excess returns and building dollar-
neutral portfolios. As a robustness check, we depart from this base scenario and run calculations with four
alternative base currencies. Specifically, we construct the output-gap-strategy out-of-sample from the separate
perspectives of Eurozone, British, Japanese, and Swiss investors. The results, reported in Table A8 in the Internet
Appendix, indicate no qualitative changes to our results based on a US perspective.

                                                         17
obtained in other ways, or whether they constitute a novel source of exchange rate predictability
which can offer diversification gains to investors.
   Table 5 reports a battery of correlation coefficients between the returns from the strategies
sorting on output gaps and the returns from a variety of currency strategies and equity-based
strategies that we provide full details of in the Internet Appendix. The main point arising from
this table is that the returns of each output gap strategy are generally uncorrelated, or only
mildly correlated, with any of the alternative strategies and factors considered. For example, for
the GAPCS strategy the correlations range from zero (for the US equity market) to 0.24 (for the
dollar factor), and they are of similar magnitude for each variant of the strategy. The results
suggest that strategies which sort on output gaps contain novel economic information and are not
a mechanical relabelling of existing currency strategies or factors. In turn, large diversification
benefits are potentially available to currency investors from adding an output gap-sorted strategy
to a broader currency portfolio.
   Thus, to better understand the value of the GAPCS strategy for a currency investor, we combine
it with various canonical currency strategies and assess its value added in terms of performance. In
Panel A of Table 6 we show the returns from carry, dollar carry, momentum, and value strategies
from 1999 and 2016. The value strategy performs the worst during this sample, with a Sharpe
ratio of essentially zero, while carry performs the best with a Sharpe ratio of 0.58. We also
consider a strategy that combines the above four canonical strategies with equal weights (EW ),
which generates a Sharpe ratio of 0.74 ­ higher than each individual strategy by exploiting (albeit
simplistically with equal weights) the imperfect correlation of returns across the individual strate-
gies. In essence, the results in Panel A of Table 6 provide us with a benchmark on performance
of standard currency strategies, and we ask whether combining them with the GAPCS strategy
improves performance and to what extent. We report results in Panel B of Table 6, both when we
combine each individual strategy with GAPCS and when we add GAPCS to the equally-weighted
strategy alongside carry, dollar carry, momentum, and value. The results indicate that adding
the GAPCS strategy to this menu of strategies delivers substantially higher Sharpe ratios. For
example, the Sharpe ratio of the carry trade improves from 0.58 to 0.85, and the equally-weighted
strategy which includes all four benchmark strategies and GAPCS delivers a Sharpe ratio of 0.87,


                                                 18
in contrast to 0.74 that is obtained when GAPCS is excluded.
    Overall, we view these findings as a confirmation of the value that the GAPCS strategy adds
when included in a currency portfolio, driven by its desirable return and correlation properties
with existing currency-based strategies.


5     Asset Pricing and Implications
In this section, we begin by investigating if a range of alternative pricing models can explain the
returns generated by output-gap sorted portfolios. The purpose of this analysis is to evaluate
whether the relationship between currency returns and business cycles can be understood from
a risk-return perspective. We go on to consider the role that business cycles may also play as a
novel source of risk.


Methodology. We denote the discrete excess returns on portfolio j in period t as RXtj . In the
absence of arbitrage opportunities, risk-adjusted excess returns have a price of zero and satisfy
the following Euler equation:


                                          Et [Mt+1 RXtj+1 ] = 0,                                (7)

where Mt+1 is the stochastic discount factor (SDF). A vast literature on currency asset pricing,
starting from Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) and including Lustig et al. (2011), Menkhoff et al.
(2012a), Della Corte et al. (2016b) and many others, considers an SDF specification that is linear
in the pricing factors ft+1 , given by


                                         Mt+1 = 1 - b (ft+1 - µ)                                (8)

where b is the vector of factor loadings, and µ denotes the factor means. When relying on
equation (8), the resulting asset pricing tests are unconditional because the SDF factor loadings
in b are assumed to be time-invariant (i.e., bt =b). However, in a more general setting the Euler
equation (7) implies SDF parameters that are time-varying, which means the covariance between
excess returns and the SDF is conditional (Hansen and Richard, 1987). If this is the case, the


                                                   19
unconditional version of the model with constant b is mispecified, potentially resulting in biased
alphas (see Boguth et al., 2011). We discuss and analyze the more general case of conditional
asset pricing tests later, while beginning our analysis on the basis of unconditional asset pricing
tests in line with the relevant literature.
      The above SDF specification implies a beta pricing model in which the expected excess return
on portfolio j is equal to the factor risk price  times the risk quantities  j . The beta pricing
model is defined as


                                              E [RX j ] =   j                                      (9)

where the market price of risk  = f b can be obtained via the factor loadings b. f =
E (ft - µ) (ft - µ)     is the variance-covariance matrix of the risk factors, and  j denotes the
regression coefficients of each portfolio's excess return RXtj+1 on the risk factors ft+1 .

5.1     Pricing Output-Gap Portfolios

Risk Factors and Pricing Kernel.              The recent literature on cross-sectional asset pricing in
currency markets has considered a two-factor SDF. The first risk factor is the expected market
excess return, approximated by the average excess return on a portfolio strategy that is long in
all foreign currencies with equal weights and short in the domestic currency ­ the DOL factor.
For the second risk factor, the literature has employed several return-based factors such as the
slope factor (HM LF X ) of Lustig et al. (2011) or the global volatility risk factor of Menkhoff et al.
(2012a).
      Following this literature, we start from a two-factor SDF with DOL as the first factor, and
then consider various second factors, including: the slope factor (HM LF X ) proposed by Lustig
et al. (2011); the global imbalance factor (IM B ) of Della Corte et al. (2016b); the volatility
factor (V OL) of Menkhoff et al. (2012a) in its factor-mimicking version (i.e., the fitted values
in a regression of global FX volatility risk on currency returns); and a GAP factor constructed
simply as the excess return from the GAPCS strategy. The GAP factor essentially measures the
excess returns generated by sorting currencies on the output gap information and is increasing in
the spread of output gaps across the world: it is therefore a measure of the return arising from

                                                    20
divergences in business cycles, such that the more business cycles diverge across countries, the
more the currencies of fast-growing countries appreciate. Later in the paper we provide a simple
model of international financial markets with long-run risk that generates this risk factor in the
pricing kernel. Our test assets are the five output-gap sorted currency portfolios obtained using
real-time conditioning information as described in Section 4. We later expand the test assets to
consider larger cross sections, given that asset pricing tests tend to have low power in small cross
sections of assets.


Cross-Sectional Regressions. Table 7 presents the cross-sectional asset pricing results, in-
cluding estimates of factor loadings b and the market prices of risk . The factor loadings b are
estimated via the Generalized Method of Moments (GM M ) of Hansen (1982). To implement
GM M , we use the pricing errors as a set of moments and the identity weighting matrix. Since the
objective is to test whether the model can explain the cross section of expected currency excess
returns, we only rely on unconditional moments and do not employ instruments. By estimating
the first stage GM M using an identity-weighting matrix, we thus attempt to price all currency
portfolios equally well.
    We report estimates of b and , and standard errors based on Newey and West (1987). The
model's performance is evaluated using the cross-sectional R2 , the Root Mean Squared Error
(RMSE), and the HJ distance measure of Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), which quantifies the
mean-squared distance between the SDF of a proposed model and the set of admissible SDFs.14
To test whether the HJ distance is statistically significant, we simulate p -values using a weighted
sum of 2
       1 distributed random variables (see, Jagannathan and Wang, 1996; Ren and Shimotsu,

2009). The p -values of the HJ distance measure are reported in brackets.
    In Table 7 we report results for two-factor SDF models that include DOL and, in turn, the carry
factor (HM LF X ), the volatility risk factor (V OL), the global imbalance risk factor (IM B ), and
the GAP factor. The results suggest that none of the factor loadings are statistically significant


  14
     Note that the HJ calculation is essentially a GM M application with the important difference that the (non-
optimal) weighting matrix is equal to the inverse of the second moment matrix of test asset returns, not the identity
matrix; see the Internet Appendix for details on the technical aspects of the asset pricing methods employed in
this section.

                                                         21
at conventional significance levels with the exception of the GAP factor, which displays strong
statistical significance both in terms of the factor loading and price of risk. The models involving
HM LF X , V OL, and IM B also display poor explanatory power in terms of the adjusted R2
(always negative), which is surprising considering the relative ease in achieving high R2 statistics
when test assets are characterized by a strong factor structure (Lewellen et al., 2010). In contrast,
the SDF involving DOL and GAP generates an adjusted R2 of 44% and a substantially lower
RMSE relative to other SDF specifications, indicating that the pricing errors are much lower.
The p-values from the HJ distance measure are always above 5% with the exception of the SDF
involving HM LF X . However, this is likely due to the low power of the HJ statistic in our small
cross section of five test assets and, in the absence of statistical significance of factor loadings
for all risk factors other than GAP , this result cannot be viewed as supportive of these pricing
models.
      Overall, the results in Table 7 suggest that the only factor that can price the currency excess
returns obtained from sorting on output gaps is GAP , and that conventional risk factors from the
currency literature are not priced. This finding highlights the novelty of the returns and the need
for alternative risk factors to account for this cross section of asset returns.

5.2     A Business Cycle Factor?

Next, we consider in more detail the possibility that currency excess returns reflect compensation
for risk linked to the relative state of business cycle conditions. The theoretical link between
aggregate macroeconomic conditions and asset prices is fundamental to the study of asset pricing,
and most classes of risk-based models require the SDF to be a function of the business cycle
(see Cochrane, 2017, for a comprehensive review and reconciliation of the link between business
cycle variables and asset pricing models).15 Specifically, we carry out asset pricing tests for two
SDF specifications: a two-factor model including DOL and HM LF X , which is the most common
benchmark in the literature since its introduction by Lustig et al. (2011), and a three-factor model
which also includes the GAP factor. This allows us to gauge the incremental pricing power of a
business cycle factor beyond the two-factor benchmark.
  15
    In complementary work, Maurer et al. (2019) use the currency market as a setting to empirically estimate
country-specific SDFs and document a linear relationship with domestic output gaps.

                                                    22
Test Portfolios. We consider two sets of test portfolios, increasing in the number of portfolios.
Recall that we first considered the five output-gap-sorted portfolios (as in Table 7), which con-
stitute a small set of test assets for the purpose of asset pricing tests. However, Lewellen et al.
(2010) show that a strong factor structure in test asset returns can give rise to misleading results in
empirical work, and this outcome is especially the case in small cross sections. Therefore, we now
conduct asset pricing tests on the following two sets of portfolios: 10 portfolios sorted on currency
value and momentum (i.e., out-of-sample test assets where the sorting variable is neither carry nor
the output gap); and a larger cross-section of 20 portfolios which comprises the 5 portfolios sorted
on output gap, plus 5 portfolios sorted on forward premia (carry), 5 portfolios sorted on momen-
tum, and 5 portfolios sorted on value. We conduct the asset pricing tests excluding the pricing
factors as test assets (Panel A of Table 8) and including them (Panel B of Table 8). Lewellen
et al. (2010) advocate adding risk factors as test assets to ensure the factors price themselves (i.e.
  E [Rf actor ]).


Cross-Sectional Regressions. Starting from Panel A of Table 8, we ask whether a two-factor
model including DOL and HM LF X can price the two sets of test assets described above. We
focus our interest on the sign and the statistical significance of the market price of risk  attached
to the HM LF X factor and of the associated factor loading b. We know from Table 7 that this
SDF specification cannot price the returns from output gap-sorted portfolios. We find that this
SDF, which is known to be powerful at pricing carry portfolios, also does not explain satisfactorily
the other cross sections considered. Specifically, the factor loading on HM LF X is statistically
insignificant from zero, and the adjusted R2 is low. The HJ distance test does not indicate a
rejection of the model in two cases but, with an insignificant factor loading and low R2 , the HJ
distance result cannot be considered as supportive of the SDF.
   When augmenting the SDF specification with the GAP factor, we find that both the loading
and the price of risk for the GAP factor enter with positive and statistically significant coefficients.
Moreover, the factor loading on HM LF X continues to be statistically insignificant. The adjusted
R2 for the three-factor model including the DOL, HM LF X , and GAP factors is substantially
higher (in a range between 59% and 62%) and the RMSE is substantially lower than the two-


                                                  23
factor specification that excludes GAP .
      In Panel B of Table 8 we carry out the same tests while augmenting the test assets to include
HM LF X in the two-factor SDF, and both HM LF X and GAP in the three-factor SDF. The results
are similar to those in Panel A. Specifically, while we observe statistically significant risk prices
for HM LF X , this is due to the inclusion of HM LF X as a test asset. More importantly, the
results from the three-factor model indicate that the addition of the GAP factor leads to strongly
statistically significant factor loadings and risk prices on GAP , much higher cross-sectional R2
statistics, and far lower RMSEs than in the two-factor specification.16

5.3     Conditional Asset Pricing

In this section we consider conditional tests based on an SDF specification that allows for time-
varying loadings bt :


                                          Mt+1 = 1 - bt (ft+1 - µ) .                                           (10)

      Other examples of conditional asset pricing tests in the currency asset pricing literature include
(Lustig et al., 2011) in the context of carry portfolios, and (Menkhoff et al., 2016, Section III.C)
for portfolios sorted on order flow.
      Given equation (10), risk equals the conditional exposure to risk factors given the information
available to investors, which implies that the covariance between excess returns and the SDF is
conditional (Hansen and Richard, 1987). If this is the case, the unconditional version of the model
with constant b is mispecified, and alphas are biased due to underconditioning on only a subset
of the investors information. This problem can be mitigated, for example, by allowing the SDF
loadings to equal realized betas estimated from rolling-window regressions. The key implication of
underconditioning is that, in the presence of conditional risk exposures, unconditional asset pricing
tests lead to a bias in the estimated alpha. An overconditioning bias can also arise, however, when

  16
     In Internet Appendix Tables A9 and A10 we present the equivalent results to those reported in Tables 7 and
8 when employing Fama-MacBeth estimation techniques, while in Tables A11 and A12 we present results in which
we replace HM LF X with either the global imbalance factor (IM B ) of Della Corte et al. (2016b) or the global
volatility factor (V OL) proposed by Menkhoff et al. (2012a). In Table A13, we present the asset pricing results for
the same set of test portfolios but for which the SDF is a two-factor linear combination of DOL and GAPCS . All
of these additional tests confirm that the GAP factor is priced in each of the sets of test assets considered.

                                                        24
the econometrician uses a conditional risk proxy that is not entirely in the information set of
investors (see Boguth et al., 2011), for example when using contemporaneous realized betas as
proxies for conditional risk, since these betas cannot be known in real time.
   In the context of our paper, it could be that, for example, the excess returns from the high
output gap currency portfolio (strong economies) are more risky in bad times, in which case
the unconditional version of the model with constant b is mispecified because time-variation in
the loadings of the portfolios on the SDF is not permitted. More generally, it is possible that
time-varying differences in risk exposures can account for the inability of asset pricing models,
not including the business cycle factor, to explain output-gap-portfolio returns, as documented
in Section 5.1. We investigate this possibility by carrying out conditional asset pricing tests that
help in addressing both the underconditioning and overconditioning biases, using as test assets
the five portfolios sorted on output gap and the excess returns from the GAPCS strategy (i.e.,
P5 -P1 ).
   Specifically, we follow the two-step instrumental variable (IV) procedure proposed by Boguth
et al. (2011). In the first step we estimate the contemporaneous exposure of the excess returns
to currency portfolio j to currency factors at time t. This step helps to overcome the undercon-
ditioning bias by allowing for a dynamic relationship between factors and returns. In the case of
the two-factor pricing model, which includes DOL and HM LF X , we estimate


                             RXtj =  + 1
                                       c           c
                                         ,t DOLt + 2,t HM LF X,t + t .                         (11)

   We consider different rolling windows over which to estimate the slope coefficients in the
above regression, including 12, 18, 24, 30, and 36 months. The first-step potentially generates
an overconditioning bias and hence we do not use the betas estimated in the first step when
estimating alphas. Instead, in the second step, we forecast the betas estimated in the first step
using a vector (Zn,t-1 ) of predictor variables,

                                                   N
                                   c
                                   k,t   = k +           n Zn,t-1 +   k,t .                    (12)
                                                   n=1

   We include as predictor variables the one-period lagged value of beta, as well as variables that


                                                       25
have been found to predict dollar and carry factor returns including global FX volatility (Bakshi
and Panayotov, 2013), the commodity return on the Commodity Research Bureau's raw industrials
index (Bakshi and Panayotov, 2013), the Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spread (Brunnermeier et al.,
2009), and the average forward discount (Lustig et al., 2014). The fitted value from this regression,
^c , is used to estimate the time-series IV alpha (IV ) that Boguth et al. (2011) show mitigates
 k,t

against biases stemming from both over and underconditioning:


          RXtj = IV + (DOL + DOL ^c )DOLt + (HM L + HM L 
                                                         ^c )HM LF X,t + ut .                    (13)
                       0     1    1,t        0      1     2,t


   In Panel A of Table 9 we report the IV alphas for the five output gap sorted portfolios and
the GAPCS strategy excess returns. In addition to the two-factor model with DOL and HM LF X
(left hand side), we report results from the two factor model with DOL and GAPCS as risk factors
(middle), and the three-factor model with DOL, HM LF X , and GAPCS (right hand side). We
also report the 2 test statistic and associated p-value for the test that the alphas are jointly equal
to zero. A p-value below 0.05 indicates that the null hypothesis, that all alphas are jointly zero,
can be rejected at the 5 percent level of significance. In Panel B of Table 9 we report the 2 test
statistic for the equivalent test on a larger set of 20 test portfolios including portfolios sorted by
output gaps, forward premia, momentum, and value.
   Starting from Panel A, for the two factor model including DOL and HM LF X , the 2 test
statistic rejects the null hypothesis that the alphas are jointly zero for every one of the 5 rolling
windows considered for the beta estimation. Examining the alphas of the individual portfolios,
we can see that this result is driven by statistically significant alphas in P5 and sometimes P4 , as
well as significant alphas in the GAPCS excess returns. However, the model specifications that
include GAPCS (middle and right hand side of Table 9) generates alphas that are not statistically
significantly different from zero, with the 2 test statistic becoming considerably smaller, and
its associated p-values comfortably above the 5% level. These results are consistent with the
results from unconditional asset pricing tests reported earlier, suggesting that the most common
benchmark for currency asset pricing, namely the two-factor model of Lustig et al. (2011), is
unable to price the output-gap-sorted portfolios, and that a business cycle factor is needed in the
SDF specification to price these portfolios.

                                                 26
     The results are qualitatively identical when we employ all 20 test portfolios including portfolios
sorted by output gaps, forward premia, momentum, and value (Panel B of Table 9). Specifically,
there is no evidence that the two-factor model with DOL and HM LF X can price these test assets,
with the exception of two cases with short rolling windows of 12 and 18 months, which generate
moderately higher p-values between 5% and 6%, whereas model specifications that include GAPCS
all generate large p-values.17
     Overall, the conditional asset pricing tests corroborate the earlier findings that conventional
risk factors used in the currency asset pricing literature are unable to price portfolios sorted on
relative output gaps, and that a business cycle factor implied by our results is priced in a broad
currency cross section.


6        A Model for the GAP Premium
The asset pricing results suggest that standard risk factors used in the literature cannot explain
the returns from currency portfolios that sort on output gaps. In this section we present a simple
model that can generate a risk premium associated with relative output gaps across countries, the
GAP premium. While this setup abstracts away from trade in the consumption goods market, it
constitutes a useful benchmark in the international finance literature, and it has been applied to
the analysis of exchange rates' volatility (Colacito and Croce, 2011), international term structure
of interest rates (Bansal and Shaliastovich, 2012), gravity in exchange rates' fluctuations (Lustig
and Richmond, 2019), and quanto contracts (Kremens and Martin, 2019). We follow the literature
and focus on this setup due to its ability to deliver closed form solutions for all the objects of
interest, and leave a fully fledged general equilibrium analysis to future research.




    17
     We also considered other two factor models as benchmarks, where the second risk factor is V OL or IM B
instead of HM LF X , and find qualitatively identical results to those obtained for the two-factor model with DOL
and HM LF X . These results are available upon request.

                                                       27
6.1     Setup of the economy

Preferences. The economy consists of N countries. Each country i is populated by a represen-
tative agent with recursive preferences

                                                          1
                   Ui,t = (1 -  ) log (Ci,t ) +  ·          log (Et [exp ((1 -  )Ui,t+1 )]) ,                     (14)
                                                         1-

where Ci,t ,  , and  denote the consumption in country i at date t, the subjective discount factor,
and risk aversion respectively. These preferences correspond to Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences
for the case of unit intertemporal elasticity of substitution (henceforth IES).
Consumption dynamics. The logarithm of consumption growth in each country evolves ac-
cording to the following law of motion:

                                                 
                     ci,t+1 = µc + zi,t +      i,t c
                                                   i,t+1                                                          (15)
                                                z
                          zi,t   = z zi,t-1 + z i,t
                                                                
                          i,t = (1 -  )¯
                                        +  i,t-1 +                   i,t ,   i  {1, 2, ..., N }

where zi,t is a consumption factor that proxies for the output gap, and i,t is the conditional
variance of consumption growth. We document in the Internet Appendix that the output gap
estimated using the same methodology that we adopt in our empirical analysis is highly correlated
with zi,t . In what follows, we will proxy the output gap with the zi,t factor.18
All shocks within a country are orthogonal to each other with the exception of

                                                                      1
                      z                z          z           z
                      i,t = corr i,t , i,t = corr i,t + i,t , i,t =        0,
                                                                    1 + 2

where z       
      i,t and i,t are two i.i.d. normally distributed orthogonal shocks. To better highlight the

key mechanism of the model, we set to zero all the correlations of international shocks with the
   18
      The explanation for why the correlation between output gap and the predictive component zi,t is positive
is straightforward. Consider the case in which the output gap is measured as the residual from the regression
ci,t =  + ci,t-1 + i,t . Since the estimated output gap, ^i,t , is equal to zi,t-1 + i,t-1 c , the positive correlation
                                                                                           i,t
with the predictive component zi,t follows immediately. In the Internet Appendix, we extend this analysis to the
case of a general number of regressors and document that this correlation is generally large. We focus on the
correlation with the cyclical component extracted using the methodology proposed by Hamilton (2018), because it
coincides with the empirical measure that we adopt for our core set of results. We cannot claim that any trend-cycle
decomposition would give rise to a large and/or positive correlation and thank an anonymous referee for pushing
us to illustrate this point.

                                                          28
exception of the international correlation of the shock z                                  z
                                                        i,t in each country with the shock k,t in

the base country k . Specifically, we assume that this correlation is time-varying according to the
process:

                                                                               1
                   corr z     z
                        i,t , k,t      = z         - 1) + 2 (1 - 
                                         ik,t = (2¯              ¯)                      ,      (16)
                                                                         1 + exp {zi,t }

from which it is easy to show that: (i) the unconditional mean of the correlation is ¯ (i.e. E z
                                                                                               ik,t =

¯); (ii) the correlation of each country i with the base country k declines with the level of the
                                    zik,t
output gap in country k (i.e.       zi,t
                                            < 0). In the Internet Appendix we provide some empirical
support for this hypothesized comovement between correlations and output gap.

Financial Markets. We assume that there is a complete set of state and date contingent bonds
that each investor has access to in frictionless financial markets at each point in time.

6.2   Equilibrium outcomes

Risk-free rates. We document in Lemma 3 of the Internet Appendix that the risk-free rates are
equal to

                   f                                      1
                  ri,t = µc - log( ) + zi,t -  -              i,t ,   i  {1, 2, ..., N }.       (17)
                                                          2

Equation (17) provides an important connection between our model and the empirical evidence
provided in the previous sections: given the imperfect degree of correlation between zi,t and i,t ,
sorting on the level of the risk-free rate is not the same as sorting on the output gap.

Currency risk premia. The following Proposition establishes the connection between sorting
the cross-section of currencies according to the output gap and the existence of an excess return.

Proposition 1 (GAP premium). Let i and j be two countries for which the following condition
holds: zi,t  zj,t . Then the excess return of a strategy that is long the currency of country i and
short the currency of country j is

               Et GAPtij
                      +1       = Et RXti+1 - RXtj+1
                                                  1               1
                               = 2 (1 - ¯)                 -                            > 0.    (18)
                                            1 + exp {zj,t } 1 + exp {zi,t }

                                                     29
where the coefficient of proportionality  is equal to
                                                                2
                                 z  ¯   1 (1 -  ) 
                              =       +                             > 0.
                                1 - z 2 1 - 

Proof. See Internet Appendix.

    The interpretation of Proposition 1 is intuitive. The representative investor of the base country
k dislikes (likes) periods of low (high) output gap shocks. Given the assumption of complete
markets, the log-growth rate of exchange rates is equal to the difference of logarithms of the SDFs
of any two countries. The more correlated is the output gap of a country with the output gap of
country k , the better hedge it provides against negative output gap shocks in country k . Indeed, in
the extreme case in which two countries have perfectly correlated output gap shocks, the exchange
rate of their currencies would have no exposure to output gap risk. Given our postulated negative
relationship between the output gap of country i and its correlation with the output gap of the
base country k , it follows that low output gap countries (high z
                                                                ik,t ) have safe currencies, while

high output gap countries (low z
                               ik,t ) have risky currencies.

    We note that in the absence of time-varying volatility, the GAP premium would be entirely
driven by differentials in risk-free rates (this follows immediately from shutting down i,t in Equa-
tion (17)). However, in the general case discussed here, the presence of time-varying macroeco-
nomic uncertainty breaks this tight relationship. In fact, a country i could have a very strong
economy (very positive zi,t ) and low risk-free rates, as long as the level of uncertainty in country
i is large and investors are risk-averse enough. In this case, the currency of country i would still
command a large GAP premium, despite the possibly low risk-free rate. Equivalently, the GAP
premium depends crucially on expected currency appreciations, which are going to result in a
positive premium notwithstanding a low or sometimes negative interest rate differential.


7     Conclusions
Understanding and measuring the sources of macroeconomic risk that drive asset prices is a
fundamental challenge in asset pricing. In this paper, we provide robust empirical evidence that
business cycles, proxied by output gaps, are an important determinant of the cross-section of


                                                 30
expected currency returns. Our primary result is that the currencies of strong economies (high
output gaps) command higher expected returns. The excess returns from a trading strategy that
sorts currencies on relative output gaps generates high risk-adjusted returns that are uncorrelated
with the excess returns from popular currency investment strategies, thereby providing tangible
diversification gains to global investors.
   Moreover, we find that a business cycle risk factor that captures the spread in output gaps
across countries is priced in the cross section of currency excess returns that includes portfolios
sorted by carry, value, and momentum. In general, these findings are important for the broad
theoretical literature seeking to explain the macroeconomic drivers of currency risk premia. We
document that a currency GAP premium arises in equilibrium in an international macro-finance
model with long-run risk, in which the correlations of the shocks vary over time with the predictive
components of consumption. Extending this framework to a fully fledged general equilibrium
analysis represents an important direction for future research.
   In future work, researchers could explore alternative theoretical mechanisms that can explain
the link between business cycles and the cross section of currency excess returns reported in the
paper. The model presented here is only one of potentially several frameworks that can predict
these facts. Empirical researchers may also wish to explore alternative ways to measure business
cycles, using richer financial and economic datasets, as a fruitful avenue to break new ground in
the empirical asset pricing of currency markets.




                                                31
References
Akram, Q. F., Rime, D., Sarno, L., 2008. Arbitrage in the foreign exchange market: Turning on
the microscope. Journal of International Economics 76, 237­253.

Andersen, L., Duffie, D., Song, Y., 2019. Funding value adjustments. Journal of Finance 74,
145­192.

Andrews, D. W. K., 1991. Hetroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix
estimation. Econometrica 59, 817­858.

Asness, C. S., Moskowitz, T. J., Pedersen, L. H., 2013. Value and momentum everywhere. Journal
of Finance 68, 929­985.

Bakshi, G., Panayotov, G., 2013. Predictability of currency carry trades and asset pricing impli-
cations. Journal of Financial Economics 110, 139­163.

Bansal, R., Shaliastovich, I., 2012. A long-run risks explanation of predictability puzzles in bond
and currency markets. Review of Financial Studies 26, 1­33.

Barroso, P., Santa-Clara, P., 2015. Beyond the carry trade: Optimal currency portfolios. Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 50, 1037­1056.

Baxter, M., King, R. G., 1999. Measuring business cycles: Approximate band-pass filters for
economic time series. Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 575­593.

Baz, J., Granger, N. M., Harvey, C. R., Le Roux, N., Rattray, S., 2015. Dissecting investment
strategies in the cross section and time series. Working paper: Man Group.

Bekaert, G., Panayotov, G., 2018. Good carry, bad carry. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis forthcoming.

Berg, K. A., Mark, N. C., 2018. Global macro risks in currency excess returns. Journal of Empirical
Finance 45, 300­315.

Boguth, O., Carlson, M., Fisher, A., Simutin, M., 2011. Conditional risk and performance eval-
uation: Volatility timing, overconditioning, and new estimates of momentum alphas. Journal of
Financial Economics 102, 363­389.

Brunnermeier, Markus, K., Nagel, S., Pedersen, L. H., 2009. Carry Trades and Currency Crashes.
In: Acemoglu, D., Rogoff, K., Woodford, M. (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

Burnside, C., 2011. The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and consumption growth
risk: Comment. American Economic Review 101, 3456­3476.

Clarida, R., Gali, J., Gertler, M., 1998. Monetary policy rules in practice: Some international
evidence. European Economic Review 42, 1033­1067.


                                                32
Cochrane, J. H., 2005. Asset Pricing: Revised Edition. Princeton University, Princeton NJ.

Cochrane, J. H., 2017. Macro-finance. Review of Finance 21, 945­985.

Colacito, R., Croce, M., 2011. Risks for the long-run and the real exchange rate. Journal of Political
Economy 119, 153­181.

Colacito, R., Croce, M. M., Gavazzoni, F., Ready, R. C., 2018. Currency risk factors in a recursive
multi-country economy. Journal of Finance 73, 2719­2756.

Cooper, I., Priestley, R., 2009. Time-varying risk premiums and the output gap. Review of Finan-
cial Studies 22, 2801­2833.

Dahlquist, M., Hasseltoft, H., 2019. Economic momentum and currency returns. Journal of Fi-
nancial Economics forthcoming.

Della Corte, P., Ramadorai, T., Sarno, L., 2016a. Volatility risk premia and exchange rate pre-
dictability. Journal of Financial Economics 120, 21­40.

Della Corte, P., Riddiough, S. J., Sarno, L., 2016b. Currency premia and global imbalances.
Review of Financial Studies 29, 2161­2193.

Du, W., Tepper, A., Verdelhan, A., 2018. Deviations from covered interest rate parity. Journal of
Finance 73, 915­957.

Engel, C., Mark, N. C., West, K. D., 2007. Exchange rate models are not as bad as you think.
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 22, 381­441.

Epstein, L. G., Zin, S. E., 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of con-
sumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica 57, 937­69.

Fung, W., Hsieh, D. A., 2001. The risk in hedge fund strategies: Theory and evidence from trend
followers. Review of Financial Studies 14, 313­341.

Gabaix, X., Maggiori, M., 2015. International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 130, 1369­1420.

Gargano, A., Riddiough, S. J., Sarno, L., 2019. Foreign exchange volume. Working paper: The
University of Melbourne and Cass Business School.

Gilmore, S., Hayashi, F., 2011. Emerging market currency excess returns. American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 3, 85­111.

G´
 omez-Cram, R., 2018. Late to recessions: Stocks and the business cycle. Working paper: The
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Goyal, A., Jegadeesh, N., 2018. Cross-sectional and time-series tests of return predictability: What
is the difference? Review of Financial Studies 31, 1784­1824.


                                                 33
Goyal, A., Saretto, A., 2009. Cross-section of option returns and volatility. Journal of Financial
Economics 94, 310­326.

Hamilton, J. D., 2018. Why you should never use the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Review of Economics
and Statistics 100, 831­843.

Hansen, L. P., 1982. Large sample properties of generalized method of moments. Econometrica
50, 1029­1054.

Hansen, L. P., Jagannathan, R., 1997. Assessing specification errors in stochastic discount factor
models. Journal of Finance 52, 557­590.

Hansen, P., Richard, S. F., 1987. The role of conditioning information in deducing testable re-
strictions implied by dynamic asset pricing models. Econometrica 55, 587­613.

Hassan, T. A., 2013. Country size, currency unions, and international asset returns. Journal of
Finance 68, 2269­2308.

Hodrick, R. J., Prescott, E. C., 1980. Postwar U.S. business cycles: An empirical investigation.
Working Paper: Carnegie-Mellon University.

Hodrick, R. J., Prescott, E. C., 1997. Postwar U.S. business cycles: An empirical investigation.
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29, 1­16.

Jagannathan, R., Wang, Z., 1996. The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of expected re-
turns. Journal of Finance 51, 3­53.

Jord`    ` Taylor, A. M., 2012. The carry trade and fundamentals: Nothing to fear but FEER
      a, O.,
itself. Journal of International Economics 88, 74­90.

Kremens, L., Martin, I., 2019. The quanto theory of exchange rates. American Economic Review
109, 810­843.

Kydland, F. E., Prescott, E. C., 1990. Business cycles: Real facts and a monetary myth. Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 14, 3­18.

Lettau, M., Maggiori, M., Weber, M., 2014. Conditional risk premia in currency markets and
other asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics 114, 197­225.

Lewellen, J., Nagel, S., Shanken, J., 2010. A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing tests. Journal of
Financial Economics 96, 175­194.

Ludvigson, S. C., 2013. Advances in consumption-based asset pricing: Empirical tests. Handbook
of the Economics of Finance 2, 799­906.

Lustig, H., Richmond, R. J., 2019. Gravity in FX R2 : Understanding the factor structure in
exchange rates. Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.



                                                34
Lustig, H., Roussanov, N., Verdelhan, A., 2011. Common risk factors in currency markets. Review
of Financial Studies 24, 3731­3777.

Lustig, H., Roussanov, N., Verdelhan, A., 2014. Countercyclical currency risk premia. Journal of
Financial Economics 111, 527­553.

Lustig, H., Verdelhan, A., 2007. The cross-section of foreign currency risk premia and consumption
growth risk. American Economic Review 97, 89­117.

Maggiori, M., 2017. Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve currencies.
American Economic Review 107, 3038­3071.

Mark, N. C., 1995. Exchange rates and fundamentals: Evidence on long horizon predictability.
American Economic Review 85, 201­218.

Maurer, T., T^
             o, T.-D., Tran, N.-K., 2018. Optimal factor strategy in FX markets. Working paper:
Washington University in St. Louis and the University of New South Wales.

Maurer, T., To, T.-D., Tran, N.-K., 2019. Pricing risks across currency denominations. Manage-
ment Science forthcoming.

Meese, R. A., Rogoff, K., 1983. Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: Do they fit out
of sample? Journal of International Economics 14, 3­24.

Menkhoff, L., Sarno, L., Schmeling, M., Schrimpf, A., 2012a. Carry trades and global foreign
exchange volatility. Journal of Finance 67, 681­718.

Menkhoff, L., Sarno, L., Schmeling, M., Schrimpf, A., 2012b. Currency momentum strategies.
Journal of Financial Economics 106, 660­684.

Menkhoff, L., Sarno, L., Schmeling, M., Schrimpf, A., 2016. Information flows in foreign exchange
markets: Dissecting customer currency trades. Journal of Finance 71, 601­634.

Menkhoff, L., Sarno, L., Schmeling, M., Schrimpf, A., 2017. Currency value. Review of Financial
Studies 30, 416­441.

Molodtsova, T., Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, A., Papell, D. H., 2008. Taylor rules with real-time data: A
tale of two countries and one exchange rate. Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 167­180.

Moskowitz, T. J., Ooi, Y. H., Pedersen, L. H., 2012. Time-series momentum. Journal of Financial
Economics 104, 228­250.

Mueller, P., Stathopoulos, A., Vedolin, A., 2017. International correlation risk. Journal of Financial
Economics 126, 270­299.

Newey, W. K., West, K. D., 1987. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and auto-
correlation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703­708.



                                                 35
P´
 astor, L., Stambaugh, R. F., 2003. Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of Political
Economy 111, 642­685.

Priestly, M. B., 1981. Spectral Analysis and Time Series. Academic Press, London.

Ready, R., Roussanov, N., Ward, C., 2017. Commodity trade and the carry trade: A tale of two
countries. Journal of Finance 72, 2629­2684.

Ren, Y., Shimotsu, K., 2009. Improvement in finite sample properties of the Hansen-Jagannathan
distance test. Journal of Empirical Finance 16, 483­506.

Rogoff, K. S., Stavrakeva, V., 2008. The continuing puzzle of short horizon exchange rate fore-
casting. Working paper: Harvard University and London Business School.

Rossi, B., 2013. Exchange rate predictability. Journal of Economic Literature 51, 1063­1119.

Verdelhan, A., 2018. The share of systematic variation in bilateral exchange rates. Journal of
Finance 73, 375­418.




                                                36
     Table 1: Full Sample Business Cycle Currency Portfolios
     The table presents descriptive statistics for five currency portfolios sorted by output gaps. The output gap is estimated as (log)
     industrial production minus the (log) trend in industrial production. The trend is estimated in four ways using a (i) Hodrick-
     Prescott filter; (ii) Baxter-King filter, (iii) linear projection, and (iv) quadratic time trend. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly with
     strong (weak) economy currencies entering P5 (P1 ). We report summary statistics for the annualized excess mean return and its
     decomposition between the exchange rate (fx ) and interest rate (ir ) components. We also report the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe ), standard
     deviation (std ), skewness (skew ), kurtosis (kurt ), maximum drawdown (mdd ), average turnover (t/o ), average forward premium (fp ),
     and average output gap (gap ) for each portfolio. The Cross Section portfolio is long P5 and short P1 . The Time Series portfolio
     takes a 1/N position in currencies, going long (short) currencies issued by countries with an output gap above (below) the US output
     gap. The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the Cross Section and Time Series portfolios at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level
     using Newey and West (1987) standard errors. The sample is from October 1983 to January 2016.


                            Hodrick-Prescott   Filter         Cross     Time                 Baxter-King Filter             Cross     Time
                     P1       P2      P3        P4    P5     Section   Series         P1      P2     P3     P4      P5     Section   Series
       mean (%)     -0.25     0.96   2.77      4.00   6.41   6.66***   2.45***      -0.44     2.45  2.39   3.72     5.97   6.41***   3.83***
           fx (%)   -2.34    -1.03 0.88        1.58 2.72       5.06      2.03       -2.34    0.65   0.49 1.23      1.92      4.26      3.38
           ir (%)   2.09     1.99    1.89      2.41 3.69       1.60      0.41        1.90    1.80   1.90 2.49      4.06      2.15      0.44
37




       Sharpe       -0.02     0.11   0.27      0.43   0.71     0.82      0.54       -0.04     0.26  0.26   0.39     0.68     0.77      0.74
       std          10.18     9.09 10.12        9.32  9.05     8.14      4.57       10.15     9.50  9.33   9.51     8.82     8.31      5.21
       skew         -0.06    -0.47 -0.28       -0.27 -0.28     0.01     -0.92       -0.08    0.06 -0.21 -0.29      -0.61     0.07     -0.39
       kurt          4.49     4.72   4.75       4.39  3.97     4.32     10.89        3.94     3.83  4.32   4.22     5.00     4.25      5.70
       mdd (%)       42.5     34.2   23.9       23.6  24.4      9.0       8.6        49.0     28.8  26.1   24.6     21.8     23.0       9.2
       t/o (%)       44.8     58.2   67.2       60.6  44.8                           10.0     21.8  29.8   23.1     11.6
       fp (t, %)     2.23     2.03   1.80       2.45  4.15                           1.91     1.87  1.75   2.38     4.81
       gap (t, %)   -3.08    -0.96   0.11       1.17  3.01                          -2.75    -0.84 0.18    1.30     3.01


                               Linear Projection              Cross     Time                Quadratic Time   Trend          Cross    Time
                     P1       P2       P3      P4     P5     Section   Series         P1       P2     P3      P4    P5     Section   Series
       mean (%)      0.46     2.85    2.23    3.18   5.41    4.95***   3.72***       0.27     1.99   3.08     4.21  4.83   4.56***   2.14**
           fx (%)   -2.25    0.93     0.27    1.13   1.95      4.20      3.36       -1.04    -0.16 0.02      1.54 1.75       2.80     1.95
           ir (%)   2.71     1.92     1.96    2.05   3.46      0.74      0.37        1.31     2.15   3.06    2.67 3.08       1.76     0.19
       Sharpe        0.05     0.32    0.23    0.33   0.56      0.66      0.72        0.03     0.21   0.32     0.49  0.51     0.60      0.41
       std           9.80     8.91    9.59    9.65   9.63      7.47      5.18       10.05     9.58   9.76     8.66  9.53     7.56      5.27
       skew         -0.24    -0.24 -0.50 -0.07       -0.54    -0.34     -1.23       -0.23    -0.21 -0.07     -0.51 -0.15    -0.68     -1.24
       kurt          4.66     5.21    4.79    3.58   5.44      5.13     10.94        4.23     4.58   4.29     4.50  5.02     6.29     10.93
       mdd (%)       40.4     28.4    31.8    29.4   19.1      35.3      11.6        38.9     28.5   31.1     24.8  21.5     18.3      16.5
       t/o (%)       26.0     43.8    52.7    44.5   26.4                            20.0     32.9   44.3     33.8  19.7
       fp (t, %)     2.68     2.01    1.90    2.17   3.97                            1.17     2.04   3.15     2.87  3.35
       gap (t, %)   -1.33    -0.30    0.31    0.90   1.98                           -8.41    -3.35 -0.22      2.59  7.78
     Table 2: Principal Component Decomposition of Business Cycle Portfolios
     The table presents results from a principal component decomposition of the returns to five currency portfolios sorted by output gaps.
     The output gap is estimated as (log) industrial production minus the (log) trend in industrial production. The trend is estimated in
     four ways using a (i) Hodrick-Prescott filter; (ii) Baxter-King filter, (iii) linear projection, and (iv) quadratic time trend. Portfolios
     are rebalanced monthly with strong (weak) economy currencies entering P5 (P1 ). We report the loading of each portfolio on all five
     principal components (PCs ) and the percentage of total return variation explained by each PC. The sample is from October 1983 to
     January 2016.


                                             Hodrick-Prescott Filter                                    Baxter-King Filter
                                      PC1     PC2 PC3 PC4              PC5                     PC1     PC2 PC3 PC4           PC5
                                P1    0.47    -0.71 0.46 -0.08         -0.23             P1    0.48    -0.51 0.69     0.11   -0.16
                                P2    0.43    -0.19 -0.33 0.00          0.82             P2    0.46    -0.18 -0.24 -0.26      0.79
38




                                P3    0.49     0.18 -0.25 0.75         -0.32             P3    0.45    -0.18 -0.52 -0.39     -0.59
                                P4    0.44     0.19 -0.47 -0.64        -0.38             P4    0.46     0.25 -0.27 0.81      -0.02
                                P5    0.40     0.63   0.63 -0.11        0.19             P5    0.38     0.78   0.36 -0.34    -0.05

                      var explained   78%      8%      5%     5%       4%      var explained   79%      7%     6%     4%     4%

                                                Linear Projection                                     Quadratic Time Trend
                                      PC1     PC2 PC3 PC4              PC5                     PC1     PC2 PC3 PC4           PC5
                                P1    0.45    -0.85 0.00      0.04     -0.26             P1    0.48    -0.08 0.70 -0.34      -0.40
                                P2    0.42    -0.03 -0.39 -0.15         0.80             P2    0.47    -0.10 0.24    0.21     0.82
                                P3    0.45     0.40 -0.57 -0.19        -0.53             P3    0.45    -0.52 -0.60 -0.40     -0.04
                                P4    0.46     0.27   0.25    0.81      0.04             P4    0.40    -0.10 -0.13 0.80      -0.41
                                P5    0.45     0.21   0.68 -0.53        0.00             P5    0.43     0.84 -0.29 -0.17     -0.02

                      var explained   78%      7%      6%     5%       4%      var explained   78%      7%     6%     5%     4%
     Table 3: Taylor-rule Currency Portfolios
     The table presents descriptive statistics for five currency portfolios sorted by their Taylor-rule implied interest rate. The Taylor rule
     is calibrated to equal 1.5t + 0.5yt , where t is inflation and yt is the in-sample output gap calculated using a Hodrick-Prescott filter.
     Portfolios are rebalanced monthly with high (low) implied interest rate currencies entering P5 (P1 ). We report summary statistics for
     the annualized excess mean return and its decomposition between the exchange rate (fx ) and interest rate (ir ) components. We also
     report the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe ), standard deviation (std ), skewness (skew ), kurtosis (kurt ), maximum drawdown (mdd ), average
     turnover (t/o ), average forward premium (fp ), and average output gap (gap ) for each portfolio. The Cross Section portfolio is long
     P5 and short P1 . The Time Series portfolio takes a 1/N position in currencies, going long (short) currencies issued by countries
     with a Taylor-rule implied interest rate above (below) the US Taylor-rule implied interest rate. The superscripts *, **, *** represent
     significance of the Cross Section and Time Series portfolios at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level using Newey and West (1987) standard
     errors. We also report the correlation of the Cross Section and Time Series portfolios with the equivalent portfolios sorted on
     Hodrick-Prescott filtered output gaps (GAP ), and interest rates (HM LF X ). The sample is from October 1983 to January 2016.
39




                                                                 Taylor Rule                Cross     Time
                                                     P1      P2      P3      P4     P5     Section   Series
                                       mean (%)     -1.52    1.19   4.25    2.68    7.45   8.97***   2.75***
                                           fx (%)   -0.56   1.07 2.74 0.16         -1.67    -1.11      0.32
                                           ir (%)   -0.96   0.12 1.51 2.52         9.12     10.08      2.43
                                       Sharpe       -0.16    0.12   0.45    0.28    0.75     0.90      0.65
                                       std           9.59   9.79    9.36    9.45    9.92     9.92      4.25
                                       skew          0.16   -0.10 -0.33 -0.42      -0.55    -0.42     -1.04
                                       kurt          4.05   3.88    4.79    4.35    4.57     4.85      9.99
                                       mdd (%)       61.3   34.7    25.2    28.8    20.6     13.8      11.2
                                       t/o (%)       24.9   40.9    43.5    33.2    12.9
                                       fp (t, %)    -0.85    0.19   1.37    2.50    9.87
                                       gap (t, %)   -1.59   -0.18 0.36      0.50    1.11
                                       GAP                                                  0.25      0.36
                                       HM LF X                                              0.84      0.51
     Table 4: Real-Time Business Cycle Currency Portfolios
     The table presents investment performance for output-gap-based currency trading strategies. The output gap is estimated using
     monthly `vintages' of real-time industrial production data from the OECD's Real-Time Data and Revisions Database. To estimate the
     output-gap we follow the linear projection procedure in Hamilton (2018) by running the regression, yi,t = i + 11     s=0 i,s yi,t-24-s + i,t
     each month, in which y is (log) industrial production. The output gap is constructed as the difference between the most recently
     available data point at time t (yt ) and the fitted value from the regression. GAPCS is a high-minus-low portfolio formed as P5 - P1 ,
     after sorting currencies into five portfolios ranging from the lowest (P1 ) to the highest (P5 ) output gap. LIN and RN K take a position
     in all currencies with the weight determined by either the magnitude or relative size of the output gap. GAPT S is a 1/N time-series
     strategy long (short) currencies issued by countries with an output gap above (below) the US output gap. The three COM portfolios
     take 50-50 weights in GAPT S and the GAPCS , LIN , and RN K strategies. We report summary statistics for the annualized mean,
     which is then further split between the exchange rate (fx ) and interest rate (ir ) components, we also report the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe ),
     skewness (skew ), kurtosis (kurt ), and maximum drawdown (mdd ). The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the strategies'
     mean excess returns at the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors. The sample
     runs from December 1999 to January 2016.


                                         Panel A: Investment Performance Excluding Bid-Ask Spreads
40




                                          GAPCS      LIN       RNK      GAPTS      COMGAP       COMLIN       COMRNK
                             mean (%)     4.92***   2.16***   3.88***    2.76**     3.82***      2.45***      3.30***
                                fx (%)      4.21      1.74      3.38       2.83       3.50         2.26         3.08
                                ir (%)      0.71      0.42      0.49      -0.07       0.33         0.19         0.22
                             Sharpe         0.72      0.74      0.72       0.65       0.82         0.82         0.82
                             skew           0.31      0.34      0.25      -0.70      -0.01        -0.46        -0.23
                             kurt           2.83      3.23      3.24       5.17       3.02         3.49         3.25
                             mdd (%)        6.88      2.91      5.40       4.27       4.66         2.97         4.03


                                         Panel B: Investment Performance Including Bid-Ask Spreads
                                          GAPCS       LIN      RNK      GAPTS      COMGAP       COMLIN       COMRNK
                             mean (%)      3.46**    1.45**    2.50**    2.14*      2.79**       1.78**       2.31**
                                fx (%)      3.10      1.19      2.34      2.37       2.71         1.76          2.33
                                ir (%)      0.36      0.25      0.15     -0.22       0.08          0.03        -0.02
                             Sharpe         0.50      0.50      0.46      0.50        0.60        0.60          0.57
                             skew           0.31      0.33      0.24     -0.70       -0.01        -0.46        -0.24
                             kurt           2.81      3.20      3.22      5.19        3.01        3.50          3.26
                             mdd (%)        6.86      2.91      5.39      4.27        4.66        2.97          4.03
     Table 5: Correlations Between Trading Strategies
     The table presents linear correlation coefficients between trading strategies. In Panel A, we report correlations between output gap
     currency trading strategies. The output gap is estimated using monthly `vintages' of real-time industrial production data from the
     OECD's Real-Time Data and Revisions Database. To estimate the output-gap we follow the linear projection procedure in Hamilton
     (2018) by running the regression, yi,t = i + 11    s=0 i,s yi,t-24-s + i,t each month, in which y is (log) industrial production. The
     output gap is constructed as the difference between the most recently available data point at time t (yt ) and the fitted value from
     the regression. GAPCS is a high-minus-low portfolio formed as P5 - P1 , after sorting currencies into five portfolios ranging from the
     lowest (P1 ) to the highest (P5 ) output gap. LIN and RN K take a position in all currencies with the weight determined by either the
     magnitude or relative size of the output gap. GAPT S is a 1/N time-series strategy long (short) currencies issued by countries with an
     output gap above (below) the US output gap. The three COM portfolios take 50-50 weights in the GAPT S and the GAPCS , LIN ,
     and RN K strategies. In Panel B, we present correlations between the output gap currency trading strategies and various currency
     and equity-based strategies. The sample runs from December 1999 to January 2016.


                                            Panel A: Output Gap Currency Trading Strategies
                                                     GAPCS     LIN     RNK     GAPTS     COMGAP      COMLIN      COMRNK
                   High-Minus-Low GAPCS
41




                   Linear Weights (LIN)                0.86
                   Rank Weights (RNK)                  0.88    0.93
                   GAPT S                              0.36    0.34    0.38
                   GAP Model Combo (COMGAP )           0.90    0.79    0.83     0.73
                   LIN Model Combo (COMLIN )           0.68    0.74    0.73     0.89        0.91
                   RNK Model Combo (COMRNK )           0.78    0.81    0.87     0.79        0.94        0.96

                        Panel B: Alternative Trading Strategies in Currency, Equity, and Interest Rate Markets
                                                     GAPCS     LIN     RNK     GAPTS     COMGAP      COMLIN      COMRNK
                   HM Lf x                            0.06      0.07    0.02     0.02       0.06       0.05        0.03
                   Dollar                             0.24      0.21    0.22     0.23       0.28       0.27        0.27
                   Dollar Carry                       0.23      0.21    0.22     0.23       0.28       0.27        0.27
                   V alue                             0.15      0.03    0.13     0.04       0.13       0.05        0.11
                   M omentum                          0.07      0.15    0.08    -0.06       0.02       0.03        0.02
                   Global Imbalance                   0.13      0.12    0.10     0.23       0.20       0.22        0.18
                   Foreign Exchange Trend Strategy    0.08      0.08    0.08     0.07       0.09       0.09        0.09
                   Interest Rate Trend Strategy       0.07      0.12    0.13    -0.22      -0.05      -0.10       -0.03
                   Illiquidity                        0.08      0.12    0.04     0.21       0.15       0.21        0.14
                   US Equity                          0.00     -0.04   -0.01    0.10       0.05        0.06        0.05
     Table 6: Diversification Benefits from the GAPCS Trading Strategy
     The table presents the investment performance of common currency trading strategies and the impact on performance from adding
     the GAPCS strategy. The output gap is estimated using monthly `vintages' of real-time industrial production data from the OECD's
     Real-Time Data and Revisions Database. To estimate the output gap we follow the linear projection procedure in Hamilton (2018)
     by running the regression, yi,t = i + 11 s=0 i,s yi,t-24-s + i,t each month, in which y is (log) industrial production. The output gap
     is constructed as the difference between the most recently available data point at time t (yt ) and the fitted value from the regression.
     GAPCS is a high-minus-low portfolio formed as P5 - P1 , after sorting currencies into five portfolios ranging from the lowest (P1 ) to
     the highest (P5 ) output gap. In Panel A, we report the investment performance of popular currency investment strategies, in which
     HM LF X is the currency carry trade; DCAR is the "dollar carry" trade; M OM is a momentum trade; V AL is a value trade and
     EW is a 1/N portfolio that takes an equal position in each currency strategy. In Panel B, we add the GAPCS strategy. We report
     summary statistics for the annualized excess mean return, the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe ), standard deviation (std ), skewness (skew ),
     kurtosis (kurt ), maximum drawdown, percentage increase in Sharpe ratio (% Sharpe), and weight in the GAPCS portfolio (wGAP ).
     The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the strategies' mean excess returns at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence levels
     using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors. The sample runs from December 1999 to January 2016.


                                                  Panel A: Excluding the GAPCS Strategy
                                                    HMLFX        DCAR        MOM           VAL         EW
42




                                      mean (%)       6.34**       2.60        1.41         0.05      2.60***
                                      Sharpe          0.58        0.31        0.16         0.01        0.74
                                      std            10.91        8.51        9.01         8.65        3.53
                                      skew            -0.72       -0.49       0.28         0.47       -0.24
                                      kurt            5.23        4.78        3.31         4.42        4.13
                                      mdd (%)         0.16        0.17        0.23         0.39        0.07

                                                   Panel B: Including the GAPCS Strategy
                                                   GAPCS +     GAPCS +      GAPCS +     GAPCS +
                                                   HMLFX        DCAR         MOM         VAL           EW
                                      mean (%)      5.61***     3.74***      3.15**      2.47*       3.06***
                                      Sharpe          0.85        0.62        0.54        0.42         0.87
                                      std             6.64        6.07        5.87        5.93         3.53
                                      skew           -0.11       -0.30        0.34        0.54         0.12
                                      kurt            4.38        3.91        3.57        5.10         4.20
                                      mdd (%)         0.07        0.09        0.08        0.19         0.06

                                      % Sharpe        45.6        102          243         7625       17.7
                                      wGAP (%)        50.0        50.0         50.0        50.0       20.0
     Table 7: Pricing Business Cycle Portfolios
     The table presents cross-sectional asset pricing results. We construct various two-factor linear SDF's that include the DOL factor plus
     a second pricing factor, including `slope' risk (HM LF X ), global imbalance risk (IM B ), volatility risk (V OL), and the GAPCS factor.
     In each model, we price five currency portfolios sorted on output gaps using real-time information. We report Generalized Method of
     Moments (GMM) one-step estimates of factor loadings on the pricing kernel (b's ) and prices of factor risk ('s ). The superscripts *,
     **, *** represent significance of the coefficients at the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected
     standard errors (reported in parentheses). We also report goodness-of-fit statistics for each model including the adjusted R2 statistic,
     Root Mean Squared Pricing Error (RM SE ), and the Hansen-Jagannathan distance statistic (HJdist ) with simulated p-values in
     brackets. The HJdist statistic measures the distance between the estimated pricing kernel and the efficient set of permissible pricing
     kernels. A p-value less than 5% indicates the null hypothesis that the pricing kernel is efficient can be rejected at the 95% confidence
     level. We provide full details of the pricing factors in Section 5. The sample runs from December 1999 to January 2016.
43




                                                        SDF                Risk
                                                     Loadings (b)        Prices ()                Model Fit
                                                                                                  2
                                                    DOL       FAC      DOL       FAC      Adj.R       RMSE    HJdist
                                  DOL + HMLFX        0.22     0.19      0.02     0.03     -0.78       1.69     0.22
                                                    (0.26)   (0.72)    (0.02)   (0.10)                        [0.03]
                                  DOL + IMB          -1.39    7.52     0.04*    0.26**    -0.15       1.59     0.19
                                                    (1.43)   (5.78)    (0.02)   (0.12)                        [0.61]
                                  DOL + VOL          -3.21    -40.5     0.03    -0.03**   -0.19       1.51     0.21
                                                    (2.86)   (31.6)    (0.02)    (0.02)                       [0.46]
                                  DOL + GAPCS        0.08    0.83***    0.02    0.05***    0.44       0.95     0.13
                                                    (0.26)    (0.29)   (0.02)    (0.02)                       [0.34]
        Table 8: Asset Pricing using DOL, HMLFX , and GAPCS as Pricing Factors
        The table presents cross-sectional asset pricing results for two sets of test portfolios. The SDF is constructed as a linear combination
        of DOL and HM LF X (2 pricing factors, left-side) and DOL, HM LF X , and GAPCS (3 pricing factors, right-side). In Panel B, we
        also include HM LF X and GAPCS as test assets. We report Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) one-step estimates of factor
        loadings on the pricing kernel (b's ) and prices of factor risk ('s ). The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the coefficients
        at the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors (reported in parentheses). In
        addition, we report goodness-of-fit statistics for each model including the adjusted R2 statistic, Root Mean Squared Pricing Error
        (RM SE ), and the Hansen-Jagannathan distance statistic (HJdist ) with simulated p-values in brackets. The HJdist statistic measures
        the distance between the estimated pricing kernel and the efficient set of permissible pricing kernels. A p-value less than 5% indicates
        the null hypothesis that the pricing kernel is efficient can be rejected at the 95% confidence level. The sample runs from December
        1999 to January 2016.


                                                       Panel A: Excluding Pricing Factors as Test Portfolios
                              2 Pricing Factors (DOL + HMLFX )                                         3 Pricing Factors (DOL + HMLFX + GAPCS )
                   Loadings (b)     Risk Prices ()           Model Fit                       Loadings (b)            Risk Prices ()                 Model Fit
                  DOL HMLFX         DOL HMLFX          Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist            DOL      HMLFX GAPCS         DOL HMLFX GAPCS             Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist
44




       10 TPs      0.19     0.08     0.02     0.01      -0.35    1.32      0.22      -0.31     0.43     2.57**     0.02     0.07    0.14***    0.59     0.67    0.16
     (val, mom)   (0.26)   (0.32)   (0.02)   (0.04)                       [0.81]    (0.36)    (0.41)    (1.01)    (0.02)   (0.05)    (0.05)                    [0.96]
      20 TPs       0.18     0.36     0.02    0.05*      0.26     1.36      0.33      -0.02     0.35     1.05***    0.02    0.06*    0.06***    0.62     0.94    0.30
     (gap, car,   (0.27)   (0.22)   (0.02)   (0.03)                       [0.99]    (0.28)    (0.22)     (0.32)   (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.02)                    [0.99]
     val, mom)

                                                       Panel B: Including Pricing Factors as Test Portfolios
                              2 Pricing Factors (DOL + HMLFX )                                         3 Pricing Factors (DOL + HMLFX + GAPCS )
                   Loadings (b)     Risk Prices ()           Model Fit                       Loadings (b)            Risk Prices ()                 Model Fit
                  DOL HMLFX         DOL HMLFX          Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist            DOL      HMLFX GAPCS         DOL HMLFX GAPCS             Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist
       10 TPs      0.16    0.41*     0.02    0.06**     0.31     1.37      0.23      -0.02    0.40*     0.97***    0.02    0.06**   0.06***    0.65     0.96    0.19
     (val, mom)   (0.28)   (0.22)   (0.02)   (0.03)                       [0.80]    (0.28)    (0.21)     (0.30)   (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.02)                    [0.91]
      20 TPs       0.17    0.41*     0.02    0.06**     0.46     1.34      0.69      0.00     0.40*     0.91***    0.02    0.06**   0.05***    0.74     0.92    0.69
     (gap, car,   (0.28)   (0.22)   (0.02)   (0.03)                       [0.91]    (0.28)    (0.21)     (0.30)   (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.02)                    [0.98]
     val, mom)
     Table 9: Conditional Asset Pricing
     The table presents results from conditional asset pricing tests. In Panel A, we present annualized two-step instrumental variable
     (IV) alphas following the procedure of Boguth et al. (2011) on five output gap sorted portfolios and the GAPCS factor. The
     contemporaneous exposure of the portfolios to the pricing factors (i.e. betas) are initially estimated over either 12, 18, 24, 30, or 36
     months. The instruments used to predict betas include the lagged beta, global foreign exchange volatility, the Commodity Research
     Bureau's industrial metals index, the Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spread, and the average forward discount. The superscripts *, **,
     *** represent significance of the alphas at the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard
     errors. We also report the 2 test statistic and associated p-value in square brackets, for the test that alphas are jointly equal to zero.
     A p-value less than 5% indicates the null hypothesis that the alphas are jointly equal to zero can be rejected at the 95% confidence
     level. In Panel B, we report the 2 test statistic and associated p-value in square brackets for the equivalent test when pricing 20
     currency portfolios, which include portfolios sorted according to output gaps (x5), forward premia (x5), currency momentum (x5),
     and currency value (x5). The sample runs from December 1999 to January 2016.


                                                                    Panel A: GAP Portfolios
45




                             2 Pricing Factors                                2 Pricing Factors                               3 Pricing Factors
                              (DOL + HMLFX )                                   (DOL + GAPCS )                             (DOL + HMLFX + GAPCS )
      Months       12       18       24      30            36       12       18        24     30            36        12     18        24     30   36
      P1         -0.89     -1.27    -1.13   -1.16        -0.95     0.58     0.33     0.42    0.59         0.71      0.62    0.25      0.03   0.13 0.34
      P2         -0.85     -0.58    -0.40   -0.49        -0.87    -0.78     -0.40    -0.29  -0.41         -0.66     -1.14   -0.69    -0.50  -0.46 -0.69
      P3         -0.91     -0.76    -0.38   -0.83        -0.76    -0.83     -0.84    -0.77  -1.03         -0.89     -0.82   -0.94    -0.54  -0.89 -0.67
      P4          1.54    1.78*    1.87*   1.88*          1.53     0.37     0.93     0.85    0.98          0.66      1.11   1.19      1.31   1.57 1.19
      P5        2.18**    2.05** 1.62** 1.85**          1.97**     0.58     0.33      0.42   0.59          0.71      0.62   0.25      0.03   0.13 0.34
      GAPCS     2.96**    3.18**   2.74*   3.00**       3.12**     0.00     0.00      0.00   0.00          0.00      0.00   0.00      0.00   0.00 0.00

      2          14.46     14.50     15.79     13.62     12.65     1.45      2.02      6.25      9.29      5.55      3.25       1.64      2.35      3.70      3.26
                [0.025]   [0.025]   [0.015]   [0.034]   [0.049]   [0.963]   [0.918]   [0.396]   [0.158]   [0.475]   [0.776]   [0.950]   [0.885]   [0.717]   [0.775]


                                                                     Panel B: All Portfolios
                             2 Pricing Factors                                 2 Pricing Factors                               3 Pricing Factors
                              (DOL + HMLFX )                                    (DOL + GAPCS )                             (DOL + HMLFX + GAPCS )
      Months      12        18       24     30            36        12        18       24     30            36        12      18       24     30      36
      2          31.29     30.70   44.86   36.95         33.53     23.35     17.91   24.49   27.96         19.37     25.06   16.49   17.85   17.09   17.20
                [0.051]   [0.059] [0.001] [0.012]       [0.029]   [0.272]   [0.593] [0.222] [0.110]       [0.498]   [0.199] [0.686] [0.597] [0.647] [0.640]
   INTERNET APPENDIX
Business Cycles and Currency Returns


        NOT FOR PUBLICATION




                 1
Estimating the Output Gap In-Sample
Hodrick-Prescott Filter
The Hodrick-Prescott filter minimizes the following expression to produce a new time series of
               tr
trend output, yi,t
                              T                       T -1
                                            tr 2                gr        gr        tr     tr      2
                                   (yi,t - yi,t ) +          [(yi,t +1 - yi,t ) - (yi,t - yi,t-1 )]              (19)
                             t=1                      t=2

where yi,t is the logarithm of industrial production at time t for country i,  is a weighing factor
to control the smoothness of the trend line. The lower the value of , the more the resulting
trend will resemble the raw data series. We follow the suggestion of Hodrick and Prescott (1980)
and Kydland and Prescott (1990) and set  = 1600 to smooth quarterly data and  = 14400 to
smooth monthly data. The output gap (cyclical component) is then constructed as the difference
                                                                           tr
between yi,t and the trend series extracted from the filter ci,t = yi,t - yi,t .

Baxter-King Filter
The Baxter-King filter removes both low and high frequency components from a time series.
Specifically it involves the estimation of the moving average model
                                                               K
                                                 y
                                                 ^i,t =             Bn xt-n
                                                             n=-K

The values Bn can be estimated using an inverse Fourier transform such that they minimize the
mean squared error between yt and y^t (see Priestly, 1981). We follow the suggestion of Baxter and
King (1999) and set K=12 for quarterly data and K=36 for monthly data. We also set standard
upper and lower limits for the cutoff frequency of 6 and 32 quarters for quarterly data and 8 and
96 months for monthly data.

Linear Projection
We follow the linear projection method proposed by Hamilton (2018) and project (log) industrial
production at time t on 12-lags of industrial production beginning 24-months earlier1
                                                          11
                                          yi,t = i +            i,s yi,t-24-s + i,t
                                                        s=0

The output gap (cyclical component) is then constructed as the difference between yi,t and the
fitted value from the above regression ci,t = yi,t - y
                                                     ^i,t .




   1
       For quarterly industrial production time series we project onto four lags beginning eight-quarters earlier.

                                                                2
Quadratic Time Trend
The quadratic time trend projects the logarithm of industrial production on a time trend t and
quadratic time trend t2

                                    yi,t = i + i,1 t + i,2 t2 + i,t
The output gap (cyclical component) is then constructed as the difference between yi,t and the
fitted value from the above regression ci,t = yi,t - y
                                                     ^i,t .


Alternative Currency Portfolios, Factors, and Strategies
Carry Trade Portfolios. At the end of each month t, we allocate currencies to five portfolios on
the basis of their forward discounts (or interest rate differential relative to the US). This exercise
implies that currencies with the lowest forward discounts (or lowest interest rate differential relative
to the US) are assigned to Portfolio 1, whereas currencies with the highest forward discounts (or
highest interest rate differential relative to the US) are assigned to Portfolio 5. We compute the
excess return for each portfolio as an equally weighted average of the currency excess returns
within that portfolio. The strategy that is long Portfolio 5 and short Portfolio 1 is referred to as
HM LF X .

Currency Momentum Portfolios. At the end of each month t, we form five portfolios based
on exchange rate returns over the previous month. We assign the 20% of all currencies with the
lowest lagged exchange rate returns to Portfolio 1 and the 20% of all currencies with the highest
lagged exchange rate returns to Portfolio 5. We then compute the excess return for each portfolio
as an equally weighted average of the currency excess returns within that portfolio. A strategy
long in Portfolio 5 (winner currencies ) and short in Portfolio 1 (loser currencies ) is denoted as
M OM .

Value Portfolios. At the end of each month t, we form five portfolios based on the lagged
five-year real exchange rate return as in Asness et al. (2013). This measure of currency value
is based on calculating the deviation from relative purchasing power parity. Specifically, relative
inflation over a 5-year window vis-`
                                   a-vis the US is compared with the foreign exchange (FX) rate
appreciation over the same period versus the US dollar. To provide a more stable measure of the
FX rate appreciation, Asness et al. (2013) calculate the appreciation as today's FX rate minus
the average FX rate observed 4.5 to 5.5 years earlier. If inflation growth in the foreign economy
outpaced that in the US but the US dollar did not appreciate against the foreign currency by an
offsetting amount, then the foreign currency is considered `overvalued'.
    To construct currency value portfolios, we collect monthly data on consumer price indices
from the IMF's International Financial Statistics database beginning in October 1978 and also
collect additional FX spot rate data from Global Financial Data beginning in April 1978, such
that the first currency value signals are obtained in October 1983. We assign the 20% of all
currencies with the highest lagged real exchange rate return to Portfolio 1 and the 20% of all
currencies with the lowest lagged real exchange rate return to Portfolio 5. We compute the excess

                                                   3
return for each portfolio as an equally weighted average of the currency excess returns within
that portfolio. A strategy long in Portfolio 5 (undervalued currencies ) and short in Portfolio 1
(overvalued currencies ) is denoted as V AL.

Other Factors and Portfolios. In addition to the portfolios described above, we also compare
the properties of the output-gap portfolios against other popular strategies and factors in the
literature. These include: (i) the Dollar factor, proposed by Lustig et al. (2011), which is essen-
tially a market factor in currency space, equal to the average return of a large basket of foreign
currencies against the US dollar; (ii) the Dollar Carry strategy as proposed by Lustig et al.
(2014), which conditions the Dollar factor on the average forward premia of currencies against the
US and thus goes long (short) the US dollar whenever interest rates are relatively high (low) in
the US; (iii) the Global Imbalance factor of Della Corte et al. (2016b), which is a factor that
compensates investors for financing risky economies with large stocks of liabilities that issue the
majority of those in foreign currency; (iv) the Trend-Following risk factors proposed by Fung
and Hsieh (2001), which reflect the option-like returns typically generated by hedge funds (we use
the FX and interest-rate trend-following returns); (v) the P´astor and Stambaugh (2003) measure
of Aggregate Market Liquidity, and (vi) the Market Risk Premium collected from Kenneth
French's website.2


Asset Pricing Tests
We provide further details on the asset pricing methods used in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 of the paper to
evaluate whether the relationship between currency returns and business cycles can be understood
from a risk-return perspective.
   We denote the discrete excess returns on portfolio j in period t as RXtj , for j = 1, ..., N and
t = 1, ..., T ; and let RXt be a N -dimensional vector of test asset excess returns. In the absence of
arbitrage opportunities, risk-adjusted excess returns have a price of zero and satisfy the following
Euler equation:

                                            Et [Mt+1 RXtj+1 ] = 0                                          (20)
with an SDF linear in k pricing factors ft+1 , given by

                                          Mt+1 = 1 - b (ft+1 - µ)                                          (21)
where b is the vector of factor loadings, and µ denotes the factor means. Equation (21) is referred
to as an unconditional asset pricing model because the SDF factor loadings in b are assumed to be
time-invariant. The vast majority of papers in the currency asset pricing literature, starting from
Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), focus on Equation (21). However, in a more general setting the Euler

   2
     The hedge fund risk factors returns are available on David A. Hsieh's website at http://faculty.fuqua.duke.
edu/~dah7/DataLibrary/TF-FAC.xls. We collect liquidity data from Lubos Pastor's website at http://faculty.
chicagobooth.edu/lubos.pastor/research/ and market data from Kenneth French's website at http://mba.
tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html. We thank each author for making their
data publicly available.

                                                       4
equation (20) implies SDF parameters that are time-varying, which means the covariance between
excess returns and the SDF is conditional (Hansen and Richard, 1987; Boguth et al., 2011). If this
is the case, for example, it could be that excess returns from high output gap currencies (strong
economies) are more risky in bad times, in which case the unconditional version of the model with
constant b is mispecified. We analyze this more general case of conditional asset pricing tests in
Section 5.3 of the paper.
    The SDF specification (21) implies a beta pricing model in which the expected excess return
on portfolio j is equal to the factor risk price  times the risk quantities  j . The beta pricing
model is defined as

                                                  E [RX j ] =   j                                 (22)
where the market price of risk  = f b can be obtained via the factor loadings b. f =
E (ft - µ) (ft - µ) is the variance-covariance matrix of the risk factors, and  j are the regression
coefficients of each portfolio's excess return RXtj+1 on the risk factors ft+1 .
    We estimate the SDF parameters, including estimates of factor loadings b and the market
prices of risk , via the Generalized Method of Moments (GM M ) of Hansen (1982). To implement
GM M , we use the pricing errors as a set of moments and the identity weighting matrix. Since
the objective is to test whether the model can explain the cross section of expected currency
excess returns, we only rely on unconditional moments and do not employ instruments. With an
identity matrix, GM M attempts to price all currency portfolios equally well. Factor means and
the individual elements of the covariance matrix of risk factors f are estimated simultaneously
with the SDF parameters by adding the corresponding moment conditions to the asset pricing
moment conditions implied by the Euler condition (20). This one-step approach ensures that we
adequately incorporate estimation uncertainty associated with the fact that factor means and the
factor covariance matrix need to be estimated (see, for example, Burnside, 2011).
    Formally, the Euler equation (20) implies the following moment conditions for the N -dimensional
vector of test asset excess returns RXt+1

                                       E {[1 - b (ft+1 - µ)] RXt+1 } = 0.                         (23)
    In addition to these N moment restrictions, our set of GM M moment conditions also includes
k moment conditions E [ft - µ] = 0 accounting for the fact that factor means µ have to be
estimated.3 Factor risk prices  can be easily obtained from our GMM estimates via the relation
 = f b, where f = E [(ft - µ)(ft - µ) ] is the factor covariance matrix. Following Burnside
(2011), the covariance matrix f is estimated along with the other model parameters by including
an additional set of corresponding moment conditions. Hence, the estimating function takes the
following form
                                                                        
                                             [1 - b (ft - µ)] RXt
                          g (zt , ) =                ft - µ                                (24)
                                       vec((ft - µ)(ft - µ) ) - vec(f )


   3
       This applies because the risk factors considered here are not mean zero by construction.

                                                          5
where  contains the parameters (b , µ , vec(f ) ) ) and zt represents the data (RXt , ft ). By ex-
ploiting the moment conditions E [g (zt , )] = 0 defined by (24), estimation uncertainty ­ due to the
fact that factor means and the covariance matrix of factors have to be estimated ­ is incorporated
in the standard errors of factor risk prices. The one-step GM M estimation uses a pre-specified
weighting matrix WT based on the identity matrix IN for the first N asset pricing moment condi-
tions and a large weight assigned to the additional moment conditions (for precise estimation of
factor means and the factor covariance matrix). Standard errors are computed based on a HAC
estimate of the long-run covariance matrix S =         j =- E [g (zt ,  )g (zt-j ,  ) ] by the Newey and
West (1987) procedure with the number of lags in the Bartlett kernel determined optimally by
the data-driven approach of Andrews (1991).
    The model's performance is evaluated using the cross-sectional R2 , the Root Mean Squared
Error (RMSE), and the HJ distance measure of Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), which quantifies
the mean-squared distance between the SDF of a proposed model and the set of admissible SDFs.
Put simply, this measure gives the least squares distance between the model's SDF and the nearest
point to such SDF in the space of all SDFs that price the test assets correctly. The HJ distance
measure for a given model's SDF applied to the data zt and with parameters , Mt (zt , ) is defined
as

                                 HJ =      min gT (zt , ) G- 1
                                                           T gT (zt ,  )                           (25)
                                             

where GT  T -1 T   t=1 RXt RXt , and gT (zt ,  )  T
                                                    -1 T
                                                       t=1 [Mt (zt ,  )RXt -IN ]. The HJ calculation
is essentially a GM M application with the (non-optimal) weighting matrix equal to the inverse
of the second moment matrix of asset returns; setting WT = G-          T
                                                                         1
                                                                           is important because this
weighting matrix does not depend on the model parameters , and hence the HJ distance metric
is comparable across different candidate SDF specifications (see Hansen and Jagannathan, 1997;
Ludvigson, 2013). To test whether the HJ distance is statistically significant, we simulate p -values
using a weighted sum of 2 1 distributed random variables (see, Jagannathan and Wang, 1996; Ren
and Shimotsu, 2009).


Details of a model for the GAP premium
In what follows, we provide the derivations for the model presented in the main text. For com-
                              1
pactness, we will denote  = 1-  
                                 .

Lemma 1 (Equilibrium Utility). The equilibrium utility takes the form:

                               Ui,t = log Ci,t + Ai + B · zi,t + Di · i,t ,

where
                                        1                                     2       2 2
             Ai =     µc + (1 -  )Di ¯+     Bz ¯ + Di                             +    D  ,
                 1-                     2                                             2 i
                                     
             B =       , Di =             .
                 1 - z          2 (1 -  )

                                                    6
Proof. We shall solve for Vi,t = Ui,t - log Ci,t :
                                                 Ui,t+1 - log Ci,t+1 + ci,t+1
                       Vi,t =  log Et exp
                                                               
                                                                      
                                                 Vi,t+1 + µc + zi,t + i,t ci,t+1
                            =  log Et exp                                          .
                                                                
Guess that the solution is of the type:
                                       Vi,t = Ai + Bi zi,t + Di i,t .
For compactness, we are going to suppress all the subscript i in the remainder of these derivations.
Then:
                                                                  
                                  A + Bzt + Dt+1 + µc + zt + t c       t+1
           Vt =  log Et exp
                                                      
                                                             B             
               = A + µc + zt + t +  log Et exp                   z zt + z z   t+1 +
                                      2                      
                     D                      
                   +     (1 -   ¯ +    t +   z              
                                                    t+1 + t+1
                     
                                                                    1
               =  [A + µc + (1 -  (D     ¯ )] +  (1 + Bz )zt +         +  D t +
                                                                    2
                                    1                              
                  + log Et exp         Bz     ¯ + D   z    t+1 +    (D  )    t+1
                                                                  
                                                 1                 2 2
               =  A + µc + (1 -  (D       ¯) +       Bz   ¯ + D  + D 2   +
                                                2                          2
                                        1
                  + (1 + Bz )zt +           +   D t .
                                        2
Matching coefficients concludes the proof.

Lemma 2 (Equilibrium SDFs). The equilibrium of the logarithm of the SDF in each country is
                                                ~i,t+1 1
                                                V
                    mi,t+1 = log  - ci,t+1 +               ~i,t+1 - 1 V art V
                                                      - Et V                ~i,t+1 ,
                                                                   22
      ~i,t = Vt + ci,t .
where V

Proof. The log-SDF in each country is
                             1                    Ut+1
        mt+1 = log  - ct+1 + Ut+1 - log Et exp
                                                    
                             Ut+1 - log Ct                Ut+1-log Ct+1 +log Ct+1 -log Ct
             = log  - ct+1 +               - log Et exp
                                                                        
                             Vt+1+ct+1                 Vt+1 + ct+1
             = log  - ct+1 +            - log Et exp                    .
                                                             

                                                     7
                        ~i,t and noting that V
Using the definition of V                    ~i,t is conditionally normally distributed conclude the
proof.

Lemma 3 (Risk-free rates). In each country, the logarithm of the risk-free rate is equal to

                                                             1
                              ri,t = µc - log  -  -              (¯
                                                                  + ~i,t ) ,
                                                             2
                       
where ~i,t =  ~i,t-1 +   t.


Proof. By definition, the log-risk-free rate in each country is equal to

                                    ri,t = - log Et exp {mi,t+1 } .

Using the equilibrium SDF and dropping the subscripts i to simplify notation, we get

                                                       ~i,t+1 1
                                                       V
            rt = - log Et exp log  - ct+1 +                       ~i,t+1 - 1 V art V
                                                             - Et V                ~i,t+1
                                                                          22
                                       1         1           ~i,t+1
               = - log  + Et ct+1 - V art ct+1 + covt ct+1 , V
                                       2         
                                     1     1
               = - log  + µc + zt - t + t
                                     2     
                                         1 1
               = -(log  - µc ) + zt -     -  t .
                                         2 



Lemma 4 (Currency excess return). Let  > 1 and take currency of country k as the base
currency. The excess return of currency i  {1, 2, . . . , N } over the base currency is

                   log Et RXti+1    = V art mk           k      i
                                             t+1 - covt mt+1 , mt+1                            (26)
                                           2   2         4
                                           (1 -  )
                                    =             2
                                                     +  2  t
                                                           k
                                                             +  1 - z
                                                                    ik,t ,
                                         4(1 -  )
where the coefficient of proportionality  is equal to
                                                                     2
                                       z   ¯    1 (1 -  ) 
                              =               +                          > 0.
                                      1 - z 2 1 - 

Proof. We shall start by computing the conditional variance and covariance needed for the con-
ditional currency risk premium. Based on the equilibrium SDF, it is easy to show that

                                    1                 1                  D
    mt+1 - Et [mt+1 ] = - 1 -              t  c
                                              t+1 +     Bz ¯ + D   z
                                                                   t+1 +   t+1 ,
                                                                         

                                                   8
where we dropped the country subscript i to simplify notation. It follows that the conditional
variance of the SDF is equal to:
                                             2
                                         1                1                  2       D 2 2
                 Vt [mt+1 ] =         1-         t +       2
                                                             B z  ¯ + D          +          ,                (27)
                                                                                      2

while the conditional covariance is:
                                                  2
                                             1                        1                         2
          covt [mi,t+1 , mj,t+1 ] =     1-                i,t j,t c + 2 Bz ¯ + D                    z
                                                                                                    ij,t .   (28)
                                                                     

Combining (27) and (28) into the formula for the currency excess return in (26) and using the
expressions for B , D, and  concludes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 1 in main text. The proof follows directly by taking the difference of the
currency risk premiums in Lemma 4 for countries i and j and by using the assumed process for
the conditional correlation of shocks in Equation (16) of the main text.


Relationship between predictive component and output gap
in the model
Consider the following data generating process:

                                      yt = y yt-1 + xt-1 + y y,t ,                                           (29)
                                      xt = x xt-1 + x x,t ,

where all shocks are i.i.d. distributed as standard normals and y,t x,t . In what follows, we will
consider the limit for y  1, in which case the long-run risk xt-1 is the conditional expectation of
yt . Additionally, we will assume stationarity of the xt process, i.e. the assumption of x < 1 is
retained throughout the derivations. This data generating process maps directly into the one used
in the model when yt = logCi,t and xt = zi,t and where, for simplicity, we set the unconditional
growth rate of consumption to zero and abstract away from time-varying volatility.

   Consider the following regression:
                                                      l
                                        yt =              j · yt-k-l + t .                                   (30)
                                                  j =0


which we use in the empirical analysis to estimate the output gap. We want to sign and quantify
the magnitude of the correlation between:

  1. the fitted residual, t (our measure of the output gap)

  2. the conditional expectation of yt , i.e. xt-1 (the long-run risk).

                                                           9
In what follows, we shall consider both the univariate case (l = 0 in equation (30)) and the
multivariate case (l > 0 in equation (30)).

Univariate case. In the univariate case of regression (30), i.e. l = 0, we can characterize the
correlation in closed form. The following lemma contains the analytical expression for several
moments that are useful to characterize the regression coefficients in equation (30).
Lemma 5. The following unconditional moments can be obtained from the system of equa-
tions (29):
                                                2
                                               x
                                 E x2
                                    t           =   ,                                                      (31)
                                             1 - 2x
                                                         2
                                                      x x
                                E [xt yt ] =                      ,                                        (32)
                                             (1 - x y ) (1 - 2 x)
                                                2                          2
                                      2
                                               y               (1 + x y ) x
                                 E yt      =         +                            ,                        (33)
                                             1 - 2y     (1 - x y ) (1 - 2       2
                                                                        x ) 1 - y
                                                                         k-1
                                                                                 (k-1)-i
                              E [yt yt-k ] =        k
                                                    yE
                                                                2
                                                               yt   +          i
                                                                               x y          E [xt yt ] .   (34)
                                                                         i=0

Proof. The proof of equation (31) is trivial and will be omitted in the interest of space. For
equation (32), we note that:

                   E [xt yt ] = E [(x xt-1 + x x,t ) (y yt-1 + xt-1 + y y,t )]
                              = y x E [yt-1 x,t ] + x y E [xt-1 yt-1 ] + x E x2t-1
                                +x E [xt-1 x,t ] + x y E [xt-1 y,t ] + x y E [x,t y,t ] .

Equation (32) follows immediately by noticing that E [yt-1 x,t ] = 0, E [xt-1 x,t ] = 0, E [xt-1 y,t ] =
0, E [x,t y,t ] = 0, and E [xt yt ] = E [xt-1 yt-1 ]. Equation (33) is obtained from
   2
E yt      = E (y yt-1 + xt-1 + y y,t )2
          = 2     2          2      2   2
             y E yt-1 + E xt-1 +y E y,t +2y E [xt-1 yt-1 ] +2y E [xt-1 y,t ] +2y y E [yt-1 y,t ],

                   E [ yt                                  1                   E [xt yt ]              0   0
                        2
                          ]         E [x2
                                        t]


after using equations (31)-(32). In order to obtain equation (34), we first note that the autoco-
variance of yt can be written recursively:

       E [yt yt-1 ] = E [(y yt-1 + xt-1 + y y,t ) yt-1 ]
                             2                                            2
                    = y E yt  -1 + E [xt-1 yt-1 ] +y E [yt-1 y,t ] = y E yt + E [xt yt ] ,

                                eq. (33)            eq. (32)                   0

       E [yt yt-2 ] = E [(y yt-1 + xt-1 + y y,t ) yt-2 ]
                    = y E [yt-1 yt-2 ] +E [xt-1 yt-2 ] = y E [yt yt-1 ] + E [(x xt-2 + x x,t-1 ) yt-2 ]
                                 E [yt yt-1 ]

                   = y E [yt yt-1 ] + x E [xt-2 yt-2 ] = y E [yt yt-1 ] + x E [xt yt ] ,

                                                                    10
                          E [yt yt-3 ] = y E [yt yt-2 ] + 2x E [xt yt ]
                                  ···
                                                               k-1)
                          E [yt yt-k ] = y E [yt yt-k+1 ] + ( x     E [xt yt ] .

Equation (34) obtains by recursive substitution of each lag k - 1 autocovariance into each lag k
autocovariance.



The following proposition summarizes the main finding.

Proposition 2. Let l = 0 in equation (30). When y  1:

  1. the estimated regression coefficient is 0 = 1,

  2. the covariance between t and xt-1 is positive and equal to

                                                         1 - k
                                                             x     x2
                                  cov t , xt-1 =                        > 0,
                                                        (1 - x ) 1 - 2x


  3. the correlation between t and xt-1 is

                                                          1 - k
                                                              x /(1 - x )
                        corr t , xt-1 =                                                       .
                                                            2
                                                            y                           -k
                                               (1 -   2
                                                      x)    2k
                                                            y
                                                                 +      k
                                                                     (1-x )2
                                                                               -   2x 1
                                                                                      1-2
                                                                                         x
                                                                                         x




Proof. The proof consists of three parts.

  1. We show that limy 1 0 = 1. Note that:

                                                          E [yt yt-k ]
                                          lim 0 = lim            2
                                                                       .
                                         y 1          y 1   E [yt  ]

     Using the moments obtained in equations (33) and (34) of lemma 5, we can rewrite this as
                                                                 k-1        (k-1)-i
                      E [yt yt-k ]            k     2
                                              y E [yt ] +        i=0   i
                                                                       x y            E [xt yt ]
                  lim        2
                                   =    lim                           2
                                                                                                   = 1,
                  y 1   E [yt  ]        y 1                       E [yt ]

     where the last equality follows from the fact that E [xt yt ] in equation (32) of lemma 2
     converges to a finite number.




                                                   11
                                     (1-k
                                        x)   x2
2. We show that cov t , xt-1 =       (1-x ) 1-2
                                                       > 0. Since 0 = 1, the residual of regression (30)
                                                x
   is equal to
                                    k-1                         k-1
             t = yt - yt-k =               xt-1-j + y                  y,t-j
                                    j =0                        j =0
                       k-1                          k-2         k                                k-1
                 =            j
                              x    xt-k + x                            i
                                                                       x        x,t-1-j + y             y,t-j
                       j =0                         j =0        i=0                              j =0
                                                    k-2                                                 k-1
                       1 - k
                           x                                    1 - jx
                                                                      +1
                 =                 xt-k + x                                       x,t-1-j + y                  y,t-j .
                       1 - x                        j =0
                                                                 1 - x                                  j =0

  Using the autoregressive structure of xt , it is possible to show that
                                                                        k-2
                                                 -1
                                  xt-1 =       k
                                               x xt-k       + x                 j
                                                                                x x,t-1-j .
                                                                        j =0

  We can now compute the covariance between the estimated output gap and the conditional
  expectation of yt :
                                                                        k-2
                             -1     1 - k
                                        x         x2
                                                                                j
                                                                                x - x
                                                                                      2j +1
      cov t , xt-1    =    k
                           x
                                                         2
                                                       + x
                                    1 - x       1 - 2x                  j =0
                                                                                  1 - x
                                                                                 k-2                    k-2
                             -1     1 - k
                                        x         x2
                                                           x2
                                                                                                x2
                      =    k
                           x                           +                                j
                                                                                        x   -                  2
                                                                                                               x
                                                                                                                 j +1
                                    1 - x       1 - 2x   1 - x                   j =0
                                                                                              1 - x     j =0
                                                                                          -1  k-2
                          -1        1-     k
                                           x
                                                    2
                                                    x                  2
                                                                       x 1-           x 1 - 2
                                                                                        k
                                                                                        x    x
                      = k
                        x                                   +                     2
                                                                                - x
                                    1 - x       1 - 2
                                                    x               1 - x 1 - x     1 - x 1 - 2x
                                                                             -1                                 k-2
                             x2
                                    -1          1 - k
                                                    x                  1 - k
                                                                           x    (1 - 2
                                                                                     x)                 x 1 - 2
                                                                                                              x
                      =           k
                                  x                              +                                  -
                           1 - 2x               1 - x                           (1 - x )2                 1 - x
                           2     -1     k-1         k-1         -1
                          x    kx   - 2
                                      x     - x + 2
                                                  x       1 - k
                                                              x    + x - k
                                                                         x
                      =                                 +
                        1 - 2x          1 -  x                  1 -  x
                           2        k
                          x    1 - x
                      =      2
                                      .
                        1 - x 1 - x
  As long as x < 1, this covariance is positive.
                                                     (1-k
                                                        x )/(1-x )
3. We show that corr t , xt-1       =                 2
                                                                                         . Since we have already com-
                                                      y            k        1-k
                                                                              x
                                            (1-2
                                               x)     2    k+           -2x
                                                      y         (1-x )2     1-2
                                                                              x

  puted the covariance between output gap and long-run risk in the previous step of this
  proof and the variance of xt in lemma 5, we shall focus on the variance of t to obtain the
  expression for the correlation:
                                                2                          k-2                  2
                                    1 - k
                                        x                             2             1 - jx
                                                                                          +1
                                                                                                       2
                     V t      =                     V (xt ) +         x                             + ky .               (35)
                                    1 - x                                   j
                                                                                     1 - x

                                                      12
      Focus on the middle term of the above equation:
                k-2                 2                   k-2
            2            1 - jx
                               +1
                                             x 2
            x                           =                      1 + 2
                                                                   x
                                                                     j +2
                                                                          - 2j
                                                                             x
                                                                               +1

                 j
                          1 - x           (1 - x )2     j =0

                                               2                        k-2                 k-2
                                             x                2                  j
                                        =         2 (k - 1) + x                2
                                                                               x     - 2x          j
                                                                                                   x
                                          (1 - x )                      j =0                j =0
                                                 2                             k-1                  -1
                                               x                21        - (2
                                                                             x)               1 - kx
                                        =           2 (k - 1) + x                     - 2x
                                            (1 - x )                      1 - 2x               1 - x
                                            2
                                            x (k - 1) (1 - 2     2   2k        k
                                                           x ) + x - x - 2x - 2x (1 + x )
                                        =
                                                                (1 - x )2 (1 - 2
                                                                               x)
                                            2
                                            x    k (1 - x ) - 1 - x - 2x + 2k
                                                        2          2k                  k+1
                                                                                 x + 2 x
                                        =                                                              .      (36)
                                                               (1 - x )2 (1 - 2
                                                                              x)

      By plugging (36) inside (35), we get:

                           1 + 2 k  k 2
                               x - 2x x
                                                     2
                                                     x k (1 - 2         2k        k    k+1
                                                              x ) - 1 - x - 2x + 2x + 2x                      2
         V t         =              2            +                             2                           + ky
                       (1 - x ) (1 -        2
                                            x)       (1 - x ) (1 -                   2
                                                                                     x)
                                 2
                              x
                     =         2         k 1 - 2
                                               x - 2x 1 - x
                                                           k
                                                               + ky2
                                                                     .
                                     2
                       (1 - x ) (1 - x )

      Using the definition of correlation concludes the proof.


   The explanation for why the covariance (and thus correlation) is positive is straightforward.
Consider the case in which k = 1. If this is the case, then t = xt-1 + y y     t , which is clearly
positively correlated with xt-1 .
   To get an assessment of how large this positive correlation is, we set the model's parameters
to x = 0.98, y = 0.02/ 12, and x = 0.1y . This choice of parameters results in an annual
volatility of yt of about 2% and in a moderate autocorrelation of yt . The figure below shows
that the correlation can be as high as 0.7 - 0.8, for values of k in the range of 24 - 36, which
correspond to the lags that we use in the empirical investigation.

Multivariate case. In the multivariate case (l > 0 in regression (30)) we lose analytical tractabil-
ity. To quantify the correlation between the estimated output gap and the long-run risk, we con-
duct a simulation exercise. We set the parameters of the model in the system of equations (29)
to y = 1, x = 0.98, y = 0.02/ 12, and x = 0.1y and simulate T = 25000 observations. We
then estimate regression (30) for various combinations of k and l, obtain the fitted residual ^t , and
compute its correlation with xt-1 .

   The results are reported in Panel A of the table below. The correlation between estimated
output gap and long-run risk is positive in all cases and it can be as high as 0.77. For the

                                                         13
                         1

                        0.9

                        0.8

                        0.7

                        0.6

                        0.5

                        0.4

                        0.3

                        0.2

                        0.1

                         0
                              0    5       10   15        20   25   30      35
                                                      k

Correlation between output gap and long-run risk (univariate case). The correlation is displayed
for values of k ranging from 1to 36 and l = 0. The parameters of the data generating process are set to
y = 1, x = 0.98, y = 0.02/ 12, and x = 0.1y .


specification that we consider in the main empirical exercise in the paper, k = 24 and l = 11, the
correlation is 0.62.

Non-integrated case. We also consider the case in which the autocorrelation of yt does not
converge to 1. We replicate the same simulation exercises described for the multivariate setup
and vary the autocorrelation coefficient y between 0.9 and 1. When we run the regressions to
estimate the output gap, we set the parameter k to 24 and vary the parameter l that governs the
number of lags in the regression between 0 and 11. The results are tabulated in Panel B of the
table below and show that the correlation between output gap and long-run risk is still positive
and large.

                   Panel A: Output gap and      long-run risk correlation   (multivariate case)
              0        1    2    3     4           5    6      7     8         9   10        11
k=1         0.42     0.35 0.31 0.27 0.25         0.23 0.22 0.21 0.20         0.19 0.19      0.18
k=12        0.77     0.71 0.66 0.62 0.60         0.58 0.56 0.55 0.54         0.53 0.53      0.52
k=24        0.77     0.72 0.70 0.68 0.66         0.65 0.64 0.63 0.63         0.62 0.62      0.62
k=36        0.72     0.70 0.68 0.67 0.67         0.66 0.66 0.65 0.65         0.65 0.65      0.65

               Panel B:       Output gap   and long-run risk correlation (non-integrated case)
y = 1.00    0.77 0.72         0.70 0.68    0.66 0.65 0.64     0.63 0.63 0.62 0.62         0.62
y = 0.95    0.67 0.66         0.66 0.66    0.66 0.66 0.66     0.66 0.65 0.65 0.65         0.65
y = 0.90    0.66 0.66         0.66 0.66    0.66 0.66 0.66     0.66 0.66 0.66 0.66         0.66
                                                                                        
Notes: The parameters of the data generating process are set to x = 0.98, y = 0.02/ 12, and x =
0.1y . In Panel A, we set y = 1, and in Panel B, the regression parameter k is set to 24.




                                                     14
Further Empirical Evidence
In this section we provide further empirical evidence on the validity of the model's assumptions.
An assumption of the model is that shocks to country i's conditional variance are positively
correlated with shocks to country i's output gap (z,   i,t > 0). Related to this assumption, if the
correlation is positive but imperfect (i.e.  = 0), then sorting currencies by interest rates is
different to sorting currencies by output gaps. We explore this assumption empirically. To do so,
we extract the conditional variance of industrial production growth using a GARCH(1,1) model
and proxy for the shocks to conditional variances and output gaps using the residuals from AR(1)
models fitted to the series. We test the sign and magnitude of the relationship by estimating a
pooled OLS regression of conditional variance shocks on output gap shocks (including country-level
dummy variables). We find the estimated coefficient is positive and highly statistically significant
( = 0.25, p-value = 0.00) but we can strongly reject the hypothesis that the coefficient equals
unity (p-value = 0.00).
    A necessary condition for the output gap premia to be positive is linked to the behaviour
of the time-varying correlation between output gap shocks in countries i and j . The condition
requires that the correlation falls as the output gap in country i rises (here country j refers
to the base currency, i.e. the US in our empirical setup). We test the condition empirically by
forming output gap shocks as the residuals from AR(1) models and construct dynamic conditional
correlations using a DCC(1,1) model. We estimate the relationship between these conditional
correlations and the model implied transformation of output gaps (1 + exp{zi,t })-1 , via a pooled
OLS regression (with country-level dummy variables). The condition is supported if the slope
coefficient is positive. We estimate the coefficient to equal 0.32, with associated p-value = 0.01,
and thus we find clear empirical support for the condition.




                                                15
                                      Table A1: Foreign Exchange Rate Data


                                                       DataStream Codes
     Country                 Code    Currency         Spot        1M Forward      Source     Start Date   End Date
     Austria                 ATS      schilling     AUSTSC$        USATS1F        Reuters    31/12/1996   31/12/1998
     Australia               AUD        dollar      BBAUDSP        BBAUD1F        Barclays   31/12/1984   31/01/2016
     Belgium                 BEF        franc       BELGLU$        USBEF1F        Reuters    31/12/1996   31/12/1998
     Brazil                  BRL         real       BRACRU$        USBRL1F        Reuters    31/03/2004   31/01/2016
     Canada                  CAD        dollar      BBCADSP        BBCAD1F        Barclays   31/12/1984   31/01/2016
     Switzerland             CHF        franc       BBCHFSP        BBCHF1F        Barclays   31/10/1983   31/01/2016
     Chile                   CLP         peso        CHILPE$       USCLP1F        Reuters    31/03/2004   31/01/2016
     Czech Republic          CZK       koruna       TDCZKSP        TDCZK1M        Reuters    31/12/1996   31/01/2016
     Germany*                DEM    deutschemark    BBDEMSP        BBDEM1F        Barclays   31/10/1983   31/01/2016
     Spain                   ESP       peseta       SPANPE$        USESP1F        Reuters    31/12/1996   31/12/1998
     Finland                 FIM       markka       FINMAR$        USFIM1F        Reuters    31/12/1996   31/12/1998
     France                  FRF        franc       BBFRFSP        BBFRF1F        Barclays   31/10/1983   31/12/1998
16




     UK                      GBP       pound        BBGBPSP        BBGBP1F        Barclays   31/10/1983   31/01/2016
     Ireland                  IEP       punt        BBIEPSP        BBIEP1F        Barclays   31/10/1993   31/12/1998
     Iceland                  ISK       krona       ICEKRO$         USISK1F       Reuters    31/03/2004   31/01/2016
     Italy                    ITL        lira       BBITLSP         BBITL1F       Barclays   31/03/1984   31/12/1998
     Japan                   JPY         yen        BBJPYSP        BBJPY1F        Barclays   31/10/1983   31/01/2016
     South Korea             KRW         won        KORSWO$        USKRW1F        Reuters    28/02/2002   31/01/2016
     Mexico                  MXN         peso       MEXPES$        USMXN1F        Reuters    31/12/1996   31/01/2016
     Netherlands             NLG       guilder      BBNLGSP        BBNLG1F        Barclays   31/10/1983   31/12/1998
     Norway                  NOK        krone       BBNOKSP        BBNOK1F        Barclays   31/12/1984   31/01/2016
     New Zealand             NZD        dollar      BBNZDSP        BBNZD1F        Barclays   31/12/1984   31/01/2016
     Poland                  PLN        zloty       TDPLNSP        TDPLN1M        Reuters    31/08/1996   31/01/2016
     Portugal                PTE       escudo       PORTES$        USPTE1F        Reuters    31/12/1996   31/12/1998
     Sweden                  SEK        krona       BBSEKSP        BBSEK1F        Barclays   31/12/1984   31/01/2016
     Turkey** (first lira)   TRY         lira       TURKLI$        USTRY1F        Reuters    31/12/1996   31/10/2000
     Turkey (second lira)    TRY         lira       TURKLI$        USTRY1F        Reuters    31/03/2004   31/01/2016

     * We replace the German deutschemark with the euro after 1998.
     ** We remove the period of hyperinflation in Turkey due to large deviations from CIP.
     Table A2: Carry-Trade Currency Portfolios
     The table presents descriptive statistics for five currency portfolios sorted by forward premia. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly with
     high (low) interest rate currencies entering P5 (P1 ). We report summary statistics for the annualized excess mean return and its
     decomposition between the exchange rate (fx ) and interest rate (ir ) components. We also report the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe ), standard
     deviation (std ), skewness (skew ), kurtosis (kurt ), maximum drawdown (mdd ), average turnover (t/o ), average forward premium (fp ),
     and average output gap (gap ) for each portfolio. The Cross Section portfolio is long P5 and short P1 . The Time Series portfolio takes
     a 1/N position in currencies, going long (short) currencies issued by countries with an interest rate above (below) the US interest
     rate. The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the Cross Section and Time Series portfolios at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level
     using Newey and West (1987) standard errors. The sample is from October 1983 to January 2016.


                                                              Forward Premia              Cross     Time
17




                                                    P1       P2     P3     P4     P5     Section   Series
                                      mean (%)     -0.63    1.02   3.88   2.83    7.17   7.80***   4.43***
                                          fx (%)   1.58     1.35   2.54 -0.40    -3.05    -4.63      0.85
                                          ir (%)   -2.20   -0.33 1.34     3.22   10.22    12.43      3.59
                                      Sharpe       -0.06    0.11   0.42   0.29    0.68     0.72      0.79
                                      std           9.80    9.30   9.23   9.72   10.49    10.87      5.60
                                      skew          0.26   -0.09 -0.29 -0.48     -0.63    -0.93     -1.14
                                      kurt          3.80    3.73   5.12   4.85    5.56     5.30      9.32
                                      mdd (%)       54.0    32.6   23.2   27.8    19.9     19.8       8.2
                                      t/o (%)       18.5    25.6   29.6   24.1    13.5
                                      fp (t, %)    -2.15   -0.32 1.25     3.25   10.94
                                      gap (t, %)   -0.04    0.02   0.08 -0.05     0.30
     Table A3: Correlation and Factor Structure of Output Gap Measures
     The table presents the average cross-sectional correlation and factor structure across measures of countries' output gap. The output
     gap is estimated as (log) industrial production minus the (log) trend in industrial production. The trend is estimated in four ways
     using a (i) Hodrick-Prescott filter; (ii) Baxter-King filter, (iii) linear projection, and (iv) quadratic time trend. In Panel A, entries
     below the diagonal are linear Pearson correlations, calculated by taking the time-series average of monthly cross-sectional correlations
     for all available currencies. The entries above the diagonal are Spearman rank correlations, also calculated as the time-series average
     of monthly cross-sectional correlations. In Panel B, we report the average proportion of cross-sectional variation accounted for by
     each principal component (PC ). To calculate, we estimate the variation explained by each PC every month and report the average
     across the sample. The sample is from October 1983 to January 2016.
18




                                                      Panel A: Output-Gap Correlations

                                                                            HP     BK     LP     QT

                                             Hodrick-Prescott Filter (HP)          0.63   0.51   0.41
                                             Baxter-King Filter (BK)        0.65          0.55   0.53
                                             Linear Projection (LP)         0.54   0.56          0.47
                                             Quadratic Time-trend (QT)      0.45   0.58   0.48


                                                    Panel B: Output-Gap Factor Structure

                                                                            PC1    PC2    PC3    PC4
                                             var explained                  86%    10%     3%     1%
     Table A4: Currency Portfolios Sorted on Deviations from Taylor-Rule-Implied Interest Rates
     The table presents descriptive statistics for five currency portfolios sorted by their deviation from a Taylor-rule implied interest rate.
     The Taylor rule is calibrated to equal 1.5t + 0.5yt , where t is inflation and yt is the in-sample output gap calculated using a
     Hodrick-Prescott filter. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly with the highest (lowest) interest-rate deviation currencies entering P5
     (P1 ). We report summary statistics for the annualized excess mean return and its decomposition between the exchange rate (fx ) and
     interest rate (ir ) components. We also report the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe ), standard deviation (std ), skewness (skew ), kurtosis (kurt ),
     maximum drawdown (mdd ), average turnover (t/o ), average forward premium (fp ), and average output gap (gap ) for each portfolio.
     The Cross Section portfolio is long P5 and short P1 . The Time Series portfolio takes a 1/N position in currencies, going long (short)
     currencies issued by countries with a positive (negative) deviation from the Taylor-rule interest rate. The superscripts *, **, ***
     represent significance of the Cross Section and Time Series portfolios at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level using Newey and West (1987)
     standard errors. We also report the correlation of the Cross Section and Time Series portfolios with the equivalent portfolios sorted
     on Hodrick-Prescott filtered output gaps (GAP ), and interest rates (HM LF X ). The sample is from October 1983 to January 2016.
19




                                                        Deviations   from Taylor Rule       Cross    Time
                                                      P1    P2        P3     P4      P5    Section   Series
                                        mean (%)     3.95 2.76        0.74  3.17    3.06    -0.89    1.82**
                                            fx (%)   0.12 1.92       -0.53 1.03 -1.17       -1.29     0.98
                                            ir (%)   3.83 0.84       1.28   2.14    4.23     0.40     0.84
                                        Sharpe       0.40 0.30        0.08  0.33    0.30    -0.11      0.34
                                        std          9.83 9.29        9.27  9.64 10.27       8.44     5.30
                                        skew         0.06 -0.10      -0.27 -0.49 -0.29      -0.26     -0.39
                                        kurt         5.98 4.17        4.40  5.21    4.45     8.09     5.93
                                        mdd (%)      25.2 26.8        24.1  25.0    34.0     63.3     15.0
                                        t/o (%)      29.8 49.2        59.1  54.4    34.9
                                        fp (t, %)    4.41 0.89        1.27  2.20    4.25
                                        gap (t, %)   1.42 0.63        0.10 -0.35 -1.58
                                        GAP                                                 -0.33    -0.05
                                        HM LF X                                             0.20     0.61
     Table A5: Portfolio Weights
     The table presents summary statistics on the portfolio weights in the GAPCS , LIN , and RN K output-gap-sorted portfolios. We report
     the average maximum (max), minimum (min), and standard deviation (std), calculated as the time-series mean of the maximum,
     minium, and standard deviation of weights each month. The sample is from December 1999 to January 2016.
20




                                                              GAPCS      LIN     RNK
                                                        max    0.20      0.18     0.25
                                                        min    -0.20     -0.16   -0.25
                                                        std    0.28      0.09     0.16
     Table A6: Real-Time Business Cycle Currency Portfolios During US Booms and Recessions
     The table presents investment performance for output-gap-based currency trading strategies during booms and recessions in the US.
     The output gap is estimated using monthly `vintages' of real-time industrial production data from the OECD's Real-Time Data
     and Revisions Database. To estimate the output-gap we follow the linear projection procedure in Hamilton (2018) by running the
     regression, yi,t = i + 11s=0 i,s yi,t-24-s + i,t each month, in which y is (log) industrial production. Periods of recession are consistent
     with those defined by the NBER's Business Cycle Dataing Committee. The output gap is constructed as the difference between
     the most recently available data point at time t (yt ) and the fitted value from the regression. GAPCS is a high-minus-low portfolio
     formed as P5 - P1 , after sorting currencies into five portfolios ranging from the lowest (P1 ) to the highest (P5 ) output gap. GAPT S
     is a 1/N time-series strategy long (short) currencies issued by countries with an output gap above (below) the US output gap. We
     report summary statistics for the annualized mean, which is then further split between the exchange rate (fx ) and interest rate (ir )
     components, we also report the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe ), skewness (skew ), kurtosis (kurt ), maximum drawdown (mdd ), and the exposure
     of the strategy to the US dollar ($ exposure ). The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the strategies' mean excess returns
     at the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors. The sample runs from December
21




     1999 to January 2016.


                                                                Expansions          Recessions
                                                               GAPCS    GAPTS     GAPCS    GAPTS
                                                 mean (%)      4.75**   3.90***    5.94*    -3.99
                                                      fx (%)    3.97      4.09     5.65     -4.61
                                                      ir (%)    0.78     -0.19      0.29     0.62
                                                 Sharpe         0.71      1.00     0.73     -0.69
                                                 skew           0.27     -0.20      0.40    -1.08
                                                 kurt           2.78      4.23     2.71      3.69
                                                 mdd (%)        8.18      6.92     5.99     16.68
                                                 $ exposure     0.00      0.26     0.00     -0.27
     Table A7: Real-Time Taylor-rule Currency Portfolios
     The table presents investment performance for Taylor-rule-based trading strategies. The Taylor rule is calibrated to equal 1.5t +
     0.5yt , where t is inflation and yt is the out-of-sample output gap calculated using monthly `vintages' of real-time industrial production
     data from the OECD's Real-Time Data and Revisions Database. To estimate the output-gap we follow the linear projection procedure
     in Hamilton (2018) by running the regression, yi,t = i + 11    s=0 i,s yi,t-24-s + i,t each month, in which y is (log) industrial production.
     The output gap is constructed as the difference between the most recently available data point at time t (yt ) and the fitted value
     from the regression. CS is a high-minus-low portfolio formed as P5 - P1 , after sorting currencies into five portfolios ranging from the
     lowest (P1 ) to the highest (P5 ) implied interest rate. LIN and RN K take a position in all currencies with the weight determined by
     either the magnitude or relative size of the implied interest rate. T S is a 1/N time-series strategy long (short) currencies issued by
     countries with an implied rate above (below) the US implied rate. The three COM portfolios take 50-50 weights in T S and the CS ,
     LIN , and RN K strategies. We report summary statistics for the annualized mean, which is then further split between the exchange
     rate (fx ) and interest rate (ir ) components, we also report the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe ), skewness (skew ), kurtosis (kurt ), and maximum
     drawdown (mdd ). The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the strategy mean excess returns at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
     significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors. We also report the correlation of the portfolios with the
     equivalent strategies sorted on output gaps as in Table 4 (GAP ) and forward premia (HM LF X ). The sample runs from December
     1999 to January 2016.
22




                                                Panel A: Investment Performance Excluding Bid-Ask Spreads
                                                    CS       LIN      RNK      GAPTS     COMGAP    COMLIN    COMRNK
                                      mean (%)     6.05**   3.24***   4.68**   3.40**    4.73***   3.33***   4.04***
                                         fx (%)     -2.34    -1.23     -1.49    1.48      -0.41      0.15      0.02
                                         ir (%)      8.39     4.47     6.17     1.92       5.13      3.18      4.02
                                      Sharpe        0.63     0.73     0.64       0.79      0.77      0.87     0.78
                                      skew         -0.25     -0.70    -0.25     -0.19     -0.22     -0.52     -0.34
                                      kurt          3.35     6.06     3.34       5.70      3.27      4.51     3.61
                                      mdd (%)       9.57     4.47     7.34       4.31      6.17      3.84     5.21
                                      GAP           0.24     0.18     0.17       0.21      0.26      0.23     0.23
                                      HM LF X       0.79     0.87     0.83       0.44      0.77      0.69     0.74


                                                Panel B: Investment Performance Including Bid-Ask Spreads
                                                    CS       LIN      RNK      GAPTS     COMGAP    COMLIN    COMRNK
                                      mean (%)     4.75*    2.52**    3.37*    2.78***    3.77**   2.65***    3.08**
                                         fx (%)    -3.34     -1.78    -2.49      1.02      -1.14    -0.36      -0.71
                                         ir (%)     8.09     4.30      5.85      1.77       4.91     3.01       3.79
                                      Sharpe        0.50     0.57     0.46       0.65      0.61      0.69     0.59
                                      skew         -0.26     -0.73    -0.27     -0.21     -0.23     -0.54     -0.35
                                      kurt          3.37     6.15     3.36       5.74      3.28      4.55     3.64
                                      mdd (%)       9.55     4.45     7.32       4.30      6.16      3.83     5.20
                                      GAP           0.24     0.18     0.17       0.21      0.26      0.23     0.23
                                      HM LF X       0.79     0.87     0.83       0.44      0.77      0.69     0.74
Table A8: Real-Time Business Cycle Portfolios across Different Home Investors
The table presents investment performance for output-gap-based currency trading strategies from the
perspective of German, Japanese, British, and Swiss investors. The output gap is estimated using
monthly `vintages' of real-time industrial production data from the OECD's Real-Time Data and Revi-
sions Database. To estimate the output-gap we follow the linear projection procedure in Hamilton (2018)
by running the regression, yi,t = i + 11     s=0 i,s yi,t-24-s + i,t each month, in which y is (log) industrial
production. The output gap is constructed as the difference between the most recently available data
point at time t (yt ) and the fitted value from the regression. GAPCS is a high-minus-low portfolio formed
as P5 - P1 , after sorting currencies into five portfolios ranging from the lowest (P1 ) to the highest (P5 )
output gap. LIN and RN K take a position in all currencies with the weight determined by either the
magnitude or relative size of the output gap. GAPT S is a 1/N time-series strategy long (short) currencies
issued by countries with an output gap above (below) the US output gap. The three COM portfolios take
50-50 weights in GAPT S and the GAPCS , LIN , and RN K strategies. We report summary statistics
for the annualized mean, which is then further split between the exchange rate (fx ) and interest rate (ir )
components, we also report the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe ), skewness (skew ), kurtosis (kurt ), and maximum
drawdown (mdd ). The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the strategies' mean excess returns
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors. The
sample runs from December 1999 to January 2016.


                                        Panel A: German Investor
                        GAPCS       LIN      RNK      GAPTS     COMGAP      COMLIN      COMRNK
            mean (%)    5.61***   2.24***   3.88***   1.76**     3.73***    2.05***      2.87***
               fx (%)     4.84      1.72      3.26      2.25       3.57       2.01         2.78
               ir (%)     0.77      0.52      0.62     -0.49       0.16       0.03         0.09
            Sharpe        0.79      0.76      0.72      0.50       0.80       0.74         0.73


                                       Panel B: Japanese Investor
                        GAPCS       LIN      RNK      GAPTS     COMGAP      COMLIN      COMRNK
            mean (%)    4.49***   1.93***   3.40***   4.19**     4.41***    3.13***      3.86***
               fx (%)     4.08      1.61      3.07     3.68        3.92       2.68         3.41
               ir (%)     0.41      0.32      0.33     0.51        0.49       0.44         0.45
            Sharpe        0.66      0.68      0.67     0.61        0.82       0.77         0.80


                                         Panel C: British Investor
                        GAPCS       LIN      RNK      GAPTS     COMGAP      COMLIN      COMRNK
            mean (%)    4.98***   2.27***   4.12***   1.51**     3.26***    1.91***      2.83***
               fx (%)     4.51      1.87      3.70     1.24        2.87       1.55         2.47
               ir (%)     0.47      0.41      0.41     0.27        0.39       0.36         0.36
            Sharpe        0.72      0.77      0.77     0.40        0.69       0.66         0.71


                                         Panel D: Swiss Investor
                        GAPCS       LIN      RNK      GAPTS     COMGAP      COMLIN      COMRNK
            mean (%)    6.35***   2.32***   4.25***     0.66     3.55***     1.54**      2.50***
               fx (%)     5.43      1.76      3.59      1.21       3.35       1.51         2.42
               ir (%)     0.92      0.56      0.66     -0.55       0.21       0.03         0.08
            Sharpe        0.91      0.81      0.81      0.14       0.73       0.48         0.59
                                                      23
     Table A9: Pricing Currency Portfolios Sorted on Output Gaps with Fama-MacBeth Estimation
     The table presents cross-sectional asset pricing results. We construct various two-factor linear SDF's that include the DOL factor
     plus a second pricing factor, including `slope' risk (HM LF X ), global imbalance risk (IM B ), volatility risk (V OL), and the GAPCS
     factor. In each model, we price five currency portfolios sorted on output gaps using real-time information. We report Fama-MacBeth
     estimates of factor loadings on the pricing kernel (b's ) and prices of factor risk ('s ). The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance
     of the coefficients at the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors (reported in
     parentheses). We also report goodness-of-fit statistics for each model including the adjusted R2 statistic, Root Mean Squared Pricing
     Error (RM SE ), and the Hansen-Jagannathan distance statistic (HJdist ) with simulated p-values in brackets. The HJdist statistic
     measures the distance between the estimated pricing kernel and the efficient set of permissible pricing kernels. A p-value less than 5%
     indicates the null hypothesis that the pricing kernel is efficient can be rejected at the 95% confidence level. We provide full details of
     the pricing factors in Section 5. The sample runs from December 1999 to January 2016.
24




                                                         SDF                Risk
                                                      Loadings (b)        Prices ()                Model Fit
                                                                                                   2
                                                      DOL      FAC      DOL       FAC      Adj.R       RMSE    HJdist
                                   DOL + HMLFX        0.22     0.19      0.02     0.03     -0.78       1.69     0.22
                                                     (0.26)   (0.72)    (0.02)   (0.10)                        [0.03]
                                   DOL + IMB          -1.39    7.52      0.04     0.26     -0.15       1.59     0.19
                                                     (1.43)   (5.78)    (0.04)   (0.20)                        [0.61]
                                   DOL + VOL          -3.21    -40.5     0.03     -0.03    -0.19       1.51     0.21
                                                     (2.86)   (31.6)    (0.03)   (0.02)                        [0.46]
                                   DOL + GAPCS        0.08    0.83***    0.02    0.05***    0.44       0.95     0.13
                                                     (0.26)    (0.29)   (0.02)    (0.02)                       [0.34]
        Table A10: Asset Pricing using DOL, HMLFX , and GAPCS as Pricing Factors with Fama-MacBeth Estimation
        The table presents cross-sectional asset pricing results for two sets of test portfolios. The SDF is constructed as a linear combination
        of DOL and HM LF X (2 pricing factors, left-side) and DOL, HM LF X , and GAPCS (3 pricing factors, right-side). In Panel B, we also
        include HM LF X and GAPCS as test assets. We report Fama-MacBeth estimates of factor loadings on the pricing kernel (b's ) and
        prices of factor risk ('s ). The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the coefficients at the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels
        using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors (reported in parentheses). In addition, we report goodness-of-fit statistics for
        each model including the adjusted R2 statistic, Root Mean Squared Pricing Error (RM SE ), and the Hansen-Jagannathan distance
        statistic (HJdist ) with simulated p-values in brackets. The HJdist statistic measures the distance between the estimated pricing kernel
        and the efficient set of permissible pricing kernels. A p-value less than 5% indicates the null hypothesis that the pricing kernel is
        efficient can be rejected at the 95% confidence level. The sample runs from December 1999 to January 2016.


                                                      Panel A: Excluding Pricing Factors as Test Portfolios
                             2 Pricing Factors (DOL + HMLFX )                                         3 Pricing Factors (DOL + HMLFX + GAPCS )
                   Loadings (b)     Risk Prices ()          Model Fit                       Loadings (b)            Risk Prices ()                 Model Fit
                  DOL HMLFX         DOL HMLFX          Adj.R2 DOL HJdist            DOL      HMLFX GAPCS         DOL HMLFX GAPCS             Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist
25




       10 TPs      0.19     0.08     0.02     0.01      -0.35    1.32    0.22       -0.31     0.43     2.57**     0.02     0.07     0.14**     0.59      0.67    0.16
     (val, mom)   (0.26)   (0.32)   (0.02)   (0.04)                     [0.81]     (0.36)    (0.41)    (1.01)    (0.03)   (0.05)    (0.06)                      [0.96]
      20 TPs       0.18     0.36     0.02    0.05*       0.26    1.36    0.33       -0.02     0.35     1.05***    0.02    0.06*    0.06***     0.62      0.94    0.30
     (gap, car,   (0.27)   (0.22)   (0.02)   (0.03)                     [0.99]     (0.28)    (0.22)     (0.32)   (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.02)                      [0.99]
     val, mom)

                                                       Panel B: Including Pricing Factors as Test Portfolios
                             2 Pricing Factors (DOL + HMLFX )                                         3 Pricing Factors (DOL + HMLFX + GAPCS )
                   Loadings (b)     Risk Prices ()          Model Fit                       Loadings (b)            Risk Prices ()                 Model Fit
                  DOL HMLFX         DOL HMLFX          Adj.R2 DOL HJdist            DOL      HMLFX GAPCS         DOL HMLFX GAPCS             Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist
       10 TPs      0.16    0.41*     0.02    0.06**      0.31    1.37    0.23       -0.02    0.40*     0.97***    0.02    0.06**   0.06***     0.65      0.96    0.19
     (val, mom)   (0.28)   (0.22)   (0.02)   (0.03)                     [0.80]     (0.28)    (0.21)     (0.30)   (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.02)                      [0.91]
      20 TPs       0.17    0.41*     0.02    0.06**      0.46    1.34    0.69       0.00     0.40*     0.91***    0.02    0.06**   0.05***     0.74      0.92    0.69
     (gap, car,   (0.28)   (0.22)   (0.02)   (0.03)                     [0.91]     (0.28)    (0.21)     (0.30)   (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.02)                      [0.98]
     val, mom)
        Table A11: Asset Pricing using DOL, IMB, and GAPCS as Pricing Factors
        The table presents cross-sectional asset pricing results for two sets of test portfolios. The SDF is constructed as a linear combination
        of DOL and IM B (2 pricing factors, left-side) and DOL, IM B , and GAPCS (3 pricing factors, right-side). In Panel B, we also
        include IM B and GAPCS as test assets. We report Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) one-step estimates of factor loadings on
        the pricing kernel (b's ) and prices of factor risk ('s ). The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the coefficients at the 10%,
        5%, and 1% significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors (reported in parentheses). In addition, we
        report goodness-of-fit statistics for each model including the adjusted R2 statistic, Root Mean Squared Pricing Error (RM SE ), and
        the Hansen-Jagannathan distance statistic (HJdist ) with simulated p-values in brackets. The HJdist statistic measures the distance
        between the estimated pricing kernel and the efficient set of permissible pricing kernels. A p-value less than 5% indicates the null
        hypothesis that the pricing kernel is efficient can be rejected at the 95% confidence level. The sample runs from December 1999 to
        January 2016.


                                                        Panel A: Excluding Pricing Factors as Test Portfolios
                               2 Pricing Factors (DOL + IMB)                                          3 Pricing Factors (DOL + IMB + GAPCS )
                  Loadings (b)       Risk Prices ()          Model Fit                     Loadings (b)            Risk Prices ()                  Model Fit
                  DOL    IMB         DOL      IMB       Adj.R2 DOL HJdist          DOL        IMB     GAPCS     DOL    IMB     GAPCS         Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist
26




       10 TPs      -0.13   2.04*      0.03    0.08**     -0.03   1.20    0.20      -0.27      1.26    1.85*      0.03     0.05     0.11**     0.47      0.80    0.14
     (val, mom)   (0.45)   (1.23)    (0.02)   (0.04)                    [0.92]    (0.42)     (1.48)   (1.12)    (0.02)   (0.05)    (0.04)                      [0.98]
      20 TPs       -0.20   2.43**     0.03    0.09***    0.43    1.35    0.41      -0.28     2.03*    0.93**     0.03    0.08**    0.06***    0.64      1.04    0.37
     (gap, car,   (0.41)   (1.18)    (0.02)    (0.03)                   [0.98]    (0.39)     (1.19)   (0.38)    (0.02)   (0.02)     (0.03)                     [0.99]
     val, mom)

                                                        Panel B: Including Pricing Factors as Test Portfolios
                               2 Pricing Factors (DOL + IMB)                                          3 Pricing Factors (DOL + IMB + GAPCS )
                  Loadings (b)       Risk Prices ()          Model Fit                     Loadings (b)            Risk Prices ()                  Model Fit
                  DOL    IMB         DOL      IMB       Adj.R2 DOL HJdist          DOL        IMB     GAPCS     DOL    IMB     GAPCS         Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist
       10 TPs      0.05    1.36***    0.03    0.05***    0.04    1.18    0.20      -0.10    1.24***   0.96***    0.03    0.05***   0.06***    0.48      0.85    0.16
     (val, mom)   (0.31)    (0.43)   (0.02)    (0.02)                   [0.96]    (0.31)     (0.43)    (0.31)   (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)                     [0.99]
      20 TPs       -0.01   1.65***    0.04    0.06***    0.36    1.41    0.41      -0.13    1.47***   0.91***    0.04    0.06***   0.06***    0.63      1.05    0.47
     (gap, car,   (0.32)    (0.56)   (0.02)    (0.02)                   [0.99]    (0.32)     (0.56)    (0.32)   (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)                     [0.99]
     val, mom)
        Table A12: Asset Pricing using DOL, VOL, and GAPCS as Pricing Factors
        The table presents cross-sectional asset pricing results for two sets of test portfolios. The SDF is constructed as a linear combination
        of DOL and V OL (2 pricing factors, left-side) and DOL, V OL, and GAPCS (3 pricing factors, right-side). In Panel B, we also
        include V OL and GAPCS as test assets. We report Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) one-step estimates of factor loadings on
        the pricing kernel (b's ) and prices of factor risk ('s ). The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance of the coefficients at the 10%,
        5%, and 1% significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors (reported in parentheses). In addition, we
        report goodness-of-fit statistics for each model including the adjusted R2 statistic, Root Mean Squared Pricing Error (RM SE ), and
        the Hansen-Jagannathan distance statistic (HJdist ) with simulated p-values in brackets. The HJdist statistic measures the distance
        between the estimated pricing kernel and the efficient set of permissible pricing kernels. A p-value less than 5% indicates the null
        hypothesis that the pricing kernel is efficient can be rejected at the 95% confidence level. The sample runs from December 1999 to
        January 2016.


                                                       Panel A: Excluding Pricing Factors as Test Portfolios
                              2 Pricing Factors (DOL + VOL)                                        3 Pricing Factors (DOL + VOL + GAPCS )
                  Loadings (b)      Risk Prices ()          Model Fit                  Loadings (b)            Risk Prices ()                   Model Fit
                  DOL    VOL        DOL      VOL       Adj.R2 DOL HJdist         DOL      VOL GAPCS          DOL   VOL     GAPCS          Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist
27




       10 TPs      -0.02    -3.37    0.02     -0.00     -0.37   1.29    0.21      -0.89    -7.93   2.40**     0.02    -0.01*    0.14***    0.57    0.67     0.17
     (val, mom)   (0.58)   (6.16)   (0.02)   (0.01)                    [0.85]    (0.75)   (7.52)   (1.01)    (0.02)   (0.01)     (0.05)                    [0.95]
      20 TPs       -0.56   -9.64*    0.03    -0.01**     0.26   1.42    0.37      -0.65   -8.38*   1.04***    0.02    -0.01**   0.07***    0.57    1.05     0.34
     (gap, car,   (0.49)   (5.05)   (0.02)    (0.00)                   [0.99]    (0.49)   (5.00)    (0.34)   (0.02)    (0.00)    (0.02)                    [0.99]
     val, mom)

                                                       Panel B: Including Pricing Factors as Test Portfolios
                              2 Pricing Factors (DOL + VOL)                                        3 Pricing Factors (DOL + VOL + GAPCS )
                  Loadings (b)      Risk Prices ()           Model Fit                  Loadings (b)              Risk Prices   ()              Model Fit
                  DOL     VOL       DOL      VOL       Adj.R2 DOL HJdist         DOL       VOL GAPCS         DOL      VOL       GAPCS     Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist
       10 TPs      -0.09  -4.10      0.02    -0.01      0.22   1.25     0.30      -0.35    -5.03 0.95***      0.02    -0.01     0.06***    0.74   0.89     0.25
     (val, mom)   (0.55) (5.74)     (0.02)  (0.00)                     [0.57]    (0.54) (5.86)     (0.31)    (0.02) (0.00)       (0.02)                   [0.73]
      20 TPs       -0.57   -9.70*    0.03    -0.01**     0.39   1.39    0.38      -0.63   -8.45*   0.88***    0.02    -0.01**   0.06***    0.67    1.02     0.43
     (gap, car,   (0.48)   (4.94)   (0.02)    (0.00)                   [0.99]    (0.48)   (4.88)    (0.32)   (0.02)    (0.00)    (0.02)                    [0.99]
     val, mom)
     Table A13: Asset Pricing using DOL and GAPCS as Pricing Factors
     The table presents cross-sectional asset pricing results for two sets of test portfolios. The SDF is constructed as a linear combination
     of DOL and GAPCS . In Panel B, we include GAPCS as a test asset. We report Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) one-step
     estimates of factor loadings on the pricing kernel (b's ) and prices of factor risk ('s ). The superscripts *, **, *** represent significance
     of the coefficients at the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels using Newey and West (1987) corrected standard errors. In addition, we
     report goodness-of-fit statistics for each model including the R2 statistic and the Hansen-Jagannathan distance statistic (HJ ) with
     simulated p-values in brackets. The HJ statistic measures the distance between the estimated pricing kernel and the efficient set of
     permissible pricing kernels. A p-value less than 5% indicates the null hypothesis that the pricing kernel is efficient can be rejected at
     the 95% confidence level. The sample runs from December 1999 to January 2016.


                                              Panel A: Excluding Pricing Factor as Test Portfolio
                                                               2 Pricing Factors (DOL + GAPCS )
                                                   Loadings (b)       Risk Prices ()           Model Fit
                                                                                                 2
                                                   DOL GAPCS          DOL    GAPCS       Adj.R  RMSE HJdist
                                       10 TPs       -0.15   1.96**     0.02    0.11**     0.35       0.91    0.17
28




                                     (val, mom)    (0.33)   (0.87)    (0.02)   (0.05)                       [0.95]
                                       20 TPs       0.02    1.06***    0.02    0.06***    0.31       1.31    0.33
                                      (gap, car,   (0.26)    (0.29)   (0.02)    (0.02)                      [0.99]
                                      val, mom)

                                              Panel B: Including Pricing Factor as Test Portfolio
                                                               2 Pricing Factors (DOL + GAPCS )
                                                   Loadings (b)       Risk Prices ()           Model Fit
                                                   DOL GAPCS          DOL    GAPCS       Adj.R2 RMSE HJdist
                                       10 TPs       0.03    0.94***    0.02    0.05***    0.46       1.00    0.19
                                     (val, mom)    (0.26)    (0.29)   (0.02)    (0.02)                      [0.89]
                                       20 TPs       0.04    0.93***    0.02    0.05***    0.40       1.29    0.42
                                      (gap, car,   (0.26)    (0.28)   (0.02)    (0.02)                      [0.99]
                                      val, mom)
