                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                        MONEY RUNS

                                       Jason R. Donaldson
                                        Giorgia Piacentino

                                      Working Paper 26298
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26298


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019


For valuable comments, we thank David Andolfatto, Vladimir Asriyan, Svetlana Bryzgalova,
Charlie Calomiris, Catherine Casamatta, John Cochrane, Doug Diamond, Phil Dybvig, Darrell
Duffie, Raj Iyer, Douglas Gale, Brett Green, Robert Hauswald, Todd Keister, Peter Koudijs,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, John Kuong, Mina Lee, Hanno Lustig, Nadya Malenko, David Martinez-
Miera, Cyril Monnet, Sophie Moinas, Ed Nosal, Guillermo Ordoñez, Dimitri Orlov, Cecilia
Parlatore, Sébastien Pouget, Uday Rajan, Roberto Robatto, Hugo Rodriguez, Maya Shaton,
Richard Stanton, Bruno Sultanum, Anjan Thakor, Alberto Trejos, Laura Veldkamp, Randy
Wright, Victoria Vanasco, Adam Zawadowski, Peter Zimmerman, and seminar participants at
Amsterdam Business School, the 9th Annual Conference in Money, Banking, and Asset Markets
Conference at the University of Winsconsin, the 17th Annual FDIC Bank Research Conference,
the 10th Annual Paul Woolley Conference, the 7th Banco de Portugal Conference on Financial
Intermediation, Berkeley, the 2017 CEPR European Summer Finance Symposium at Gerzensee,
Columbia, EIEF, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the 2018 FIRS Conference, the 2017
FTG Summer Meeting at the LSE, the 2016 IDC Summer Conference, the 2017 OxFIT
Conference, the 2017 Summer Workshop on Money, Banking, Payment and Finance (Bank of
Canada), Stanford GSB (FRILLS), Stanford (Macro Lunch), the Toulouse School of Economics,
the University of Minnesota, WAPFIN@Stern, Washington University in St. Louis, the 2017
WFA, the 2017 Wharton Liquidity and Financial Fragility Conference, and Yale. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jason R. Donaldson and Giorgia Piacentino. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Money Runs
Jason R. Donaldson and Giorgia Piacentino
NBER Working Paper No. 26298
September 2019
JEL No. G01,G21

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a model in which, as in practice, bank debt is both a financial security used to raise
funds and a kind of money used to facilitate trade. This dual role of bank debt provides a new
rationale for why banks do what they do. In the model, banks endogenously perform the essential
functions of real-world banks: they transform liquidity, transform maturity, pool assets, and have
dispersed depositors. Moreover, they make their debt redeemable on demand. Thus, they are
endogenously fragile. We show novel effects of narrow banking, suspension of convertibility, and
some other policies.


Jason R. Donaldson
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
Simon Hall
1 Olympian Way
St Louis, MO 63130
j.r.donaldson@wustl.edu

Giorgia Piacentino
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall 813
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
g.piacentino@gsb.columbia.edu
                                        In the use of money, every one is a trader.

                                                                                         David Ricardo (1876)




1 Introduction
What is money? Some money, like the physical currency you exchange by hand, is created
by central banks. But most money, like the deposit you exchange electronically by debit card
or bank transfer, is created by private banks.1 Such bank money is not a new thing. Bank
debt has served as a means of payment for hundreds of years. For example, bank-drawn bills
of exchange served as money in early modern Europe, bank-issued notes served as money in
the 19th-century US, and bank-certified checks served as money more recently.
    But bank debt is not only a form of money that you can use to make payments, it is also
a financial security that banks use to raise funds. Thus, when banks choose what security
to issue to raise funds, they should take its value as money into account. In practice, banks
choose to issue securities, like banknotes and deposits, that are redeemable on demand. But
such demandable debt can be an unstable form of money. Indeed, many bank panics and
financial crises throughout history, from 18th-century London to contemporary Greece, seem
to have followed from the failure of bank debt to be accepted as money (see below). In such
crises, convertibility is often suspended. This prevents bank runs--you are unable to run on
a bank if you cannot redeem your debt on demand. But it has been argued that it could
also impede circulation--you could be unlikely to accept the debt as payment if you cannot
redeem it on demand.2 Remarkably, however, this has not always been the case. To the
contrary, bank debt sometimes resumes circulation when convertibility is suspended.3
   Despite historical precedents, most current theories of why banks choose a fragile fi-
nancial structure are not linked to how bank debt serves as private money (see, notably,
Calomiris and Kahn (1991), Diamond and Dybvig (1983), and Diamond and Rajan (2001b),
discussed further in Section 7). To develop a model based on this link, we model how bank
   1
     E.g., the Bank of England estimates that 97% of broad money is created by banks (McLeay, Radia, and
Thomas (2014)).
   2
     See, e.g., Dewald (1972) on how the "trade journals reported that depression was accountable to sus-
pension and a lack of loans to sustain trade" (p. 939), i.e. on how some argued that the suspension impeded
payments/trade. See also Sprague (1910).
   3
     For example, in the crisis of 1907, despite suspension of convertibility, bank debt in the form of clearing
house certificates started to circulate as money. See, e.g., Andrew (1908), on how "[s]hops and stores and
places of amusement...generally accepted [certificates], and it is, indeed, surprising...how little real difficulty
was experienced in getting them to circulate in lieu of cash" (p. 513). Perhaps as a result, banks remained sol-
vent in the panic. Indeed, see, e.g., Calomiris and Gorton (1991) on how "the Panic of 1907 [was] practically
a non-event from the standpoint of national bank failures" (p. 156).


                                                        1
debt serves as a means of payment explicitly, following the new monetarist literature (see
Lagos, Rocheteau, and Wright (2017) for a survey).
   We use the model to address the following questions. Why is bank money almost always
redeemable on demand, regardless of the form it takes, from physical banknotes to electronic
deposits? Why is demandable debt a fragile form of money? Given it is, why do banks still
choose to issue it, exposing themselves to sudden redemptions, and making the financial
system fragile too? And what are the effects of financial regulations, such as "narrow"
banking and suspension of convertibility?
   By modeling the dual role of bank debt--to provide a means of funding to banks and a
means of payment for depositors--we uncover a new rationale for why banks do what they
do. Banks choose to fund themselves with demandable debt to take advantage of a "price
effect of demandability": demandable debt trades at a high price in the secondary market,
and hence increases banks' debt capacity in the primary market. But this high price is not
always a good thing. Reluctant to pay it, potential counterparties may decide not to buy
the debt at all, and therefore leave the holder with something he cannot trade, but only
redeem on demand. Such redemption constitutes a new kind of bank run, or "money run,"
resulting entirely from the failure of debt to circulate as money in the secondary market.
In our model, banks are fragile because money is fragile, not the other way around (cf.
Friedman and Schwartz (1963)). However, banks continue to issue demandable debt. To do
so, they exploit economies of scale that arise solely from the price effect of demandability
(independent of the diversification benefits in Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Diamond
(1984)). Specifically, they transform liquidity, transform maturity, pool assets, and borrow
from dispersed depositors. I.e. they do something that looks like real-world banking. But,
to do it effectively, they exacerbate their exposure to money runs. Narrow banking limits
this fragility, but can also inefficiently constrain bank funding. Suspension of convertibility,
on the other hand, can not only prevent runs, but can, in fact, facilitate circulation.
    Model preview. Because we want to show how banking can arise endogenously, we
start with a single borrower B with a single investment (e.g., a corporate loan). Ultimately,
multiple borrowers will form an institution that assumes features of real-world banks. But,
for now, B resembles a bank only insofar as its debt plays a dual role. To capture its role as
a funding instrument, we assume that B is penniless and needs to fund an investment from
a creditor C0 (i.e. a depositor). To capture its role as a means of payment, we make two
assumptions. First, C0 could be hit by a liquidity shock before B's investment pays off, as in
Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Thus, C0 could want to trade B's debt to get liquidity. Second,
C0 must trade bilaterally in a decentralized market, similar to those in Trejos and Wright
(1995) and Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005). We assume that to acquire B's debt from


                                               2
C0 , a counterparty C1 must pay an entry cost k to enter and bargain with C0 over the price.4
Likewise, if C1 is shocked, a counterparty C2 must pay k and bargain with him to trade,
and so on. The terms of trade between counterparties depend on how B designs its debt. In
particular, B can make its debt redeemable on demand. In this case, B chooses a redemption
value r , for which a creditor can redeem before the investment pays off. To pay r , B has to
liquidate its investment (so r is bounded by the liquidation value).
    Results preview. Our first main result is that B makes its debt redeemable on de-
mand to borrow more from C0 . C0 is willing to pay more for demandable debt, even if he
never redeems in equilibrium. The reason is that C0 still values the option to redeem off
equilibrium, even if he never exercises it, because it provides him with a valuable threat
(i.e. outside option) when he bargains with C1 . As a result, he can sell B's debt at a higher
price. Anticipating selling to C1 at a high price in the secondary market, he is willing to lend
more to B in the primary market. This result contrasts with existing models of demandable
debt as liquidity insurance, in which, roughly, you do not need the option to redeem debt
on demand if you can just trade it in the secondary market (e.g., Jacklin (1987)). Here, in
contrast, you do: just the option to redeem on demand props up the resale price of debt in
the secondary market, even if the option is never exercised. We refer to this as the "price
effect of demandability," because it works entirely through the secondary market price, not
through actual redemptions.
   Our second main result is that B's debt is susceptible to a new kind of run, which results
directly from its failure to circulate in the secondary market. A sudden (but rational) change
in beliefs can cause secondary-market trading to stop, leading C0 to redeem on demand and
forcing B to liquidate inefficiently to pay the redemption value. Even though there are gains
from trade when C0 is hit by a liquidity shock, he may not be able to get liquidity from C1 ,
and hence he might still end up redeeming. The reason is that C1 's willingness to pay the
entry cost k depends on his ability to sell B's debt in the future. Hence, if his beliefs change,
and he starts to doubt whether future counterparties will enter, he will not enter himself,
leaving C0 with nothing to do but redeem. The belief change may be precipitated by a shock
to fundamentals, in which case the run amplifies a downturn, or by a "confidence crisis"
unrelated to fundamentals, in which case the run constitutes a panic in itself. Either way,
such a run can occur even though B has only a single creditor--in this case, there is not a co-
ordination problem in which multiple creditors race to withdraw as in Diamond and Dybvig
(1983), Goldstein and Pauzner (2005), or He and Xiong (2012); rather, there is a coordi-
nation problem in which a creditor cannot get liquidity in the secondary market and must
  4
   The (possibly very small) cost k can capture physical costs of coming to market and trading or the
opportunity cost of doing so (see Subsection 6.1).



                                                 3
withdraw as a result. We refer to this run as a "money run," because it is the result of the
failure of B's debt to function as money in the secondary market.
   We construct an equilibrium in which money runs happen on the equilibrium path due to
confidence crises that occur with probability . In this case, B faces a trade-off. If he issues
demandable debt, he benefits from the price effect of demandability, but exposes himself to
runs with probability . Hence, we ask: what is the largest  for which B still makes its
debt demandable? Our model is tractable enough to admit a closed-form expression for this
number. For "reasonable" parameters, we find that it is large (about 14%), suggesting that
our model can plausibly explain why banks choose run-prone instruments even though doing
so exposes them to costly liquidation.
     Our third main result is that increasing the redemption value r has a dark side. Although
it increases the price C0 can sell for (as per the price effect of demandability), it symmetrically
increases the price C1 must pay. This makes C1 less willing to enter. Thus, for high r , C0 's
option to redeem on demand can undermine itself, putting him in such a strong bargaining
position that he has no willing counterparty, and ends up redeeming on demand in a money
run.
    Our fourth main result is that B sets the redemption value r as high as possible. This
increases the price of B's debt, allowing it to borrow more cheaply. This has a social cost,
because it increases the risk of a run, and, hence, increases the expected deadweight loss
from early liquidation. But B still wants to increase r , because it has a private benefit. It
helps it to extract rent from future creditors, by increasing the price they pay when they
bargain to buy its debt. Hence, although financial fragility may be necessary--sometimes
B must make its debt demandable to borrow enough to fund its investment--it can also be
excessive--B makes the redemption value too high just to decrease its cost of funding, and
hence exposes itself to more runs than necessary.
   Our fifth main result is that if multiple borrowers can get together, they can exploit
economies of scale that allow them to issue debt with total redemption value in excess of the
total liquidation value of their investments. To show this, we consider N parallel versions
of the model--we assume that there are N parallel borrowers, each of which borrows to
fund an investment from one of N parallel creditors, each of whom trades bilaterally in one
of N parallel markets. The only link between the parallel versions is that the borrowers
can issue debt backed by the entire pool of investments. So now there are N creditors
holding N securities backed by N investments, instead of one creditor holding one security
backed by one investment. We assume that everything is perfectly correlated, so, unlike in
Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Diamond (1984), there is no possibility of diversification.
Despite this, we find that getting together can still benefit borrowers, because they can give


                                                4
each of the N creditors the option to redeem for the entire pool. Why does each creditor
have a claim on the entire pool, rather than just a fraction 1/N of it? Because if bank debt
circulates, no one redeems on the equilibrium path; thus, if one creditor deviates, he is the
only one redeeming, and he has the first claim on all of the assets. As per the price effect of
demandability, the option to be first in line is valuable, even if it is never exercised. Hence,
it can be enjoyed by one creditor without making it unavailable to others--in the language
of public goods, the redemption option is "non-rivalrous." To decrease their cost of funding,
the borrowers continue increasing the redemption value r until the price of their debt is so
high that counterparties are just indifferent between paying the entry cost k and staying
out. Remarkably, by doing so, the borrowers can fund exactly the investments with positive
social surplus--no more and no fewer.
   With this result, we see that our model, based on only the dual role of bank debt, points
to a new rationale for why banks do what they do: borrowers form a "bank" (or a banking
system) only to create demandable debt, or "money"; they endogenously transform liquidity,
transform maturity, pool assets, and borrow from dispersed creditors. And, like a bank, they
are fragile. By doing banking, borrowers exacerbate their exposure to money runs. Unlike
in the banking literature, banks are fragile because money is fragile. And, unlike in the new
monetarist literature, money is fragile no matter how small counterparties' entry cost k is
(see Section 7). The reason is that, here, the redemption value r is determined endogenously.
If k decreases, the bank responds by increasing r , keeping counterparties indifferent to entry.
Thus, as k  0, r approaches the face value--as in developed economies in normal times,
bank debt is redeemable at par. But, given counterparties are indifferent to staying out,
the debt remains a fragile means of payment. The bank remains vulnerable to money runs,
which can now trigger liquidation of the whole pool of investments.
   Policy. In our model, bank structure and demandable debt arise endogenously in re-
sponse to the environment. Thus, the model takes the possibility of regulatory arbitrage
into account. As a result, it is not easily subject to Lucas-type critiques and is well suited
to policy analysis. Most notably, we explore two measures that policy makers can use to
fight crises: (i) suspension of convertibility, i.e. prohibiting redemption on demand once a
crisis has begun, and (ii) restricting banks to be "narrow," i.e. separating deposit taking and
lending to prevent the crisis from happening in the first place.
    Our sixth main result is that, in our model, suspending convertibility not only mechan-
ically puts an end to bank runs in a crisis, but, in certain circumstances, can also restore
the circulation of bank debt. The reason is that it lowers the price of debt, and thus makes
counterparties more willing to enter. This result suggests that the worry that suspension
could impede circulation (see footnote 2) could be exaggerated.


                                               5
   In contrast, in the model, there is a straightforward but important downside of narrow
banking. Yes, forbidding multiple creditors to have the first claim on the same assets can
prevent bank runs. However, it also prevents banks from taking advantage of the non-
rivalrous redemption value (as per our fifth main result). As a result, it can prevent them
from funding some investments with positive social surplus.
   Further results. We explore three extensions. (i) We add random, heterogenous entry
costs. We show that this is another way to generate runs on the equilibrium path, as
well as to obtain a unique equilibrium. (ii) We show that if B can choose its investment, its
choice can be distorted toward high-liquidation-value investments, which facilitate its issuing
demandable debt. (iii) We study a version of the model with a continuum of creditors in
which debt can be rolled over as well as traded. We show that the results of our baseline
model are robust. (This setup also has the attractive feature that not every withdrawal is a
run.)
   Evidence and applications. Although our model is stylized, our findings resonate
with practice. Banks borrow via demandable debt, but it seems to be a fragile means of
payment. Indeed, many historical panics have features of money runs. For example, when
merchants refused bank-drawn bills of exchange in 18th-century London, it led to the crisis
of 17725 ; when the Second Bank refused state bank notes in the early 19th-century US, it
led to the crisis of 18196 ; when New York clearing houses refused bank trusts' checks in the
early 20th-century US, it led to the Panic of 19077; when retailers refused checks in late
20th- and early 21st-century Argentina, it exacerbated both the banking panic of 1995 and
the economic crisis of 1998­20028; when retailers refused debit cards and wholesalers refused
bank transfers in contemporary Greece, it exacerbated the Greek debt crisis.9
   5
      See, e.g., Kosmetatos (2014) on how "[t]hrough drawers, acceptors, or endorsers of bills stopping [ac-
cepting them], [issuers]...quickly failed" in the 1772 crisis (p. 14). See, e.g., Bagehot's Lombard Street on
how something similar happened in the crisis of 1825 when "the country was...within twenty-four hours
of a state of barter" and "Exchequer Bills would have been useless unless the bank cashed them...[in an]
intervention...chiefly useful by the effect which it would have in increasing the circulating medium" (pp.
98­99).
    6
      See, e.g., Blackson (1989) on how "[t]he 1818 decline began, no doubt...[when] the [Second Bank] began
to press state institutions to satisfy in specie their obligations [to it]" (p. 351). Such panics were ubiquitous in
the free banking era. See, e.g., Gorton (2012a) on how, as Secretary of the Treasury Howell Cobb describes
it, "The merchant, the mechanic, the grocer, and the butcher began business in the morning...and their
customers found that the bank note that passed freely yesterday was rejected this morning" (p. 36).
    7
      See, e.g., Tallman and Moen (1990) on how "stop[ping] clearing checks for the Knickerbocker Trust
Company" incited the 1907 panic; see also Frydman, Hilt, and Zhou (2015).
    8
      See, e.g., the New York Times on how "[s]ome big businesses [were] demanding cash on delivery and
refusing to accept checks" in the 1995 banking panic ("Bank crisis undermining `the Argentine Miracle,' "
May 1, 1995) and on how "a growing number of stores...were refusing to accept any form of payment other
than cash" in the 1998­2003 crisis ("In Argentina's bank holiday, cash is most scarce commodity," April 24,
2002).
    9
      See, e.g., the Financial Post on how "many retailers were not accepting card transactions"


                                                         6
   Although we are motivated by these traditional forms of bank debt, like banknotes and
deposits, we suggest that it could also apply, perhaps more loosely, to other forms of bank
debt classified as money, such as repos (Section 5.2). And some results could even apply to
some non-bank debt that resembles money, such as commercial paper.
   Layout. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Sec-
tion 3 analyzes benchmarks. Section 4 includes our main results. Section 5 discusses policy,
applications, and empirical content. Section 6 discusses our assumptions and explores some
extensions. Section 7 discusses the related literature. Section 8 concludes. The Appendix
contains all proofs and a table of notations.


2 Model
In this section, we present the model.


2.1 Players, Dates, and Technologies
There is a single good, which is the input of production, the output of production, and the
consumption good. Time is discrete and the horizon is infinite, t  {0, 1, ...}.
    There are two types of players, a borrower B and infinitely many deep-pocketed creditors
C0 , C1 , ..., where Ct is "born" at Date t. Everyone is risk-neutral and there is no discounting.
B is penniless but has a positive-NPV investment. The investment costs c at Date 0 and
pays off y > c at a random time in the future, which arrives with intensity . Thus, the
investment has NPV = y - c > 0 and expected horizon 1/. B may also liquidate the
investment before it pays off; the liquidation value is  < c.
   B can fund its project by borrowing from C0 . However, there is a horizon mismatch
similar to that in Diamond and Dybvig (1983): creditors may need to consume before B's
investment pays off. Specifically, creditors consume only if they suffer "liquidity shocks,"
which arrive at independent random times with intensity  (after which they die). Hence, a
creditor's expected "liquidity horizon" is 1/.
   For now, we focus on a single borrower funding a single investment with debt to a single
creditor; this helps us to distinguish the forces in our model from those in the literature.10
Later, we include multiple borrowers funding multiple investments from multiple creditors;
in 2015 ("Greece in limbo as it shuts banks," June 29, 2015) and, e.g., Reuters on how Greek
olive oil producers "want it in cash or they prefer to keep their olive oil in their tanks"
("Greek olive farmers demand cash as bank fears grow," July 7, 2015) in the same period.
   10
      For example, there is no coordination problem among multiple creditors (but we show there can be a
different coordination problem with a single creditor) and there is no possibility to pool multiple investments
(but we show a new reason to pool investments in an enriched environment (Subsection 4.5)).


                                                      7
this allows us to show how the forces in our model give rise to something that looks like
real-world banking.


2.2 Borrowing Instruments
At Date 0, B borrows the investment cost c from its initial creditor C0 via an instrument
with terminal repayment R  y , paid when the investment pays off, and redemption value
r  , paid if the instrument is redeemed earlier. Creditors can exchange the instrument
among themselves and B must repay whichever creditor holds it. Hence, the instrument is
tradeable demandable debt, and we refer to it as a "banknote," although it also resembles a
bank deposit or even a repo. We let vt denote the Date-t value of B's debt to a creditor not
hit by a liquidity shock.
    As benchmarks, we consider instruments that may not be tradeable (so B has to repay
C0 ) and/or may not be demandable, but may be "long-term" (so B makes only the terminal
repayment). I.e. we allow B to borrow via the banknote or one of the following debt instru-
ments: (i) non-tradeable long-term debt, which we refer to as a "loan," (ii) non-tradeable
demandable debt, which we refer to as a "puttable loan"; and (iii) tradeable long-term debt,
which we refer to as a "bond" (although it also resembles an equity share). These instruments
are summarized in Figure 1. They constitute all of the feasible Markovian instruments in
the sense that they are all transfers from B to the debtholder that can depend on the state of
B's investment at Date t (but not on the date itself) and do not violate B's limited-liability
constraints.

                              Figure 1: Debt Instruments

                        not demandable                    demandable

 non-tradeable               "loan"                      "puttable loan"

     tradeable               "bond"                        "banknote"


2.3 Secondary Debt Market: Entry, Bargaining, and Settlement
If B has borrowed via tradeable debt, then creditors can trade it bilaterally in a decentralized
market. At each Date t, Ct is the single (potential) counterparty with whom the debtholder,
denoted by Ht , can trade B's debt. Ct meets Ht whenever he pays an "entry" cost k , which
can represent any opportunity cost of trade. In this case, Ct and Ht determine the price pt



                                               8
via generalized Nash bargaining.11 Ht 's bargaining power is denoted by  . If Ct and Ht agree
on a price, then trade is settled: Ct becomes the debtholder in exchange for pt units of the
good. Otherwise, Ht retains the debt. If the debt is demandable, Ht can demand redemption
from B or he can remain the debtholder at Date t + 1. This sequence of entry, bargaining,
and settlement is illustrated in Figure 2.12 (The entry and bargaining stages are standard
in the literature; the settlement stage is our addition to model demandable debt.)

                             Figure 2: Secondary-market Trade



                      Entry                        Bargaining                       Settlement

              counterparty enters           holder and counterparty               debt traded
              at cost k or not              determine price pt by              or demanded
                                            Nash bargaining




       Date t                                                                                  Date t + 1 


   We let t denote Ct 's mixed strategy if Ht is hit by a liquidity shock, so t = 1 means
that Ct enters for sure and t = 0 means that Ct does not enter. Thus, t also represents
the probability that Ht finds a counterparty when hit by a liquidity shock. Observe that
we restrict attention to Ct 's strategy given Ht is hit by a liquidity shock without loss of
generality.13
  11
      We discuss the entry cost k and Nash bargaining protocol in Subsection 6.1. Note here that what matters
is just that Ct makes the decision to bear a cost to trade before he bargains with Ht and that Ct and Ht
split the gains from trade after k is sunk. Further, it does not matter if Ht bears a (possibly larger) cost to
trade.
   12
      By separating bargaining and settlement, we zero in on tradability and demandability--Ht agrees to
trade with Ct or not at the bargaining stage and then demands redemption from B or not at the settlement
stage. This structure precludes other arrangements, e.g., in which B intermediates trades between Ht and Ct .
We discuss such "rollover" arrangements in Subsection 6.1 and modify our set-up to speak to them explicitly
in Subsection 6.4.
   13
      The reason that this is without loss of generality is that Ct would never enter if Ht were not shocked:
if Ht is not shocked, Ht and Ct are identical and there are no gains from trade, so it is never worthwhile to
pay the entry cost k for the opportunity to trade.




                                                      9
      2.4 Timeline
      First, B makes C0 a take-it-or-leave-it offer of a repayment and a redemption value, as
      described in Subsection 2.2 above. Then, if C0 accepts, he becomes the initial debtholder
      H1 . The debtholder may redeem on demand or may trade in the secondary market, as
      described in Subsection 2.3 above. Formally, the extensive form is as follows.

   Date 0        B offers C0 a repayment R and a redemption value r .
                 If C0 accepts, then B invests c. C0 is the initial debtholder, H1 = C0 .

Date t > 0       If B's investment pays off: B repays R to Ht and B consumes y - R.
                 If B's investment does not pay off: there is entry, bargaining, and settlement as
                 described in Subsection 2.3.
                     If there is trade, Ct becomes the new debtholder, Ht+1 = Ct .
                     If there is no trade, Ht either holds the debt, Ht+1 = Ht , or redeems on de-
                     mand, in which case B liquidates its investment, repays r to Ht , and consumes
                      - r.


      2.5 Equilibrium
      The solution concept is subgame perfect equilibrium. An equilibrium constitutes (i) the
      repayments R and r , (ii) the price of debt in the secondary market pt at each date, and (iii)
      the entry strategy t of the potential counterparty Ct such that B's choice of instrument
      and Ct 's choice to enter are sequentially rational, pt is determined by Nash bargaining, and
      each player's beliefs are consistent with other players' strategies and the outcomes of Nash
      bargaining.
         For most of the paper, we focus on stationary equilibria, i.e. t   and pt  p.


      3 Benchmarks
      To begin, we consider three benchmark instruments, the loan, the puttable loan, and the
      bond. We verify two results in the literature in our environment: (i) demandability can
      increase debt capacity as in Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and (ii) tradeability can substitute
      for demandability as in Jacklin (1987).




                                                    10
3.1 Loan
First, we consider a loan, i.e. non-tradeable long-term debt. At Date t, the value vt of the
loan with face value R can be written recursively:

                                      vt = R + (1 - )(1 - )vt+1 .                                            (1)

The terms are determined as follows. With probability , B's investment pays off and B
repays R. With probability (1 - ), B's investment does not pay off and the debtholder
Ht is hit by a liquidity shock. Since the loan is neither tradeable nor demandable, Ht gets
zero. With probability (1 - )(1 - ), B's investment does not pay off and Ht is not hit by a
liquidity shock. Ht retains B's debt at Date t + 1, which has value vt+1 at Date t since there
is no discounting.14 By stationarity (vt = vt+1  v ), equation (1) gives

                                                       R
                                             v=              .                                               (2)
                                                    + (1 - )

Even though B will always repay eventually, the loan's value v is less than its face value
R. The loan is discounted because, without the option to demand debt or trade it, Ht gets
nothing in the event of a liquidity shock. Hence, the discount vanishes as shocks become
unlikely, v  R as   0. For  > 0, demandability and tradeability can help to reduce the
discount, as we see next.


3.2 Puttable Loan
Now we consider a puttable loan, i.e. non-tradeable demandable debt. At Date t, the value
vt of the puttable loan can be written recursively:

                                 vt = R + (1 - ) r + (1 - )vt+1 .                                            (3)

The terms are determined as follows. With probability , B's investment pays off and B
repays R. With probability (1 - ), B's investment does not pay off and the debtholder Ht
is hit by a liquidity shock. Since the loan is demandable, but not tradeable, Ht redeems on
demand and gets r . With probability (1 - )(1 - ), B's investment does not pay off and
Ht is not hit by a liquidity shock. Ht retains B's debt at Date t + 1, which has value vt+1 at
  14
    Formally, the value of holding B's debt is the Date-t expected value of B's debt at Date t + 1, i.e. we
should write Et [vt+1 ] instead of vt+1 . For now, we focus on deterministic equilibria. Thus, this difference is
immaterial and we omit the expectation operator for simplicity. (In Subsection 4.4, we do keep track of the
expectation operator.)



                                                       11
Date t since there is no discounting. By stationarity (vt = vt+1  v ), equation (3) gives

                                             R + (1 - )r
                                        v=               .                                          (4)
                                              + (1 - )

    We now compare the puttable loan's debt capacity with the loan's, where "debt capacity"
refers to the maximum B can borrow given limited liability. I.e. we compare equation (4)
with R = y and r =  and equation (2) with R = y :

Proposition 1. (Benchmark: benefit of demandability.) If

                                    y        y + (1 - )
                                          <c            ,                                           (5)
                                 + (1 - )     + (1 - )

then B can fund itself with a puttable loan but not with a loan.

   The analysis so far already points to one rationale for demandable debt. As in Calomiris
and Kahn (1991), the ability to liquidate insures C0 against bad outcomes, making him more
willing to lend.15 Thus, by issuing demandable debt, B expands its debt capacity.


3.3 Bond
Now we consider a bond, i.e. tradeable long-term debt. (This instrument can also represent
an equity claim; debt and equity have equivalent payoffs, since the terminal payoff y is
deterministic.) At Date t, the value vt of the bond can be written recursively:

                              vt = R + (1 - ) t pt + (1 - )vt+1 .                                   (6)

The terms are determined as follows. With probability , B's investment pays off and B
repays R. With probability (1 - ), B's investment does not pay off and the debtholder
Ht is hit by a liquidity shock. Since the bond is tradeable, but not demandable, Ht gets pt
if he finds a counterparty, which happens with probability t , and nothing otherwise. With
probability (1 - )(1 - ), B's investment does not pay off and Ht is not hit by a liquidity
shock. Ht retains B's debt at Date t + 1, which has value vt+1 at Date t since there is no
discounting.
       To solve for the value vt , we must first find the secondary-market price of the bond pt .

Lemma 1. The secondary-market price of the bond is pt = vt .
  15
     In Calomiris and Kahn (1991), "bad outcomes" are associated with moral hazard problems, rather than
liquidity shocks.



                                                  12
The bond price splits the gains from trade between Ht and Ct in proportions  and 1 -  .
Since Ht has value zero in this case (Ht dies at the end of the period and the bond is not
demandable), the gains from trade are just the value vt of the bond to the new debtholder
Ct .
     By stationarity (vt = vt+1  v and t   ) and the preceding lemma (pt  p  v ),
equation (6) gives
                                                     R
                                        v=                    .                                             (7)
                                              + (1 - )(1 -  )
   We now compare the bond's debt capacity (equation (7) with R = y and  = 1)16 to the
puttable loan's (equation (4) with R = y and r = ):

Proposition 2. (Benchmark: tradeability substitutes demandability.) Sup-
pose the bond circulates in equilibrium ( = 1).17 If

                              y + (1 - )           y
                                         <c                  ,                                              (8)
                               + (1 - )      + (1 - )(1 -  )

then B can fund itself with a bond but not with a puttable loan (or a loan).

If the bond circulates, B can borrow against the full value y whenever trading frictions
vanish (in the sense that Ht gets the bargaining power). I.e. if  = 1, then there is no role
for demandability whenever   1. Hence, the analysis so far supports Jacklin's (1987)
intuition that tradeability substitutes for demandability. If C0 is hit by a liquidity shock, he
can trade B's debt in the market, rather than die with it. In other words, like the option to
demand, the option to trade insures C0 against bad outcomes, making him more willing to
lend. In the language of Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), market liquidity creates funding
liquidity. Moreover, absent trading frictions (  1), B can expand its debt capacity more by
issuing tradeable debt (a bond) than by issuing demandable debt (a puttable loan). However,
we will see next that with trading frictions ( < 1), there is a role for demandability, even if
debt is never redeemed in equilibrium (Proposition 3).


4 Banknote and Banking
In this section, we analyze the banknote and present our main results.
  16
     The debt capacity of a tradeable instrument refers to the maximum B can borrow if it circulates, or
 = 1. Thus, since  is chosen by Ct , the debt capacity is an upper bound on what B can borrow. I.e. the
condition that the debt capacity exceeds c is necessary but not sufficient for B to invest.
  17
     As we will see below (setting r = 0 in equation (14)), there is an equilibrium in which the bond circulates
as long as Ct 's entry cost k is sufficiently small.


                                                      13
4.1 The Price Effect of Demandability
Now we consider a banknote, i.e. tradeable, demandable debt. At Date t, the value vt of the
banknote can be written recursively:


                      vt = R + (1 - )  t pt + (1 - t )r + (1 - )vt+1 .                                   (9)

The terms are determined as follows. With probability , B's investment pays off and B
repays R. With probability (1 - ), B's investment does not pay off and the debtholder Ht
is hit by a liquidity shock. Since the banknote is both tradeable and demandable, Ht gets
pt if he finds a counterparty, which happens with probability t , and otherwise redeems on
demand and gets r . With probability (1 - )(1 - ), B's investment does not pay off and Ht
is not hit by a liquidity shock. Ht retains the banknote at Date t + 1, which has value vt+1
at Date t since there is no discounting.
       To solve for the value vt , we must first give the secondary-market price of the banknote
pt .
Lemma 2. The secondary-market price of the banknote is pt = vt + (1 -  )r .
The price of the banknote splits the gains between Ht and Ct in proportions  and 1 -  .
Since Ht has value r (Ht redeems on demand and gets r if he does not trade with Ct ), the
gains from trade are vt - r , the value to the new debtholder Ct minus the value to the current
debtholder Ht . The price that splits these gains is pt = r +  (vt - r ) = vt + (1 -  )r .18
  By stationarity (vt = vt+1  v and t   ) and the preceding lemma (pt  p =
v + (1 -  )r ), equation (9) gives

                                          R + (1 - ) 1 -  r
                                     v=                     .                                           (10)
                                           + (1 - ) 1 - 

We now compare the banknote's debt capacity (v with R = y , r = , and  = 1) to the
benchmark instruments' (Section 3). We find that B can borrow more via a banknote than
via any other instrument.
Proposition 3. (Price effect of demandability.) Suppose the banknote circulates
( = 1).19 If

                   y + (1 - )       y                                   y + (1 - )(1 -  )
            max               ,                                 <c                        ,             (11)
                    + (1 - )  + (1 - )(1 -  )                            + (1 - )(1 -  )
  18
      This result depends on how outside options determine the division of surplus in bargaining. See Subsec-
tion 6.1 for a discussion.
   19
      We will see below (equation (14)) that there is an equilibrium in which the banknote circulates as long
as Ct 's entry cost k is sufficiently small.

                                                     14
then B can fund itself only with the banknote.

Unlike the puttable loan, the banknote need not be redeemed in equilibrium. Like the bond,
it can circulate in the secondary market until maturity. But it is still more valuable than the
bond. The reason is that just the option to redeem the banknote on demand (off equilibrium)
puts the debtholder in a strong bargaining position in the secondary market, increasing its
price. Thus, given secondary market trading frictions ( < 1), demandability complements
tradability: your option to demand debt increases the price you trade at. This high price
leads to a high debt capacity: in anticipation of being able to sell at a high price in the
secondary market, C0 is willing to pay a high price in the primary market.
    What kind of borrower needs to issue the banknote? To answer, we rewrite the condition
of Proposition 3. From the left-hand inequality in equation (11):

                            1  1          y-c
                              > ·                          .                              (12)
                                (1 - ) min{c - , (1 -  )c}

This says that creditors' expected liquidity horizon 1/ is small relative to B's expected
investment horizon 1/. Hence, B's debt is a kind of inside money, since a creditor generally
does not hold it for its entire maturity; rather he holds it for a short time and then uses
it to get liquidity from another creditor--as Kiyotaki and Moore (2001) put it, "[w]henever
paper circulates as a means of short-term saving (liquidity), it can properly be considered
as money, or a medium of exchange, because agents hold it not for its maturity value but
for its exchange value" (p. 1). Moreover, it implies that B intermediates between short-
horizon creditors and a long-horizon investment. Hence, B is starting to resemble a bank, as
maturity transformation is one of banks' defining features. But this is just the first step in
our argument that B is a bank. Below, we will see that B will endogenously look a lot like
a real-world bank: it will not only transform maturity, but pool assets and engage in other
canonical banking activities as well, all to create valuable money (Subsection 4.5).


4.2 Money Runs
Having established how a banknote helps B raise funds in the primary market, we now turn
to how it trades in the secondary market, and whether it could be in fact redeemed early.
In other words, does the banknote always circulate ( = 1), as we assumed above? To
answer, we assume that B has issued a banknote at Date 0 with terminal repayment R and
redemption value r , and we look at the equilibria of the subgames for t > 0. (We determine
R and r in equilibrium in Proposition 7.)
   First, observe that Ct enters as long as the value he captures minus the price he pays


                                              15
exceeds his entry cost, or

                                       (1 -  ) R - r
                              v-p=                      k.                                 (13)
                                       + (1 - )(1 -  )

Observe that his payoff depends on other strategies'  , which reflect his beliefs about whether
B's banknote circulates. Indeed, the note circulates as long as t = 1 is a best response to
the belief that Ct plays t = 1 for all t > t. This is the case as long as Ct is willing to pay
the entry cost k to gain the surplus v - p given  = 1, or

                                                  (1 -  )(R - r )
                             k  v-p          =                    ,                        (14)
                                        =1        + (1 - )(1 -  )

having substituted in from Lemma 2 and equation (10).
   But there may also be another equilibrium in which B's banknote does not circulate. B's
banknote does not circulate as long as t = 0 is a best response to the belief that Ct plays
t = 0 for all t > t. This is the case as long as Ct is not willing to pay the entry cost k to
gain the surplus v - p given  = 0, or

                                                  (1 -  )(R - r )
                              k v-p           =                   ,                        (15)
                                         =0         + (1 - )

again having substituted in from Lemma 2 and equation (10). If r were fixed, this "bad"
equilibrium would arise only for sufficiently high k . But r is endogenous, not fixed. We
show below that it can increase if k decreases, so that this equilibrium can arise even for
arbitrarily small k > 0 (see Subsection 4.5).

Proposition 4. (Money runs.) Suppose that B borrows via a banknote with terminal
repayment R and redemption value r . If the entry cost k is such that

                        (1 -  )(R - r )      (1 -  )(R - r )
                                         k                   ,                             (16)
                          + (1 - )           + (1 - )(1 -  )

then the t > 0 subgame has both an equilibrium in which B's debt circulates ( = 1) and
there is no early liquidation and an equilibrium in which B's debt does not circulate ( = 0)
and there is early liquidation. There is also a mixed equilibrium, with   (0, 1) given in the
proof.

If a counterparty Ct doubts future liquidity, i.e. he doubts that he will find a counterparty in
the future, then Ct will not enter. As a result, the debtholder Ht indeed will not find a coun-
terparty. There is a self-fulfilling dry-up of secondary-market liquidity. With demandable


                                                 16
debt, this has severe real effects: unable to trade, Ht redeems his debt on demand, leading
to the costly liquidation of B's investment. In other words, a change in just the beliefs about
future liquidity leads to the failure of B's debt as a medium of exchange in the secondary
market--the failure of B's debt as money. As a result, there is sudden withdrawal of liquidity
from B, i.e. a bank run, or a money run.

Corollary 1. Suppose k satisfies condition (16). If Ct 's beliefs change from t = 1 to
t = 0 for t > t, the debtholder Ht "runs" on B, i.e. Ht unexpectedly demands redemption
of his debt, forcing B to liquidate its investment.

The literature has stressed bank failures resulting from shocks to fundamentals (e.g., Allen
and Gale (1998) and Gorton (1988)) or beliefs about primary market withdrawals (Diamond
and Dybvig (1983)). Friedman and Schwartz (1963) emphasize that such bank failures,
whatever their root cause, disrupt economic activity because banks create money--e.g.,
they issue banknotes--which facilitates trade. Our model also connects bank failure with
money creation. But the chain of causation goes in the opposite direction: the banknote is
redeemed only because it fails to circulate. Thus, a run can occur even with a single creditor,
who redeems his debt when he cannot trade it. It need not be the result of many creditors
racing to be the first to redeem from a common pool of assets. Thus, our model explains
runs on repos and 19th-century banknotes, which are individually collateralized, not backed
by common assets (see Subsection 5.2 and Section 7).
   In our model, financial fragility is a necessary evil. It is necessary because B must
issue a fragile instrument--the banknote--to fund itself (Proposition 3). And it is evil
because money runs lead to inefficient liquidation. This contrasts with the literature on
the necessity of financial fragility, which stresses its virtue, not evil (Allen and Gale (1998),
Diamond and Rajan (2001a, 2001b)).


4.3 Dark Side of Demandable Debt
Although financial fragility is necessary in our model, it can still be excessive. To see why,
first observe that increasing the redemption value r makes runs "more likely": high r puts Ht
in a strong bargaining position, increasing the price Ct pays. This makes it less attractive for
him to enter. And if Ct does not enter, Ht is unable to trade and must redeem early--must
run.

Proposition 5. (Dark side.) Increasing the redemption value r makes the banknote less
likely to circulate in the following senses:



                                               17
 (i) each counterparty Ct enters only for lower entry cost k (given the strategy of other
     counterparties);

 (ii)  = 1 is an equilibrium of the t > 0 subgame only for lower k ;

(iii)  = 0 is not an equilibrium of the t > 0 subgame for lower k .

Hence, demandability cuts both ways. It is both the thing that allows B to fund itself and
the thing that exposes B to runs. It increases B's debt capacity, since it props up the price
of B's debt (Proposition 3). But it also increases B's liquidation risk, since it makes Ct
reluctant to enter.
    Does B internalize the full cost of liquidation risk? Given there are multiple equilibria, it is
not straightforward to know how to address this question. Although Proposition 5 says that
increasing r makes a run equilibrium more likely to exist, it does not say how an incremental
increase in r affects the probability that a run occurs within the multiple-equilibria region.
To make progress, we focus on possible equilibria in which t is an increasing function f of
(R - r ), directly reflecting the form of Ct 's payoff if he enters (equation (13)). The restriction
holds in the equilibria we solve for explicitly below, both in (i) the sunspot equilibrium in
Proposition 4.4 and in (ii) the unique stationary cut-off equilibrium in Proposition 10, which
reflects an exercise akin to equilibrium selection using global games.
    With this additional structure, we find that the answer is no, B does not internalize
liquidation risk:

Proposition 6. (Redemption value.) Suppose that the probability that each counter-
party enters is an increasing function f of (R - r ). As long as the derivative f  is not too
large, B sets the maximum redemption value, r = .

Intuitively, there is a benefit to B of increasing the redemption value r : C0 requires less
compensation for the risk of having to sell at a discount in the secondary market. This
benefit is a cost to C0 's future counterparty, who pays a high price for the banknote. But he
is not there at Date 0, when B and C0 are bargaining. Hence, although B and C0 maximize
their joint surplus, they do not fully internalize this cost, and B continues to increase r even
when it has no social benefit.


4.4 Equilibrium Runs
We now turn to characterizing an equilibrium in which B borrows via a banknote and
money runs arise on the equilibrium path. To do this, we introduce a "sunspot" coordination
variable at each date, st  {0, 1}. We will interpret st = 1 as "normal times" and st = 0

                                                18
as a "confidence crisis," since the sunspot does not affect economic fundamentals, but serves
only as a way to coordinate beliefs. We assume that s0 = 1, that P [st+1 = 0 | st = 1] =: ,
and that P [st+1 = 0 | st = 0] = 1, where we think about  as a small number. In words: the
economy starts in normal times and a permanent20 confidence crisis occurs randomly with
small probability .
   We now look for a Markov equilibrium, i.e. an equilibrium in which the sunspot (rather
than the whole history) is a sufficient statistic for Ct 's action:
                                               
                                                1           if st = 1,
                                           t =                                                          (17)
                                                0           if st = 0.

We can now write the banknote's value v as a function of st (cf. the analogous equation for
the stationary case in equation (9)):


             v 0 = R + (1 - )   0 p0 + 1 -  0 r                 + (1 - )v 0 ,                           (18)


             v 1 = R + (1 - )   1 p1 + 1 -  1 r                 + (1 - ) v 0 + (1 - )v 1          .     (19)


The next proposition characterizes an equilibrium in which the "confidence crisis" induces a
money run.

Proposition 7. (Equilibrium with sunspot runs.) Suppose that the condition in
equation (11) is satisfied strictly. As long as  is sufficiently small, there exists k such that
B can fund its investment only with tradeable, demandable debt (a banknote), even though
it admits a money run when st = 0. Specifically, Ct plays t = st , and the value of the
banknote when st = 0 is
                                       R + (1 - )
                                  v0 =               ,                              (20)
                                          + (1 - )
the value of the banknote when st = 1 is

                              + (1 - ) (1 +  ) + (1 - )                  c - (1 - )
                     v1 =                                                                 ,             (21)
                                             + (1 - )  + (1 - )
 20
      We assume that the crisis is an absorbing state only to be able to solve easily in closed form.




                                                       19
the repayment R is

             (1 - )   + (1 - )(1 -  ) + (1 - )  + (1 - )(1 -  )
  R =c+                                                                                    c- ,      (22)
                                   + (1 - )  + (1 - )

and the redemption value is r = .

With these closed-form expressions, it is easy to see how the price of debt depends on
parameters.

Corollary 2. (Comparative statics.) The (net) interest rate (R - c)/c is

  (i) decreasing in the liquidation value ;

 (ii) decreasing in debtholders' bargaining power  ;

(iii) decreasing in creditors' liquidity horizon 1/;

(iv) increasing in the probability of a confidence crisis ;

 (v) increasing in the investment size c;

(vi) increasing in the investment horizon/expected maturity 1/. Moreover, the term struc-
       ture is upward sloping, in the sense that the yield 21 (R - c)/c is also increasing in
       1/.

In our model, the interest rate is compensation for liquidity risk. The results (i)­(iv) capture
that increasing  and  decrease liquidity risk and increasing  and  increase it. (v) says
that bigger investments are effectively riskier (all else equal). The reason is that, for fixed
liquidation value , they are liquidated at a larger discount in a confidence crisis. (vi) says
that longer maturity investments demand not only higher repayments, but also higher per-
period interest rates, even though there is no discounting in preferences. The reason is that
as maturity increases both the probability that C0 has to trade at a discount before maturity
and the size of the discount he trades at increase. So illiquidity in the secondary market
generates the term structure.22
  21
   This uncompounded yield is approximately equal to the continuously compounded yield, which you
might be more used to. For a zero-coupon instrument:

                                                        R            R-c           R-c
                continuously compounded yield   log       =  log 1 +                   ,
                                                        c             c             c

for small (R - c)/c (given the Taylor expansion of log(1 + x)).
  22
     See Kozlowski (2017) for a macroeconomic model in which trading frictions generate the yield curve.

                                                   20
  A word on welfare and a numerical example. Given its multiple equilibria, our
model does not admit a general welfare analysis. To speak to welfare, we make the following
assumption, motivated by the idea that confidence crises are likely only if there is the risk
of early redemption: confidence crises can occur if B borrows via the banknote, but not if B
borrows via the bond. We ask: if both the banknote and the bond are feasible, how small
does the probability  of a confidence crisis have to be for B to prefer the banknote?

Lemma 3. Suppose confidence crises can occur only if B borrows via the banknote. If the
bond is feasible, B still borrows via the banknote whenever the probability  of a confidence
crisis is below the threshold  ,

                                        + (1 - ) (1 -  )
                           =                                    ,                                     (23)
                                 y -  +  + (1 - ) (1 -  )( - c)

and borrows via the bond otherwise.

For example, if  = 1/4,  = 1/10, y = 20, c = 10,  = 8, and  = 3/4, B chooses the
banknote whenever     14.4%.23 This points to a potentially attractive feature of
our model: unlike in many quantitative bank run models, a borrower chooses the run-prone
instrument for "reasonable" parameters even when the probability of a run is relatively high.


4.5 Banking
We now suppose that the horizon mismatch (equation (11)) is so severe that the borrower
cannot raise c to fund its investment, not even via a banknote. In this case, direct finance is
not possible. But perhaps a form of intermediated finance is?
   To address this question, we now consider N parallel versions of our baseline model:
N identical borrowers B1 , ..., BN can do parallel investments at Date 0 and N identical
                     N
creditors C1
           t , ..., Ct can enter parallel markets at each Date t > 0. At Date 0, the bor-
rowers can issue mutualized instruments, backed by the whole pool of their investments.
Redeeming creditors are paid first come, first served à la Diamond and Dybvig (1983). At
each Date t > 0, each version of the model proceeds exactly as in the baseline, as de-
scribed in Section 2. Note that we assume that the parallel versions of the model are
  23
    We think about these as annual numbers.  = 1/4, the number used in Ennis and Keister (2003), implies
creditors suffer liquidity shocks on average once every four years.  = 1/10 implies the investment is long-
term, taking ten years to complete on average. Given this maturity, y = 20 and c = 10 imply the investment
has annual return of 7.2%.  = 8 implies the investment has a 20% liquidation discount relative to its book
value.  = 3/4 implies that debtholders get most of the surplus, but far from all of it; this is intended to
capture some degree of competition among counterparties.



                                                    21
identical in every state, i.e. investments/liquidity shocks are perfectly correlated across bor-
rowers/creditors. Thus, there are no diversification benefits from pooling loans/deposits as
in Diamond (1984)/Diamond and Dybvig (1983).
    Even absent diversification, the borrowers can benefit from pooling their investments to
increase their debt capacity and raise c. The reason is that pooling allows borrowers to
increase the redemption value r of each banknote up to N, rather than just up to .
    Why does each creditor have a claim on the whole liquidation value N rather than just
on a fraction 1/N of it? The answer is that in an equilibrium in which banknotes circulate,
no one redeems on the equilibrium path; thus, if one creditor deviates, he is the only one
redeeming, and can get paid up to N. As per the price effect of demandability, a high
redemption value r is valuable, even if the redemption option is never exercised. Thus,
increasing r can benefit all N creditors simultaneously--it is "non-rivalrous." And now r can
become arbitrarily large as the number of borrowers N pooling assets increases.
   But that does not mean that borrowers should make r arbitrarily large. If it is too large,
banknotes do not circulate, viz. creditors do not enter if they anticipate being in a weak
bargaining position. Their entry condition (equation (14)) puts an upper bound r max on r :

                                                    + (1 - )(1 -  )
                               r  r max := R -                      k.                                   (24)
                                                        (1 -  )

       Now, to find the debt capacity of a banknote, we substitute r = r max , R = y , and  = 1
into the value of the banknote (equation (10)), to get

                                     R + (1 - ) 1 -  r
                          max v =                                                                        (25)
                                      + (1 - ) 1 - 
                                                                   r =r max , R=y, =1
                                          (1 - )
                                  =y-            k.                                                      (26)
                                              

       Given borrowers can undertake an investment only if its debt capacity exceeds its cost
(max v > c), equation (26) implies that the borrowers can undertake investments if and only
if the NPV, y - c, exceeds creditors' total expected entry costs, (1-
                                                                      )
                                                                        k .24 Thus, by forming
a "bank," the borrowers can issue banknotes to fund all (and only) investments with positive
total surplus. There is a money-creation rationale for banking:
  24
    This expression for the expected entry costs can be understood as follows: from Date 1 onward, creditors
pay k at Date t if debtholders are shocked while investments are still underway, which occurs with probability
(1 - )t . Hence,
                                                          
                                                                           (1 - )
                           total expected entry costs =      (1 - )t k =          k.
                                                         t=1
                                                                              




                                                     22
Proposition 8. (Banking.) Suppose

                                    1     + (1 - )(1 -  )
                              N       y-                  k .                              (27)
                                             (1 -  )

There is an equilibrium in which borrowers successfully fund all investments, raising c by
issuing a banknote to each of the Date-0 creditors, if and only if the investments have positive
total surplus, i.e. the NPV is higher than the total expected entry costs, or

                                                (1 - )
                                       y-c             k.                                  (28)
                                                   

    To fund all positive-surplus investments, borrowers have to set r so high that counterpar-
ties are indifferent between entering and staying out. This makes them especially susceptible
to runs, since an arbitrarily small change in a counterparty's belief about others' strategies
makes him stay out, leading to a money run.
    And now a money run has severe consequences. As in a real-world bank run, there is
mass liquidation: with r > , multiple investments need to be liquidated to redeem each
banknote. In addition to this fragility, the coalition of borrowers has other defining features
of a real-world bank.

  1. Liquidity transformation. The bank funds illiquid assets (non-tradeable invest-
     ments that are costly to liquidate early) with liquid liabilities (circulating demandable
     debt).

         ·   Issuing liquid (tradeable) liabilities gives creditors insurance against liquidity
             shocks.

  2. Maturity transformation. The bank funds long-term investments with short-term
     (demandable) liabilities.

         ·   Issuing demandable liabilities allows creditors to trade at a high price given liq-
             uidity shocks.

  3. Asset pooling. The bank pools borrowers' investments, reusing their liquidation
     value to back demandable debt.

         ·   Issuing debt backed by a pool of assets gives creditors a high redemption value.

  4. Dispersed depositors (creditors). The bank borrows from a large number of dis-
     persed creditors.

                                               23
         ·   Issuing debt to many creditors gives them the option to redeem against the same
             assets (hence dispersed creditors are necessary for asset pooling to help).

  5. Fragility. The bank borrows via debt that is susceptible to runs, and runs force early
     liquidation of multiple investments.

         ·   Issuing run-prone debt, i.e. demandable debt with high redemption value, is nec-
             essary to make the secondary market price high enough that the bank can fund
             efficient investments.

In the banking equilibrium, financial fragility is not necessarily the result of monetary
fragility. With dispersed creditors, there is a common pool problem, which makes creditors
want to redeem if they believe others are going to. Thus, not all runs need be money runs;
there can be Diamond­Dybvig runs too, and these different types of runs could exacerbate
each other.
   The banking equilibrium also makes it easier to apply our model to contemporary deposit
markets, in which entry costs often seem to be small and deposits are redeemable at par:

Corollary 3. Consider the banking equilibrium in Proposition 8 in which r = r max . As
entry costs become small, i.e. k  0, the redemption value and secondary market price
approach the face value, i.e. r  R and p  R.

Here, unlike in the baseline model, a run can occur no matter how small the entry cost k
is. If k is small, the borrowers make r high, so counterparties are still indifferent between
entering and staying out (cf. equation (15)).
   The flip side of this result is that for k > 0, we should expect to see a penalty for early
withdrawal (i.e. r < R), in line with those we see for less liquid forms of bank debt, such as
savings accounts and certificates of deposit.


5 Policy, Applications, and Empirical Content
We now turn to our model's policy implications, applications, and empirical content.


5.1 Policy
Our analysis stresses how the secondary market in which bank debt circulates interacts with
the primary market in which banks issue debt and debtholders demand redemption. Our
focus on this interaction gives new perspectives on a number of policies. Most notably, it


                                              24
admits an analysis of suspension of convertibility in crises. It affirms how this can protect
against runs, as in the literature so far. But it also suggests that it can restore the circulation
of banknotes, in contrast to received thought, but in line with some historical evidence (see
footnotes 2 and 3).
    Suspension of convertibility. To analyze suspension of convertibility, we consider a
set-up akin to that in Subsection 4.4, in which there are two sunspot states, st  {0, 1},
where st = 0 represents a confidence crisis and st = 1 normal times. Here, we assume that
there is a circulating banknote with face value R. We assume it has redemption value r 1
in normal times, and ask what happens if the bank (or a regulator) suspends convertibility
in a confidence crisis, setting r 0 = 0. Does this mitigate the confidence crisis by preventing
runs? Or does it exacerbate it by inhibiting circulation? To address these questions, we
assume the economy is in a confidence crisis today that persists with probability 1 - µ at
each date or comes to a permanent end,25 i.e. s0 = 0, P [st+1 = 0 | st = 0] =: 1 - µ, and
P [st+1 = 1 | st = 1] = 1.
    We find that suspending convertibility can not only prevent runs, but also restore circu-
lation:

Proposition 9. (Suspension of convertibility.) Suppose r 1 = r max as in the banking
equilibrium in Proposition 8. If the banknote circulates in normal times  1 = 1, then, as
long as

                            (1 -  )µ(1 - ) +   + (1 - )( + (1 - )µ)
                      R>                                            k,                                   (29)
                                        (1 -  )  + (1 - )µ

suspending convertibility in a crisis ensures the banknote always circulates.

Intuitively, if convertibility is suspended, the debt holder Ht can no longer redeem his note
from the bank if trade fails. This decreases his outside option when bargaining with his
counterparty Ct , putting Ct in a relatively strong bargaining position. Under the condition
in the proposition, this makes Ct 's bargaining position so strong that he is willing to enter
even if he believes no one else will enter until the crisis is over. However, suspension should
only be temporary. As we point out in the proof of Proposition 9, if Ct anticipates redeeming
at a high price in the future, it can help circulation in a crisis. In line with these prescriptions,
in practice, suspension is temporary, after which bank debt is typically repaid in full.26
    Other policies. Our model gives new perspectives on a number of other policies.
  25
    As in Section 4.4, we assume that st = 1 is an absorbing state to be able to solve easily in closed form.
  26
    See, e.g., Calomiris and Gorton (1991) on how, despite frequent suspensions, "[t]he worst loss per deposit
dollar...in the National Banking Era was 2.1 cents per dollar of deposits" (p. 114).



                                                     25
  1. Narrow banking. In our model, a bank can fund all worthwhile investments if it
     can pool them and issue demandable debt backed by the whole pool (Proposition
      8). This suggests a downside to the idea of narrow banking, which suggests that
      real investments should be separate from deposit-taking (its financial stability benefits
      notwithstanding).

  2. Asset purchase guarantees. In 2008 the US Treasury opened its Temporary Guar-
     antee Program, in which it promised to buy the shares of money market mutual funds
      at a guaranteed price. This off-equilibrium promise to buy money-like securities could
      eliminate the "bad" equilibrium in our model, in which counterparties do not enter the
      secondary market fearing it will dry up in the future.

  3. Capital requirements. In our model, capital requirements are a double-edged sword.
     They can help, by curbing banks' incentive to use too much demandable debt (Propo-
      sition 5). But they can also hurt, by inefficiently constraining investment (Proposition
      3).


5.2 Applications
By zeroing in on the dual role of bank debt--as a funding instrument and payment instrument--
we have abstracted from some things stressed in contemporary discussions of money, banking,
and financial stability. Notably, (i) we assume that all money is created by banks, abstract-
ing from outside money and assuming that debt is redeemable for real goods. (ii) We assume
that there is a single bank, abstracting from interbank competition, trade, and clearing. We
also make stark assumptions about the secondary market, modeling decentralized trade in
the simplest way we can, with (iii) costly entry/trade and (iv) prices determined by bilateral
bargaining.
   In the Free Banking Era, our model assumptions seem to be mostly satisfied. Before
Greenbacks were introduced in 1861, (i) all paper money was created by banks, and it was
redeemable for gold and silver. Sometimes, (ii) there was only one bank in a geographical
region (see, e.g., Helderman (1931)). As a result, counterparties would trade largely that
bank's notes. (iii) Bilateral trade was costly for a number of reasons, including spatial
separation, and the fact that "[e]ach time a transaction took place the seller [of goods] had to
make some judgment about the quality of the particular set of bank notes being offered...[and
the] process of making this judgment used real resources" (Rockoff (1974), p. 144). Moreover,
banknotes traded at different discounts, which varied depending on who traded and where,
reflecting that (iv) prices were determined bilaterally. Indeed, notes tended to trade at higher


                                              26
prices when redemption values were higher and when physical redemption was cheaper (i.e.
the issuer was physically closer), consistent with the effect of the redemption value r on
the secondary market price through bargaining (see, e.g., Gorton (1996) and Weber (2005)).
However, the mapping from r to the price was not one-to-one, consistent with the effect of
bargaining on the division of surplus (for   (0, 1)). And it was not homogenous across
notes and time, consistent with the effect of a self-fulfilling aspect to prices, as in our model.
   More often, however, our model assumptions are not satisfied so literally. But we think
our model still speaks to these circumstances, albeit with a broader interpretation. (i) Central
banks create paper and electronic money, which is what bank debt can be redeemed for. In
this case, the good in our model should be interpreted as outside money, which can be used
freely for consumption/investment. Typically, (ii) there are multiple banks in a geographical
region. In this case, the bank in our model should be interpreted as the banking system,
and rejecting a bank's notes as not accepting transfers from it. For example, in the recent
crises in Argentina and Greece, merchants sometimes refused transfers from the domestic
banking system, but accepted foreign ones (see footnotes 8 and 9). These crises also highlight
that although (iii) trading costs and (iv) bilateral negotiations are less salient in developed
economies in normal times, they can quickly reemerge in crisis. This is consistent with our
model, which suggests that notes trade at par for small k (Corollary 3).
   Our model can also capture some aspects of other important money-like securities, such
as repos. Repos are financial contracts that banks use as a primary source of liquidity.
Some repo transactions are centralized through tri-party agents or CCPs, but trillions of
dollars of them are negotiated bilaterally in decentralized (OTC) markets (CGFS (2017)).
Moreover, repos are effectively redeemable on demand (repo positions are typically left open
until creditors demand they be closed). In these aspects, our model applies well to repos. In
another aspect, however, it seems like it might not apply as well. That is that repo contracts
do not circulate per se--they are formally bilateral agreements, not tradeable instruments.
But the collateral underlying them does, making them closer to the bank money in our model
than they might seem.27 As Gorton and Metrick (2010) put it,


       [An] important feature of repos is that the...collateral can be "spent"...used as
       collateral in another, unrelated, transaction.... This...means that there is a money
       velocity associated with the collateral. In other words, the same collateral can
       support multiple transactions, just as one dollar of cash can lead to a multiple of
       demand deposits at a bank. The collateral is functioning like cash (p. 510).

Thus, "repo runs," salient events of the 2008­2009 financial crisis, could be money runs. As
  27
    See also Donaldson, Lee, and Piacentino (2018), Donaldson and Micheler (2018), Singh (2010), and
Singh and Aitken (2010).

                                                27
such, our framework casts light on the puzzle of how runs arise even though each repo is
individually collateralized, and the common pool problem necessary to generate Diamond­
Dybvig runs is absent (see Gorton and Metrick (2010, 2012) and Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and
Orlov (2014)).


6 Discussion of Assumptions and Extensions
In this section, we discuss some of our key assumptions and then analyze extensions.


6.1 Discussion of Assumptions
Entry costs. As we stress in Subsection 4.5, money runs can arise no matter how small k
is. Whether k reflects the literal cost of entering a trade or the opportunity cost of the time
taken in trading, such a small k could be realistic for some contemporary markets, like retail
markets in which consumers trade deposits for goods via debit cards. But a larger entry
cost also has natural interpretations. Historically, it could represent the physical/temporal
costs of coming to market or, alternatively, of acquiring the expertise/technology to check
for counterfeit instruments. Today, it could represent the cost of setting up a trading desk
to participate in a specific market (e.g., the repo market) or, alternatively, of establishing
the legal infrastructure to handle certain instruments (e.g., the GMRA master agreement for
repos). More generally, it could represent any relative cost of searching for a counterparty
as in the search money literature, of trading/transacting as in the finance literature, or
of posting a vacancy as in the labor literature. Any cost sunk before counterparties meet
suffices for our results.
     Rollover. To focus on trade in the secondary market, we want to abstract from rollover in
the primary market (its practical importance notwithstanding). Indeed, the entry-bargaining-
settlement setup in Subsection 2.3 deliberately precludes strategies in which B borrows via
one-period contracts, and issues new debt to Ct to settle its existing debt with Ht at each
date: since B would have to settle first with Ct and then with Ht , this would require an
additional settlement stage. Moreover, such a one-period rollover strategy would typically
be less desirable than demandable debt in our baseline environment anyway: someone would
have to pay the cost k to enter and buy the new issue in every period, rather than to enter
and trade existing debt only in periods in which Ht is hit by a liquidity shock. More practi-
cally, secondary market trade allows the borrower to avoid floatation costs, which could be
prohibitive if borne in every period in the rollover strategy.
   That said, below we include rollover in our environment (under some additional assump-


                                              28
tions), and show that money runs can still occur (Subsection 6.4).
    Bargaining protocol. In our model, demandability matters because the redemption
value r serves as the outside option in bargaining. Thus, security design can substitute for
market design: the borrower can adjust the terms of trade in the secondary market, choosing
r to calibrate the division of surplus between counterparties, even though the bargaining
power  is immutable.
   Our results hold for bargaining protocols, like Nash bargaining, in which the outside
option determines the division of the surplus. Not every non-cooperative bargaining game
has this feature in equilibrium (Sutton (1986)). But many do. Indeed, the Nash outcome
coincides with the equilibrium of a game in which bargainers either (i) risk having the
bargaining process suddenly break down or (ii) have the ability to make take-it-or-leave-it
offers (see, e.g., Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky (1986)). Within our model, the risk
of a breakdown could reflect the probability that a counterparty abandons the negotiation
because he is hit by a liquidity shock himself or because he finds another, more profitable
trade to execute. And the ability to make take-it-or-leave-it offers could reflect the situation
in modern " `hi-tech' markets [like the repo market] in which binding deals are made quickly
over the telephone [or Bloomberg chat]" (Binmore, Osborne, and Rubinstein (1992)), p. 190;
see Shaked (1994)).
    Infinite horizon. Money runs arise due to dynamic coordination--a counterparty enters
if he believes his future counterparty will, who enters if he believes his future counterparty
will.... Thus, if it is common knowledge that any counterparty is the last one, he will never
enter, and the "good" equilibrium would unravel by backward induction. We avoid this by
assuming that the horizon is infinite, so every counterparty has a future counterparty. Indeed,
there is no date at which the banknote expires for sure; as such, tradable, demandable debt
may have more in common with perpetual debt than with short-term debt.
   The infinite horizon is one way to capture the idea that each counterparty believes that
an instrument could continue for one more period with positive probability. It is the way
used in the new monetarist literature, following Kiyotaki and Wright (1989, 1993), but it is
not the only way; for example, counterparties could be uncertain about their position in a
finite trading sequence (see, e.g., Moinas and Pouget (2013)).


6.2 Random Entry Costs
                                                                 ~t , so that Ct enters only
We now extend the model so Ct 's entry cost is a random variable k
if his entry cost is below a threshold k  . This adds generality and realism, by allowing
for some random, fundamental-based withdrawals. Just as importantly, it shows that the


                                              29
                                   ~t  k  is an increasing function of R - r , providing a
probability that Ct enters, i.e. P k
micro-foundation for the class of functions considered in Proposition 6.
   We assume that the distribution of entry costs is Pareto, with support [k0 , ) and ex-
            ~t  Pareto (k0 , 1). This allows us to solve for cut-off equilibria in closed-form.
ponent one, k
To do so, we suppose that Ct believes that future creditors Ct enter whenever kt  k  , so
his entry condition is

                                         (1 -  ) R - r
                         v-p =                                       kt .                   (30)
                                                  ~t  k 
                                  + (1 - ) 1 -  P k

This is the entry condition in equation (13) with future creditors' entry probability given by
the probability their entry cost exceeds the cut-off k  , rather than by their mixing probability
 . Using the Pareto distribution to substitute in for this probability, P k~t  k  = 1 -k0 /k  ,
gives the next proposition:

Proposition 10. (Cut-off equilibrium with random entry costs.) Define

                                    (1 -  )(R - r ) - (1 - )k0
                              k =                              .                            (31)
                                         + (1 - )(1 -  )

If entry costs follow the Pareto distribution described above and k  > k0 , then there is a
unique stationary cut-off equilibrium of the t > 0 subgame in which Ct enters if and only if
kt  k  .

Observe that, in this equilibrium, Ht withdraws with positive probability on the equilibrium
path, namely whenever he suffers a liquidity shock and his counterparty Ct does not enter.
Ct enters only if kt  k  , or

                   ~t  k  = 1 - k0 = 1 -     + (1 - )(1 -  ) k0
                 P k                                                .                       (32)
                                k        (1 -  )(R - r ) - (1 - )k0

Recall that in Proposition 6, we establish a dark side of demandable debt, under the assump-
tion that the probability that creditors enter is an increasing function f of (R - r ). This
is the case here. Hence, this extension provides an equilibrium foundation for that assump-
tion (we verify that the expression above satisfies the other conditions of the proposition in
Appendix A.19); cf. the discussion in Subsection 4.3.




                                               30
6.3 Asset Choice
What if a single borrower B chooses the type of its investment before borrowing from C0 ?
Do frictions in the secondary market distort its choice? Yes, toward high-liquidation-value
investments:

Proposition 11. (Excessive liquidity.) Suppose that B can choose between an invest-
ment with payoff y and liquidation value  and another investment that is otherwise identical
but has lower payoff y  < y and higher liquidation value  , where

                                                  
                                   >  +                   y - y .                                      (33)
                                            (1 - )(1 -  )

There exists an investment cost c such that in any equilibrium in which investment occurs,
B chooses the low-NPV, high-liquidation-value investment (y ,  ).

Intuitively, with a high-liquidation-value investment, B can issue a high-redemption-value
banknote and borrow more. Thus, to make its debt money-like, B chooses to increase its
liquidation value even at the expense of NPV.


6.4 Partial Rollover
We now turn to a version of the model in which counterparties are matched with debtholders
in a single market via a homogenous matching technology. (This differs from Subsection
4.5, in which they trade in parallel markets.) This set-up allows us to show that money
runs can occur even if (i) there are no aggregate shocks to liquidity and (ii) B can raise
money from new creditors at the beginning of each date, thereby rolling over its debt to
meet redemptions.28 Moreover, unlike in the baseline model, not every withdrawal is a run.
Rather, some debtholders redeem at each date.
   Here we do not model funding/investment, but focus on the secondary market, assuming
that banknotes are held by a unit continuum of debtholders, a fraction  of which needs
liquidity at each date. Counterparties can enter at cost k , in which case they are matched
with debtholders via a homogenous matching function. Thus, the probability t with which
a debtholder meets a counterparty depends on the number of counterparties who enter. The
fraction t of debtholders who meet counterparties trade in the secondary market. The
  28
    This distinguishes our run risk from rollover risk, where we use "run risk" to mean the risk of an
unexpectedly large number of withdrawals and "rollover risk" to mean the risk that B attempts to raise new
debt and fails. Below, we assume B can roll over costlessly--there is no rollover risk--but B cannot go back
to the market to meet a large number of withdrawals without some delay--there is run risk.




                                                    31
remaining (1 - t ) redeem for r . We assume that B issues new identical banknotes to raise
exactly enough to meet these redemptions at the beginning of each date.29
    The next result says that this set-up has multiple steady state equilibria. Indeed, there
is a "good equilibrium," in which many counterparties enter and few debtholders are left
unmatched. In this equilibrium, there are relatively few withdrawals at each date, so B
chooses its rollover strategy to raise a relatively small amount of liquidity. But there is
also a "bad equilibrium," in which few counterparties enter and many debtholders are left
unmatched. In this equilibrium, there are more withdrawals at each date, so B has to choose
a rollover strategy to raise more liquidity. Thus, a change in beliefs can lead to a money
run analogous to that in Corollary 1: if counterparties today believe that few of their future
counterparties will enter, then few of them enter today; this leads to an unexpectedly high
number of withdrawals--a money run.

Proposition 12. (Money runs with partial rollover.) Let the matching technology
                 
be given by  = m q , where q is the number of counterparties that enter and m > 0 is a
parameter. Suppose that B borrows via banknotes from a continuum of creditors. The t > 0
subgame has two stationary equilibria, one in which many counterparties enter,

                                                2
       k  + (1 - ) +          k 2  + (1 - )         - 4m2 k(1 - )(R - r ) (1 -  )
  =                                                                                   =: +     (34)
                                        2k (1 - )

--banknotes are liquid--and another in which few counterparties enter,

                                                2
       k  + (1 - ) -          k 2  + (1 - )         - 4m2 k(1 - )(R - r ) (1 -  )
  =                                                                                   =: -     (35)
                                        2k (1 - )

--banknotes are illiquid--as long as + and - above are well-defined probabilities.

This result implies that money runs can occur even with no aggregate risk, no rollover risk,
and no sequential-service constraint. This affirms that money runs result only from intertem-
poral coordination in the secondary market and helps distinguish our model of bank fragility
from models of rollover risk (e.g., Acharya, Gale, and Yorulmazer (2011) and He and Xiong
(2012)).
  29
    Assuming that B decides how much to raise at the beginning of the date makes runs possible and
assuming that all banknotes are identical (with face value R and redemption value r) keeps the model
stationary.




                                                32
7 Related Literature
We make four main contributions to the literature.
  First, we offer a new rationale for demandable debt. This adds to the literature in two
ways. (i) It complements the literature that shows how demandability can help to miti-
gate moral hazard problems (Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and Diamond and Rajan (2001a,
2001b)).30 In particular, we show how demandability can help to increase the value of bank
debt as "private money." Thus, our model connects two of the main features of bank liabili-
ties: they circulate as money and are redeemable on demand. (ii) It provides a counterpoint
to the literature that suggests that tradeability can substitute for demandability. Notably,
Jacklin (1987) shows that, in Diamond and Dybvig's (1983) environment, you do not need
to redeem debt on demand if you can just trade it in the secondary market.31 , 32 We show
that if bank debt is traded in a decrentralized market, like, e.g., banknotes, deposits, and
repos are, then demandability complements tradeability by increasing the price at which it
trades.
    Second, we uncover a new kind of bank run. By connecting the fragility of money to the
fragility of banks, this adds both to the literature on coordination-based bank-run models
following Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and to the literature on search-based money models
following Kiyotaki and Wright (1989, 1993). In these money models, monetary exchange
is fragile since trade is self-fulfilling. Similarly, in the bank run models, bank deposits are
fragile since withdrawals are self-fulfilling. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
show that such bank fragility follows immediately from such monetary fragility33 and, hence,
  30
     In their conclusion, Diamond and Rajan (2001a) make the link between demandability and circulating
banknotes informally, saying that
      deposits are readily transferable, and liquid, because buyers of deposits have no less ability
      to extract payment than do sellers of deposits. Thus, the deposits can serve as bank notes
      or checks that circulate between depositors. This could explain the special role of banks in
      creating inside money (p. 425).
We make this link formally in this paper.
  31
     However, Jacklin (1987) does point out that tradeable debt can have one disadvantage relative to de-
mandable debt: investments at the initial date can be distorted in anticipation of trading later on (see also
Allen and Gale (2004), Farhi, Golosov, and Tsyvinski (2009), and Kucinskas (2017)).
  32
     Other papers show that there may still be a role for demandability if tradeability is limited (Allen and
Gale (2004), Antinolfi and Prasad (2008), Diamond (1997), and von Thadden (1999)). In these models,
banks issue demandable debt in spite of trade in secondary markets, e.g., to overcome trading frictions, such
as limited market participation. In our model, banks issue demandable debt because of trade in secondary
markets--the option to redeem on demand improves the terms of trade in the secondary market.
  33
     A number of papers study bank money creation independently of financial fragility (e.g., Donald-
son, Piacentino, and Thakor (2018), Gu, Mattesini, Monnet, and Wright (2013), Kiyotaki and Moore
(2001, 2002, 2005)) and some others embed Diamond­Dybvig runs in economies with private money (e.g.,
Champ, Smith, and Williamson (1996) and Sanches (2015); see also Sultanum (2018)). Relatedly, Sanches


                                                     33
coordination-based bank runs can occur even with a single depositor--i.e. without multiple
depositors racing to withdraw from a common pool of assets.34 , 35 Thus, we explain historical
runs on assets backed by individual collateral, such as banknotes and repos.36 In so doing,
we respond to what Gorton (2012b) argues remains a theoretical challenge, saying that


      Generating [a run] event in a model seems harder when...the form of money [is
      such that] each "depositor" receives a bond as collateral. There is no common pool
      of assets on which bank debtholders have a claim. So, strategic considerations
      about coordinating with other agents do not arise. This is a challenge for theory
      and raises issues concerning notions of liquidity and collateral, and generally of
      the design of trading securities--private money (p. 2).

   Third, we show that the need to create circulating demandable debt gives rise to numerous
other banking actives. This adds to the literature on the foundations of banking, connect-
ing pooling assets and dispersed liabilities (e.g., Boyd and Prescott (1986), Diamond (1984),
Diamond and Dybvig (1983), and Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1984)) with money creation
(e.g., Donaldson, Piacentino, and Thakor (2018) and Gu, Mattesini, Monnet, and Wright
(2013)). Notably, in contrast to papers that emphasize that pooling helps banks meet re-
demptions in equilibrium via diversification, we show that it improves creditors' option to
redeem off equilibrium even absent diversification. The benefit of being first in line off
equilibrium also appears in Diamond and Rajan (2001b), where it helps curb moral hazard.
   Fourth, by studying security design when securities are traded in a decentralized sec-
ondary market, our paper adds to the literature in three ways. (i) It complements the
search-based money literature which analyzes which type of asset is the socially optimal
medium of exchange for trade in the secondary market (e.g., Kiyotaki and Wright (1989)
and Burdett, Trejos, and Wright (2001)). We analyze which type of contract is the privately
optimal circulating instrument for funding in the primary market. And we show that this
link with security design matters for the fragility of money as a means of payment. In our
model, securities with positive fundamental value remain fragile--in the sense that there
are multiple steady-state equilibria--as trading/entry costs become vanishingly small. In
the new monetarist literature, in which securities are not designed to raise funds, they do
(2016) argues that banks' inability to commit to redeem deposits can make private money unstable.
  34
     Our focus on runs that result from dynamic coordination failures among counterparties in the secondary
market complements models that focus on runs that result from dynamic coordination failures among de-
positors in the primary market (the dynamic analog of Diamond­Dybvig-type runs), such as He and Xiong
(2012); see also Qi (1994).
  35
     Bond and Rai (2009) uncover another kind of run that can occur with a single depositor, or even with
no depositors whatsoever: a "borrower run."
  36
     This complements the models in Donaldson, Lee, and Piacentino (2018), Kuong (2015) and Martin,
Skeie, and von Thadden (2014a, 2014b).


                                                    34
not (see Lagos, Rocheteau, and Wright (2017)).37 (ii) It extends results in the literature
on corporate bonds that suggest short-maturity bonds can have the benefit of high resale
prices in the secondary market, but the cost of frequent debt issuances (Bruche and Segura
(2016) and He and Milbradt (2014)). These papers restrict attention to debt contracts as in
Leland and Toft (1996). We point out that with more general contracts, the benefit can come
without the cost: demandable debt props up the secondary market price by giving sellers
the option to redeem on demand, an option that need never be exercised.38 (iii) It provides
a counterpoint to the literature that suggests that security design may prevent bank runs
(e.g., Andolfatto, Nosal, and Sultanum (2018), Green and Lin (2003), and Peck and Shell
(2003)). This literature suggests that if the space of securities is rich enough, then bank runs
do not arise in Diamond and Dybvig's (1983) environment. Our analysis suggests that the
security designs proposed in this literature may not prevent all kinds of bank runs. This is
because, in our environment, it is exactly the possibility of a run, i.e. the option to redeem
on demand, that makes the banknote the optimal funding instrument.
   More broadly, this paper complements the related line of research that focuses on in-
formation, rather than trading frictions, in secondary-market trade, which started with
Gorton and Pennacchi (1990).39 This literature generally focuses on fundamental risk, and
suggests that information frictions in the secondary market lead banks to do risk transfor-
mation, and this improves social efficiency. We focus on coordination risk, and suggest that
trading frictions in the secondary market lead banks to do liquidity transformation but that
this can decrease social efficiency.


8 Conclusion
What is a bank? A bank is something that creates money, i.e. debt that facilitates trade
in decentralized markets. By thinking about a bank this way, we found a new rationale
for demandable debt, a new type of bank run--a "money run"--and a new explanation
for the other quintessential things banks do, such as pooling assets and maturity/liquidity
transformation. The perspective matters for policy. Among other things, it suggests a cost
of narrow banking and a benefit of suspension of convertibility, both new to the literature.


  37
      See Rocheteau and Wright (2013) for a model in which multiple (non-steady state) equilibria arise in a
decentralized market without a fixed cost.
   38
      In an extension, Bruche and Segura (2016) do consider a version of puttable debt. However, they
effectively assume it is not tradeable, which shuts down the interaction of demandability and tradeability
that is critical to our results.
   39
      See, Chemla and Hennessy (2014), Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2015a, 2015b), Dang, Gorton, Holm-
ström, and Ordoñez (2017), Gorton and Ordoñez (2014), Jacklin (1989), and Vanasco (2017).

                                                    35
A Proofs
A.1 Proof of Proposition 1
For an instrument i, let max vi be an instrument's debt capacity, i.e. its maximum value over
any R, r , and  :
                        max vi := sup vi , r   , R  y ,   [0, 1] .                       (36)

So, C0 lends against instrument i only if max vi  c. Hence, B can fund itself with the
puttable loan but not with the loan if and only if

                                 max vloan < c  max vputt. loan .                               (37)

Substituting r =  and R = y into the expressions for their values in equations (2) and (4)
gives the condition in the proposition.


A.2 Proof of Lemma 1
When Ct and Ht are matched, Ht has been hit by a liquidity shock. Thus, Ct 's value of the
bond is vt and Ht 's value of the bond is zero (since Ht consumes only at Date t and the bond
is not demandable). The total surplus is thus vt , which Ct and Ht split in proportions 1 - 
and  , in accordance with the Nash bargaining solution. Thus the price is pt = vt .


A.3 Proof of Proposition 2
The proof is analogous to that of Proposition 1. B can borrow via a bond but not with a
puttable loan if and only if

                                max vputt. loan < c  max vbond ,                                (38)

where max v is as defined in equation (36). Substituting r = , R = y ,  = 1 into the
expressions for their values in equations (4) and (7) gives the condition in the proposition.


A.4 Proof of Lemma 2
When Ct and Ht are matched Ht has been hit by a liquidity shock. Thus, Ct 's value of the
banknote is vt and Ht 's value of the banknote is r (since Ht consumes only at Date t, it
redeems on demand if it does not trade). The gains from trade are thus vt - r , which Ct and



                                               36
Ht split in proportions 1 -  and  , in accordance with the Nash bargaining solution, i.e. pt
is such that

                                  Ht gets  vt - r + r = pt ,                             (39)
                                  Ct gets (1 -  ) vt - r = vt - pt ,                     (40)

or pt = vt + (1 -  )r .


A.5 Proof of Proposition 3
The proof is analogous to those of Proposition 1 and Proposition 2. B can borrow via a
banknote but not with a puttable loan or a bond if and only if

                     max      max vputt. loan , max vbond   < c  max vb.note ,           (41)

where max v is as defined in equation (36). Substituting r = , R = y ,  = 1 into the
expressions for their values in equations (4), (7), and (10) gives the condition in the propo-
sition.


A.6 Proof of Proposition 4
For the pure equilibria, the argument is in the text (see equations (14) and (15)).
   For the mixed equilibrium, Ct must be indifferent between entering and staying out,
k = v - p, or
                                            (1 -  ) R - r
                                      k=                    .                            (42)
                                            + (1 - )(1 -  )
Solving for  gives

                              1              
                          =         1-           (1 -  ) R - r - k        .              (43)
                                         (1 - )k




A.7 Proof of Corollary 1
The result follows immediately from Proposition 4.


A.8 Proof of Proposition 5
We prove points (i)­(iii) in turn.

                                                 37
   (i) Consider Ct 's best response given other counterparties play  in equation (13):

                                          (1 -  ) R - r
                            k v-p=                        .                              (44)
                                          + (1 - )(1 -  )

The RHS above is decreasing in r (for fixed  ).
   (ii) The result follows immediately from equation (14).
   (iii) The result follows immediately from equation (15).


A.9 Proof of Proposition 6
We prove the result by setting up B's maximization problem over R and r given  = f (R - r )
and showing that B optimally sets r = . We proceed in the following steps.

 (i) We write down B's utility as a function of R and r .

 (ii) We set up the constrained maximization problem to find R and r .

(iii) We show that the constraint in the maximization problem binds.

(iv) We show that the objective in the maximization problem is increasing in r given the
     constraint binds.

 (v) We conclude that r = , its maximum possible value.

   B's utility. Let u denote B's expected utility, which can be written recursively as

            ut = (y - R) + (1 - )  t ut+1 + (1 - t )( - r ) + (1 - )ut+1                 (45)

The terms are determined as follows. With probability , B's investment pays off and B
repays R, keeping y - R. With probability (1 - ), B's investment does not payoff and
the debtholder Ht is hit by a liquidity shock. With conditional probability t , Ht finds a
counterparty and B continues its investment, getting ut+1 , since there is no discounting.
Otherwise, with conditional probability 1 - t , Ht does not find a counterparty and redeems
on demand. B must liquidate its investment and repay r , so it gets  - r . With probability
(1 - )(1 - ), B's investment does not pay off and Ht is not hit by a liquidity shock. Again,
B continues and gets ut+1 . Given (ut = ut+1  u), substituting t  f  f (R - r ) in
accordance with the hypothesis of the proposition and solving for u gives

                               (y - R) + (1 - )(1 - f )( - r )
                          u=                                   .                         (46)
                                      + (1 - )(1 - f )

                                            38
   B's maximization problem. B will choose R and r to maximize u subject to the
constraint that v  c (so C0 lends). Substituting for u form equation (46) and for v from
equation (10) with  = f (R - r ), this reads:
                     
                                          y - R) + (1 - )(1 - f )( - r )
                      maximize
                     
                                                + (1 - )(1 - f )                            (47)
                                         R + (1 - )(1 - f )r
                                s.t.                          c.
                     
                                          + (1 - )(1 - f )

    Constraint binds. To show that the constraint binds, we show that decreasing R (i)
increases the objective and (ii) tightens the constraint:

                            u
  (i) By differentiation,   R
                                 < 0 as long as

                        f  (1 - ) y - R - ( - r )        <  + (1 - )(1 - f )                (48)

      If the term in square brackets is negative, this is always satisfied, since f  > 0. If it
      is positive, then it is satisfied as long as f  is sufficiently small, which is required by
      hypothesis.
                            v
 (ii) By differentiation,   R
                                 > 0 as long as

                                                + (1 - )(1 - f )
                                       f > -                     .                          (49)
                                                (1 - ) (R - r )

      This is always satisfied given f  > 0.

   Optimal r . To show that r = , we show that u is increasing in r given the constraint
binds. To see this, compute the total derivative of u = u r, f (R - r ), R(r ) "along the
constraint":

                            du   u u df   u dR
                               =  +     +                                                   (50)
                            dr   r f dr R dr
                                 u u  dR         u dR
                               =  +  f      -1 +      ,                                     (51)
                                 r f     dr      R dr

where dR/dr comes from differentiating the constraint (given it binds) and the partial deriva-




                                                  39
tives follow from direct computation:


             dR        (1 - ) (1 - f )( + (1 - )(1 - f )) - (R - r )f 
                  =-                                                             ,       (52)
             dr             ( + (1 - )(1 - f ) + (1 - )(R - r )f )
             u                
                  =-                    ,                                                (53)
             R         + (1 - )(1 - f )
             u      (y - R - ( - r ))(1 - )
                  =                         ,                                            (54)
             f        ( + (1 - )(1 - f ))2
             u          (1 - )(1 - f )
                  =-                    .                                                (55)
             r         + (1 - )(1 - f )

Substituting equations (52), (53), (54), and (55) into equation (51) and manipulating, we
see that the derivative du/dr > 0 as long as so long as


                           2                                             2
      + (1 - )(1 - f )          y -  - (R - r ) +   + (1 - )(1 - f           R - r f <
                                                                                         (56)
                  < (1 -  )f  + (1 - )(1 - f )  + (1 - )(1 - f ) .

If the term in square brackets is negative, this is always satisfied, since f  > 0. If it is
positive, then it is satisfied as long as f  is small, which is required by hypothesis.


A.10 Proof of Proposition 7
We first solve for the values v 0 and v 1 in terms of r and R given the strategies  0 = 0 and
 1 = 1. We then show that these strategies are indeed best responses (for some k ). Finally,
we argue that r =  and compute the repayment R. Finally, we substitute r and R back
into the values to get the expressions in the proposition. Then, the fact that B can borrow
via the banknote and only via the banknote for  sufficiently small follows immediately from
Proposition 3 and the continuity of v 1 in .
    Values. From equation (18) with  0 = 0, we have immediately that

                                             R + (1 - )r
                                      v0 =                                               (57)
                                              + (1 - )

(this is just the value of the puttable loan in equation (4)). From Lemma 2 (the logic of
which is not affected by the presence of sunspots), we have the prices

                               p0 = v0 + (1 -  )r,                                       (58)
                               p1 =  v 0 + (1 - )v 1 + (1 -  )r.                         (59)


                                               40
Thus, equation (19) with  1 = 1 reads

 v 1 = R + (1 - )   v 0 + (1 - )v 1 + (1 -  )r + (1 - ) v 0 + (1 - )v 1                                  , (60)

so
                               R + (1 - )  1 - (1 -  ) v0 + (1 -  )r
                        v1 =                                                           .                   (61)
                                   + (1 - )  1 - (1 -  ) + (1 -  )

       Best responses.  1 = 1 and  0 = 0 are best responses if

                                 v 0 - p0  k  v 0 + (1 - )v 1 - p1                                         (62)

or
                      (1 -  )(v 0 - r )  k  (1 -  ) v 0 + (1 - )v 1 - r .                                  (63)

This is satisfied for some k as long as v 1  v 0 . This is the case as long as R  r , which must
be the case since R > c >   r .
   Repayments. r =  since v 1 is (uniformly) increasing in r but, for  small, B's payoff
does not depend on r (directly).40 , 41
   Now, the repayment R is determined by solving

                                           c = v 0 + (1 - )v 1 .                                           (64)

Substituting in for v 0 and v 1 from equations (57) and (61) and solving for R, we find

              (1 - )   + (1 - )(1 -  ) + (1 - )  + (1 - )(1 -  )
     R =c+                                                                                      c- ,       (65)
                                     + (1 - )  + (1 - )

as expressed in the proposition.
  40
      Intuitively, if you are "close" to the good equilibrium (so the banknote almost always circulates), you get
all of the benefit increasing r (via the increased price), but almost none of the cost (via the increased payout
given early redemption). Formally, v                                 u
                                         r > 0 uniformly in , but r  0 as   0 (see the expressions for B's
payoffs in equations (71) and (72)).
   41
      Note that we are calculating the optimal values of R and r as if they do not affect the equilibria of
the t > 0 subgames. I.e. counterparties enter in state st = 1 and not in state st = 0, as described in the
proposition, off the equilibrium path as well as on it. However, other equilibria are possible too, supported
by different off-equilibrium behavior.




                                                       41
   We can then use the expressions for R and v 0 above and substitute them into v1 to find

                          + (1 - ) (1 +  ) + (1 - )           c - (1 - )
                 v1 =                                                         ,             (66)
                                      + (1 - )  + (1 - )

as expressed in the proposition.


A.11 Proof of Corollary 2
The results follow directly from differentiation given the expression for R in equation (22).


A.12 Proof of Lemma 3
We first solve for B's Date-0 utility if it issues a bond, which we label u|bond . Then we solve
for B's utility if it issues a banknote, which we label u|b.note . Then we show u|b.note  u|bond
whenever    .
   Bond. Suppose B issues a bond. By assumption, the bond always circulates. Hence, B
never liquidates early and eventually gets y and repays R. Since there is no discounting, B's
utility is u = y - R. Since the bond is like a banknote that always circulates with redemption
value zero, R is given by equation (22) with  = 0 and  replaced by zero (since r = 0 instead
of r = ). We have
                                     + (1 - )(1 -  )
                            u=y-                         c =: u bond .                    (67)
                                               
   Banknote. Suppose B issues a banknote. Denote B's utility in state st by ust . First,
consider st = 0. u0 solves

                        u0 = (y - R) + (1 - ) ( - r ) + (1 - )u0 ,                          (68)

where the terms are determined as follows. With probability , B's investment pays off and
B repays R, keeping y - R. With probability (1 - ), B's investment does not payoff and
the debtholder Ht is hit by a liquidity shock. Since st = 0, t = 0 and Ht redeems on
demand and B must liquidate its investment and repay r , getting r - . With probability
(1 - )(1 - ), B's investment does not pay off and Ht is not hit by a liquidity shock. B gets
u0 , since st+1 = 0 given P [st+1 = 0 | st = 0] = 1. Solving for u0 with r =  gives

                                              (y - R)
                                      u0 =             .                                    (69)
                                              + (1 - )




                                               42
Now, consider st = 1. u1 solves

                                 u1 = (y - R) + (1 - ) u0 + (1 - )u1 ,                   (70)

where the terms are determined as follows. With probability , B's investment pays off and
B repays R, keeping y - R. With probability 1 - , B's investment does not payoff. In this
case, B continues its investment to the next date (it does not matter if Ht is shocked, since
B's debt always circulates given st = 1). Hence, with conditional probability , st+1 = 0
and B gets u0 and, with conditional probability 1 - , st+1 = 1 and B gets u1 . Solving for
u1 gives
                                               (y - R) + (1 - )u0
                                        u1 =                      .                      (71)
                                                    + (1 - )
B's Date-0 utility is thus
                                          ub.note = u0 + (1 - )u1 .                      (72)

Substituting for u0 , u1 , and R from equations (69), (71), and (22) and differentiating imme-
diately gives the following lemma, which is useful below.

Lemma 4. u          b.note
                             is continuously decreasing in .

Proof. Direct computation gives


                             (1 - ) y -  + (1 - )(1 -  ) c +  (c - ) + (1 - )(1 -  )
  u        b.note
                      =-                                                 2                 .
                                                   + (1 - )  + (1 - )
                                                                                         (73)
This is negative since each term in the numerator is positive, given y - ( +(1 - )(1 -  ))c 
0 by the assumption that the bond is feasible (equation (8)).


   Comparison. B prefers to issue a banknote than a bond whenever u|b.note  u|bond .
From the expressions above, equality holds if

                                             + (1 - ) (1 -  )
                                =                                     .                  (74)
                                     (y - ) +  + (1 - ) (1 -  )( - c)

And given u|bond does not depend on  and u|b.note is increasing in  (Lemma 4), u|b.note 
u|bond exactly when    .




                                                     43
A.13 Proof of Proposition 8
Most of the argument is in the text preceding the proposition. It remains only to show that
creditors' entry condition puts a tighter bound on the redemption value than the liquidation
value does, i.e. r  r max is a tighter constraint than r  N. And, indeed, the assumption
in equation (27) says exactly that r max  N.


A.14 Proof of Corollary 3
The result follows immediately from the expressions for r max in equation (24) and p in Lemma
2 (given the expression for v in equation (10)).


A.15 Proof of Proposition 9
Here, we start with the value functions, then the prices, and then compute Ct 's entry con-
dition in the crisis under the assumption that the note does not circulate in the crisis. We
then show that, under the condition in the proposition, Ct does enter if convertibility is
suspended, i.e. if r 0 = 0, contradicting the assumption that the note does not circulate.
   (Note that we assumed in the proposition that counterparties always enter in normal
times; this is a best response given the definition of r 1 = r max .)
   Values. We have that


         v 0 = R + (1 - )   0 p0 + 1 -  0 r 0        + (1 - ) (1 - µ)v 0 + µv 1   ,     (75)


         v 1 = R + (1 - )   1 p1 + 1 -  1 r 1        + (1 - )v 1 ,                      (76)


which are the analogs of equations (18) and (19) in Subsection 4.4. These values depend on
the prices, which are determined by Nash bargaining, to give

                           p0 =  (1 - µ)v0 + µv 1 + (1 -  )r 0 ,                        (77)

                           p1 = v 1 + (1 -  )r 1 .                                      (78)

Substituting back into the value functions, and supposing that the note circulates in normal
times and (in anticipation of a contradiction) that it does not circulate in a crisis,  1 = 1
and  0 = 0, we have that

                                R + (1 - )r 0 + (1 - )µ(1 - )v 1
                         v0 =                                                           (79)
                                    + (1 - )  + (1 - )µ

                                              44
and
                                        R + (1 - )(1 -  )r 1
                                 v1 =                        ,                                (80)
                                         + (1 - )(1 -  )
which, with r = r max from equation (24), simplifies to

                                                 (1 - )
                                      v1 = R -          k.                                    (81)
                                                    

   Ct 's entry condition. Ct 's entry condition in a crisis (st = 0) is

                                 (1 - µ)v 0 + µv 1 - p0         k,                            (82)
                                                          =0


which is the analog of equation (13) in the model without sunspots. Using v 0 and p0 above,
this reads
                     (1 -  ) µv 1 + (1 - µ)R -  + (1 - )µ r 0
                                                                   k.                  (83)
                                + (1 - )  + (1 - )µ
Note that the RHS is decreasing in r 0 : a high redemption value in a crisis makes Ct more
reluctant to enter, as stressed in Proposition 5 and Proposition 6. Moreover, the RHS is
increasing in v 1 , which in turn is increasing in r 1 : a high redemption value in normal times
makes Ct more willing to enter, because he anticipates a higher value in the future.
    From here, we substitute for v 1 and r 1 = r max to find that Ct enters if and only if

                           (1 -  )µ(1 - ) +   + (1 - )( + (1 - )µ)
                 r0  R -                                           k.                         (84)
                                       (1 -  )  + (1 - )µ

Suspension of convertibility restores circulation if this equation is satisfied for r 0 = 0, or the
RHS is positive, which is the condition in the proposition.


A.16 Proof of Proposition 10
      ~t  Pareto (k0 , 1), we can replace  in Ct 's entry condition (equation (13)) by
Given k
P [t = 1] = 1 - k0 /k  . Ct must be indifferent at the cut-off k  :

                                         (1 -  ) R - r
                              k =                              k0
                                                                         .                    (85)
                                     + (1 - ) 1 -  1 -         k
                                                                     ]

Solving for k  gives
                                    (1 -  )(R - r ) - (1 - )k0
                             k =                               .                              (86)
                                         + (1 - )(1 -  )




                                                45
A.17 Proof of Proposition 11
By Proposition 3, B can invest in (y ,  ) but not in (y, ) if and only if

                            max vb.note   (y,)
                                                 < c  max vb.note    (y  , )
                                                                               ,                (87)

where max v is as defined in equation (36). Substituting for R, r and  in the value of the
banknote (equation (10)), this says that

                    y + (1 - )(1 -  )    y  + (1 - )(1 -  )
                                      <c                    .                                   (88)
                     + (1 - )(1 -  )      + (1 - )(1 -  )

There exists c satisfying the above inequalities whenever the left-most term is less than the
right-most term. This reduces to the condition in the proposition (equation (33)).


A.18 Proof of Proposition 12
Observe first that the value of the banknote is given by the same expression as in the baseline
model (equation (10)). But now an interior value of  is determined by counterparties' entry
condition. Recall that the matching function is homogenous, so each counterparty is matched
with a debtholder with probability /q . Counterparties' entry condition is thus

                                           
                                             v - p  k,                                          (89)
                                           q

where q represents the steady-state mass of counterparties entering at each date. Since
each counterparty is small, the inequality above will bind. Substituting in for v and p =
v + (1 -  )r , we have
                                    (1 -  ) R - r
                                                         = k.                         (90)
                              q  + (1 - )(1 -  )
            
With  = m q , this can be re-written as

                                                        
                mk (1 - )q - k  + (1 - )                    q + m(1 -  )(R - r ) = 0.           (91)

                                  
This is a quadratic equation in      q . It has the two solutions, i.e. there are two steady states,

                                                        2
             k  + (1 - ) ±        k 2  + (1 - )             - 4m2 k(1 - )(R - r ) (1 -  )
      q± =                                                                                  .   (92)
                                            2mk (1 - )
                  
Substituting ± = m q± gives the expressions in the proposition.


                                                   46
A.19 Verifying the Conditions of Proposition 6 in the Set-up of Subsection 6.2
Following Proposition 6, call the probability that creditors enter f . In the set-up of Subsec-
tion 6.2, this probability is given by equation (32):

                                              + (1 - )(1 -  ) k0
                      f (R - r ) := 1 -                              .                      (93)
                                          (1 -  )(R - r ) - (1 - )k0

This is an increasing function of R - r , as long as the denominator of the second term is
positive, which is the case by the hypothesis that k  > k0 (Proposition 10). Indeed, we can
write f  as
                                      (1 -  )(1 - f )
                          f =                              > 0.                             (94)
                                (1 -  )(R - r ) - (1 - )k0
   Now we verify that the condition of the lemma that f  not be too large is satisfied. The
specific condition we need is given in equation (48) in the proof. One sufficient condition is
immediate:
                               (1 - ) y - R - ( - r ) < 0.                                (95)

   If the above condition is not satisfied, it is enough that

                                         + (1 - )(1 - f )
                                f <                         .                               (96)
                                      (1 - )(y - R -  + r )

To re-write this, we substitute for f  from equation (94). We find that the following condition
must be satisfied:

                       (1 -  )(1 - f )           + (1 - )(1 - f )
                                            <                       .                       (97)
                 (1 -  )(R - r ) - (1 - )k0   (1 - )(y - R -  + r )

                                                                       1-f
A sufficient condition for the above is that the LHS is less than   y -R-+r
                                                                            .   This form allows
us to cancel 1 - f and derive that the conditions of Proposition 6 hold in the random-entry
costs set-up if
                                      (1 - )k0
                              y-+                  > 2(R - r ),                        (98)
                                        (1 -  )
(and the condition in equation (95) is violated).




                                               47
B Table of Notations


                                Players and Indices
       t       time index
       B       borrower or "bank"
       Ct      (potential) creditor/counterparty at Date t
       Ht      debtholder at Date t


                            Technologies and Preferences
       y       payoff of B's investment
       c       cost of B's investment
               liquidation value of B's investment
               probability B's investment pays off each date
               probability Ct is hit by liquidity shock at each date
       u       B's utility (used only in the Appendix)
       k       Ct 's entry cost


                           Prices, Values, and Strategies
       R       terminal repayment (face value of debt)
       r       redemption value
       vt      value of B's debt to a creditor at Date t
       pt      secondary-market price of B's debt at Date t
       t       mixed strategy of counterparty Ct


                                  Other Variables
       st      sunspot at Date t (Subsection 4.4 and Subsection 5.1)
               P [st+1 = 0|st = 1], "confidence crisis" probability (Subsection 4.4)
       µ       P [st+1 = 1|st = 0], "confidence crisis" probability
       max v   debt capacity/maximum value of an instrument (equation (36))
       rmax    maximum redemption value s.t. Ct enters (equation (24))
       m       matching parameter in Subsection 6.4




                                         48
References
Acharya, Viral, Douglas Gale, and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2011, Rollover risk and market freezes,
  The Journal of Finance 66, 1177­1209.

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1998, Optimal financial crises, The Journal of Finance
  53, 1245­1284.

       , 2004, Financial intermediaries and markets, Econometrica 72, 1023­1061.

Andolfatto, David, Ed Nosal, and Bruno Sultanum, 2018, Preventing bank runs, Theoretical
 Economics 177.

Andrew, A. Piatt, 1908, Substitutes for cash in the panic of 1907, The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 22, 497­516.

Antinolfi, Gaetano, and Suraj Prasad, 2008, Commitment, banks and markets, Journal of
  Monetary Economics 55, 265­277.

Bagehot, Walter, 1873, Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market (McMaster
  University Archive for the History of Economic Thought).

Binmore, Ken, Martin J. Osborne, and Ariel Rubinstein, 1992, Noncooperative models of
  bargaining, vol. 1 of Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications . chap. 7, pp.
  179­225 (Elsevier).

Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein, and Asher Wolinsky, 1986, The nash bargaining solution
  in economic modelling, The RAND Journal of Economics 17, 176­188.

Blackson, Robert M., 1989, Pennsylvania banks and the panic of 1819: A reinterpretation,
  Journal of the Early Republic 9, 335­358.

Bond, Philip, and Ashok S. Rai, 2009, Borrower runs, Journal of Development Economics
  88, 185­191.

Boyd, John H., and Edward Prescott, 1986, Financial intermediary-coalitions, Journal of
  Economic Theory 38, 211­232.

Bruche, Max, and Anatoli Segura, 2016, Debt maturity and the liquidity of secondary debt
  markets, Temi di discussione (Economic working papers) 1049 Bank of Italy, Economic
  Research and International Relations Area.



                                              49
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding
  liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201­2238.

Burdett, Kenneth, Alberto Trejos, and Randall Wright, 2001, Cigarette money, Journal of
  Economic Theory 99, 117­142.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Gary Gorton, 1991, The Origins of Banking Panics: Models,
  Facts, and Bank Regulation . chap. 4, pp. 109­174 (National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc).

Calomiris, Charles W., and Charles M. Kahn, 1991, The role of demandable debt in struc-
  turing optimal banking arrangements, American Economic Review 81, 497­513.

CGFS, 2017, Repo market functioning, CGFS papers 59 Bank for International Settlements.

Champ, Bruce, Bruce D. Smith, and Stephen D. Williamson, 1996, Currency elasticity and
  banking panics: theory and evidence, Canadian Journal of Economics 29, 828­864.

Chemla, Gilles, and Christopher Hennessy, 2014, Skin in the game and moral hazard, The
  Journal of Finance 69, 1597­1641.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, 2015a, Ignorance, debt and financial
 crises, Working paper.

          , 2015b, The information sensitivity of a security, Working paper.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmström, and Guillermo Ordoñez, 2017, Banks as
 secret keepers, American Economic Review 107, 1005­29.

Dewald, William G., 1972, The national monetary commission: A look back, Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking 4, 930­956.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1984, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, The Review
  of Economic Studies 51, pp. 393­414.

Diamond, Douglas W, 1997, Liquidity, banks, and markets, Journal of Political Economy
  105, 928­56.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig, 1983, Bank runs, deposit insurance, and
  liquidity, Journal of Political Economy 91, 410­419.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2001a, Banks and liquidity, The American
  Economic Review 91, 422­425.

                                               50
       , 2001b, Liquidity risk, liquidty creation, and financial fragility: A theory of banking,
  Journal of Political Economy 109, 287­327.

Donaldson, Jason Roderick, Jeongmin Lee, and Giorgia Piacentino, 2018, The opportunity
 cost of collateral, Working paper Washington University in St Louis.

Donaldson, Jason Roderick, and Eva Micheler, 2018, Resaleable debt and systemic risk,
  Journal of Financial Economics 127, 485­504.

Donaldson, Jason Roderick, Giorgia Piacentino, and Anjan Thakor, 2018, Warehouse bank-
  ing, Journal of Financial Economics 129, 250­267.

Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Gârleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2005, Over-the-counter markets,
 Econometrica 73, 1815­1847.

Ennis, Huberto M., and Todd Keister, 2003, Economic growth, liquidity, and bank runs,
  Journal of Economic Theory 109, 220­245.

Farhi, Emmanuel, Mikhail Golosov, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2009, A theory of liquidity and
  regulation of financial intermediation, Review of Economic Studies 76, 973­992.

Friedman, Milton, and Anna Schwartz, 1963, A Monetary History of the United States,
  1867-1960 (National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc).

Frydman, Carola, Eric Hilt, and Lily Y. Zhou, 2015, Economic Effects of Runs on Early
  "Shadow Banks": Trust Companies and the Impact of the Panic of 1907, Journal of Polit-
  ical Economy 123, 902­940.

Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner, 2005, Contagion of self-fulfilling financial crises due to
  diversification of investment portfolios, Journal of Fianance 119, 151­183.

Gorton, Gary, 1988, Banking panics and business cycles, Oxford Economic Papers 40, 751­
  781.

      , 1996, Reputation formation in early bank note markets, Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 104, 346­97.

       , 2012a, Misunderstanding Financial Crises: Why We Don't See Them Coming (Ox-
  ford University Press).

       , 2012b, Some reflections on the recent financial crisis, NBER Working Papers 18397
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

                                              51
       , and Andrew Metrick, 2010, Haircuts, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis Review 96,
  507­519.

        , 2012, Securitized banking and the run on repo, Journal of Financial Economics
  104, 425­451.

Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordoñez, 2014, Collateral crises, American Economic Review
  104, 343­78.

Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi, 1990, Financial intermediaries and liquidity creation,
  Journal of Finance 45, 49­71.

Green, Edward J., and Ping Lin, 2003, Implementing efficient allocations in a model of
  financial intermediation, Journal of Economic Theory 109, 1­23.

Gu, Chao, Fabrizio Mattesini, Cyril Monnet, and Randall Wright, 2013, Banking: a new
 monetarist approach, Review of Economic Studies 80, 636­662.

He, Zhiguo, and Konstantin Milbradt, 2014, Endogenous liquidity and defaultable bonds,
  Econometrica 82, 1443­1508.

He, Zhiguo, and Wei Xiong, 2012, Dynamic debt runs, Review of Financial Studies 25,
  1799­1843.

Helderman, Leonard, 1931, National and State Banks: A Study of their Origins (Houghton
  Mifflin: Boston).

Jacklin, Charles, 1987, Demand deposits, trading restrictions, and risk sharing, in Edward
  Prescott, and Neil Wallace, ed.: Contractual Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade .
  chap. II, pp. 26­47 (University of Minnesota Press: Minneapolis).

         , 1989, Demand equity and deposit insurance, Working paper Stanford University.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 2001, Evil is the root of all money, Clarendon Lectures,
  Oxford.

        , 2002, Evil is the root of all money, American Economic Review, Papers and Pro-
  ceedings 92, 62­66.

         , 2005, Financial deepening, Journal of the European Economic Association 3, 701­
  713.



                                            52
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and Randall Wright, 1989, On money as a medium of exchange, Journal
  of Political Economy 97, 927­954.

       , 1993, A search-theoretic approach to monetary economics, American Economic
  Review 83, 63­77.

Kosmetatos, Paul, 2014, Financial contagion and market intervention in the 1772-3 credit
  crisis, Working Papers 21 Department of Economic and Social History at the University
  of Cambridge.

Kozlowski, Julian, 2017, Long-term finance and investment with frictional asset markets,
  Working paper New York University.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel, and Dmitry Orlov, 2014, Sizing up repo, The Journal
  of Finance 69, 2381­2417.

Kuong, John, 2015, Self-fulfilling fire sales: Fragility of collateralised short-term debt mar-
  kets, Working paper.

Kucinskas, Simas, 2017, Liquidity creation and financial stability: The role of hidden trades,
 Working paper University of Amsterdam.

Lagos, Ricardo, Guillaume Rocheteau, and Randall Wright, 2017, Liquidity: A New Mone-
  tarist Perspective, Journal of Economic Literature 55, 371­440.

Leland, Hayne, and Klaus Bjerre Toft, 1996, Optimal capital structure, endogenous
  bankruptcy, and the term structure of credit spreads, Journal of Finance 51, 987­1019.

Martin, Antoine, David Skeie, and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden, 2014a, The fragility of short-
  term secured funding markets, Journal of Economic Theory 149, 15­42.

       , 2014b, Repo runs, Review of Financial Studies.

McLeay, Michael, Amar Radia, and Ryland Thomas, 2014, Money creation in the modern
 economy, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin.

Moinas, Sophie, and Sebastien Pouget, 2013, The bubble game: An experimental study of
 speculation, Econometrica 81, 1507­1539.

Peck, James, and Karl Shell, 2003, Equilibrium bank runs, Journal of Political Economy
  111, 103­123.



                                              53
Qi, Jianping, 1994, Bank liquidity and stability in an overlapping generations model, The
  Review of Financial Studies 7, 389­417.

Ramakrishnan, Ram, and Anjan Thakor, 1984, Information reliability and a theory of finan-
  cial intermediation, Review of Economic Studies 51, 415­32.

Rocheteau, Guillaume, and Randall Wright, 2013, Liquidity and asset-market dynamics,
  Journal of Monetary Economics 60, 275­294.

Rockoff, Hugh, 1974, The free banking era: A reexamination, Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking 6, 141­167.

Sanches, Daniel, 2016, On the inherent instability of private money, Review of Economic
  Dynamics 20, 198­214.

Sanches, Daniel R., 2015, Banking panics and protracted recessions, Working Papers 15-39
  Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Shaked, Avner, 1994, Opting out: bazaars versus "hi tec" markets, Investigaciones Econom-
  icas 18, 421­432.

Singh, Manmohan, 2010, The velocity of pledged collateral, Working paper IMF.

       , and James Aitken, 2010, The (sizable) role of rehypothecation in the shadow banking
  system, Working paper IMF.

Sprague, O. M. W., 1910, History of Crisis under the National Banking System (National
  Monetary Commission: Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office).

Sultanum, Bruno, 2018, Financial fragility and over-the-counter markets, Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory 177, 616­658.

Sutton, John, 1986, Non-cooperative bargaining theory: An introduction, The Review of
  Economic Studies 53, 709­724.

Tallman, Ellis, and Jon Moen, 1990, Lessons from the panic of 1907, Economic Review 75,
  2­13.

Trejos, Alberto, and Randall Wright, 1995, Search, bargaining, money, and prices, Journal
  of Political Economy 103, 118­41.

Vanasco, Victoria, 2017, The downside of asset screening for market liquidity, The Journal
  of Finance 72, 1937­1982.

                                            54
von Thadden, Ernst-Ludwig, 1999, Liquidity creation through banks and markets: Multiple
  insurance and limited market access, European Economic Review 43, 991­1006.

Weber, Warren, 2005, Were U.S. state banknotes priced as securities?, Research department
 staff report 344 Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.




                                           55
