                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               REPORTING REGULATION AND CORPORATE INNOVATION

                                          Matthias Breuer
                                          Christian Leuz
                                       Steven Vanhaverbeke

                                        Working Paper 26291
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26291


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 2019, Revised December 2020




We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments and suggestions from Ray Ball, Benjamin
Balsmeier, Phil Berger, Jannis Bischof, Judson Caskey, Hans Christensen, Wouter Dessein,
Stephen Glaeser, John Hughes, Miao Liu, Antoinette Schoar, Andrew Sutherland, Laurence van
Lent, Alexander Wagner (discussant), Alminas Zaldokas, Jingjing Zhang (discussant), and
seminar participants at the University of Chicago, University of Mannheim, Bocconi University,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, UCLA, Lancaster University, the 2019 EASYS, the 2019
Conference on Regulating Financial Markets at Goethe University Frankfurt, the 2019 UNC/
Duke Fall Camp, the 2019 German Economists Abroad Conference at the Frankfurt School of
Finance & Management, and the 2020 AAA FARS Midyear Meeting. This study is based on data
from Eurostat, the Community Innovation Survey (CIS) of 2000 to 2014. The responsibility for
all conclusions drawn from the data lies entirely with the authors. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Matthias Breuer, Christian Leuz, and Steven Vanhaverbeke. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reporting Regulation and Corporate Innovation
Matthias Breuer, Christian Leuz, and Steven Vanhaverbeke
NBER Working Paper No. 26291
September 2019, Revised December 2020
JEL No. K22,L51,M41,M48,O43,O47

                                          ABSTRACT

We investigate the impact of reporting regulation on corporate innovation. Exploiting thresholds
in Europe's regulation and a major enforcement reform in Germany, we find that forcing firms to
publicly disclose their financial statements discourages innovative activities. Our evidence
suggests that reporting regulation has significant real effects by imposing proprietary costs on
innovative firms, which in turn diminish their incentives to innovate. At the industry level,
positive information spillovers (e.g., to competitors, suppliers, and customers) appear insufficient
to compensate the negative direct effect on the prevalence of innovative activity. The spillovers
instead appear to concentrate innovation among a few large firms in a given industry. Thus,
financial reporting regulation has important aggregate and distributional effects on corporate
innovation.

Matthias Breuer                                  Steven Vanhaverbeke
Columbia Business School                         Rotterdam School of Management
3022 Broadway                                    Postbus 1738
Uris 605A                                        Rotterdam 3000
New York, NY 10027                               Netherlands
mb4468@gsb.columbia.edu                          vanhaverbeke@rsm.nl

Christian Leuz
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu
    1. Introduction

         Disclosure and financial reporting mandates are ubiquitous. They typically aim to improve

the functioning of capital markets and to protect firms' investors and other stakeholders. Despite

substantial evidence of capital-market benefits from corporate disclosures (Healy & Palepu 2001),

firms frequently oppose disclosure and reporting regulation arguing that it forces them to reveal

proprietary information (e.g., about profitable markets), which dissipates their gains from innovation

and hurts their incentives to innovate (Arrow 1962). How serious this concern is, however, remains

unclear. For one, firms could point to proprietary costs to disguise that they oppose transparency for

ulterior reasons (Berger & Hann 2007). Moreover, even if a mandate forces firms to reveal proprietary

information, other firms could benefit (Zingales 2009). This redistribution could leave aggregate

innovation unchanged or even enhance it if mandatory reporting speeds up the adoption of novel

processes and products or generates substantial follow-on innovation by other firms. The potential

for such spillovers implies that estimating the direct effect of regulation on regulated firms' innovation

is difficult (Glaeser & Guay 2017) and, furthermore, that the aggregate and distributional effects of

financial reporting regulation on corporate innovation are far from clear.

         In this study, we investigate the effects of regulation mandating the public disclosure of

financial statements on corporate innovation. Corporate innovation is key to productivity and

economic growth and, at the same time, an activity for which the potential proprietary costs of

reporting mandates are pertinent. As pointed out, to examine how reporting regulation affects

innovation, we need to account for the possibility that the regulation not only has direct effects, but

also indirectly affects firms via information spillovers, including those in the control group. 1 We

account for the potential spillovers in two ways (Berg et al. 2020). First, we estimate the aggregate



1 For this very reason, spillovers pose a threat to identification in firm-level designs (Glaeser & Guay 2017). One could

find a (seemingly) negative direct effect on treated firms merely because the control firms benefit from spillovers; not
because mandated firms actually innovate less. Our aggregate design reduces this concern by allowing for spillovers among
related firms, for which they are likely largest. For more discussion of the aggregation level see Section 4.


                                                           1
impact of reporting regulation on innovation activity for all firms in a given country and two-digit

industry, whether they are required to report or not. This aggregate assessment captures any spillovers

among firms operating in the same industry and country. We highlight that this aggregation is not

perfect, as it misses cross-industry or cross-country spillovers, but it presents a significant

improvement over firm-level designs. Second, we explicitly estimate spillovers that originate from

mandating firms operating in the same and other industries. By explicitly accounting for such

spillovers, we can decompose the aggregate impact of regulation into its direct effect on mandated

firms and its indirect effects on other firms. This decomposition allows us to shed light on the

distributional effects of disclosure regulation when it comes to innovation.

        To estimate the effects on corporate innovation, we exploit unique features of reporting

regulation in Europe. The regulation, set forth in the Accounting Directives of the European Union

(EU), stipulates that all limited-liability firms--private and public ones--must disclose their financial

statements, including a management report discussing business risks, R&D activities, and firm strategy.

However, countries can grant exemptions to smaller private firms, leading to size-based thresholds

that vary by country. Exempted firms must typically provide only an abridged balance sheet with

abbreviated notes, allowing them to withhold substantial information that otherwise would have to be

disclosed in the income statement, more detailed notes, or the management report. Despite the

exemptions, the reporting mandates have contributed significantly to corporate transparency in

Europe (Kalemli-Ozcan et al. 2015; Breuer 2020). An important exception to this statement is

Germany. In contrast to other European countries, Germany failed to enforce its reporting mandate

until 2007, when mounting pressure by the EU commission triggered a substantial enforcement

reform (e.g., Bernard 2016; Vanhaverbeke et al. 2019; Breuer 2020).

        The European setting exhibits several desirable features when investigating the effect of

mandatory reporting on innovative activity. First, the size-based thresholds across EU countries and

the German enforcement reform generate substantial variation in the amount of financial information



                                                   2
that otherwise opaque private firms are required to provide. Second, both the size-based thresholds

and the enforcement change enable us to use two alternative, quasi-experimental research designs.

Third, the EU regulation and the German enforcement reform pertain to all limited-liability firms

rather than a few public firms, which is important when estimating aggregate effects. 2 Notably, private

firms play an important role for innovation (e.g., Rothwell 1978; Acs & Audretsch 1990; Vossen 1998;

Schneider & Veugelers 2010). Last but not least, there are detailed innovation input and output data

for European and especially German firms, including various innovation types, allowing us to measure

innovation effects more granularly and also fairly comprehensively. Importantly, these innovation

data are confidentially reported to national research centers, allaying concerns that firms' reporting

requirements or strategic disclosure incentives distort the availability or content of the data.

         We employ two alternative research designs to identify the effect of reporting regulation on

innovation at the industry level. In the European setting, we exploit the fact that countries' distinct

exemption thresholds generate variation in the share of firms facing mandatory reporting across

industries. For example, industries with innately greater fixed asset requirements exhibit a larger

fraction of firms that exceed the asset-based exemption thresholds. The same applies for labor-

intensive industries and the employee-based exemption thresholds. We use this country-industry-level

variation in the intensity of the regulation and employ a cross-sectional difference-in-differences design.

This design does not rely on changes in countries' thresholds across time, but instead compares

differences in innovation for industries with many versus few large firms in countries with high versus

low exemption thresholds. Thus, conceptually, there are two differences in a given year: (1) the

difference in the shares of mandated firms in a given country across industries because industries have


2Out of the 24 million active firms in Europe, 80% are limited-liability companies (EU 2019b). Small- and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) represent over 99.8% of active enterprises within the economy and employ 93 million people,
accounting for 67 % of employment in the EU-28 non-financial business sector (EU 2017). Importantly, many SMEs
contribute significantly to innovation: 38.3% of EU-28 SMEs developed at least one product or process innovation
between 2014-2016, compared to 67.8% of large enterprises (EU 2019a). Some SMEs developed disruptive or
breakthrough innovations, while others innovated in more incremental ways. The proportion of innovative SMEs (large
enterprises) that introduced at least one new-to-the-market innovation between 2014 and 2016 was 13% (32%).



                                                          3
different firm-size distributions and (2) the difference in the shares of mandated firms in a given

industry across countries because countries' thresholds differ.

        To ensure that (potentially endogenous) differences in firm sizes across countries or changes

over time do not confound our measure of regulatory intensity, we do not use the actual share of

mandated firms in a given country, industry, and year as our intensity measure. Instead, we construct

a Europe-wide and time-invariant firm-size distribution per industry and then calculate our intensity

measure as the hypothetical share of firms that would face the mandate if a given country's exemption

thresholds were applied to this firm-size distribution. This intensity treatment is known as a simulated

instrument (Currie & Gruber 1996; Mahoney 2015) and akin to a Bartik instrument (Goldsmith-

Pinkham et al. 2020). By using it, we ensure that the treatment variable of interest varies only due to

differences in the exemption thresholds across countries as well as systematic differences in firm sizes

across industries. As such, it alleviates concerns about reverse causality (e.g., technology shocks

causing firms in certain industries to grow above the thresholds) and omitted factors correlated with

countries' firm-size differences (e.g., industrial policies and specialization).

        In the German setting, we exploit the fact that the enforcement reform pertained to limited-

liability firms, but not other firms (e.g., unlimited-liability or public firms). This feature creates

variation in the intensity with which the enforcement reform treats local markets (defined at the county-

industry level), depending on the pre-existing shares of mandated firms (i.e., limited-liability firms

among all firms) in the local markets. We use this county-industry-level variation in the intensity of

the shift in enforcement as our market-level treatment in a time-series difference-in-differences design,

which essentially compares changes in innovation activity across local markets. For firm-level tests,

we use a standard, time-series difference-in-differences design comparing treated (limited-liability) and

control firms, either unlimited-liability or publicly traded firms, around the enforcement reform.

        The two settings exhibit complementary strengths and weaknesses. The main strength of the

European setting is that it is more highly aggregated (country-industry level) and hence more likely to



                                                     4
estimate the net impact of mandatory reporting on corporate innovation, which comprises the direct

impact on mandated firms and the indirect impact on other firms. In addition, the European analysis

essentially compares different country-industry equilibria and as such allows for long-run adjustments

in industries along all margins, including potential financing benefits spurred by greater industry-wide

transparency. In this sense, our estimates based on the European analysis represent a net-net effect of

the mandate on innovation at the country-industry level. However, the high level of aggregation of

this analysis comes at the cost of power, limiting it to observations at the country-industry level. The

main strengths of the German setting in turn are (i) the power that comes with the granular county-

industry (or firm-level) variation in enforcement and (ii) the detailed input and output measures of

corporate innovation. Although the within-country regional aggregation in the German setting

neglects potentially important spillovers, it affords more granular analyses that help with the

mechanism. Thus, we use the German setting to examine the direct impact on mandated firms (instead

of the aggregate net impact) and to uncover underlying forces of the net impact. In this sense, the

enforcement reform analysis complements the aggregate analysis in the European setting.

       We combine financial information on private and public firms in Europe from Bureau van

Dijk's Amadeus database, patent data for European firms from Bureau van Dijk's Orbis database and

the European Patent Office's PATSTAT database, and confidential information on innovation inputs

and outputs from Eurostat's Community Innovation Surveys and the Mannheim Innovation Panel.

The European sample covers up to 26 countries over a time span of 15 years from 2000 to 2014. The

German sample covers more than 20,000 unique firms over 12 years from 2002 to 2013.

       In the European setting, we find that mandatory financial reporting is significantly negatively

associated with the prevalence of corporate innovation (e.g., fewer innovating firms) at the country-

industry level. Thus, within-country-industry spillovers appear insufficient to compensate for the

negative direct effect on firms' innovative activities. We do not find significant evidence that the

mandates reduce total innovation spending though. The latter suggests that, while reporting mandates



                                                   5
discourage many firms' innovation activities, a few, presumably larger firms appear to increase their

spending, which in turn suggests both spillovers and a concentration of innovation spending.

Consistent with this redistribution of innovative activity, we find that reporting mandates reduce

innovation activities of mandated firms, while they spur innovation activities of other firms, especially

larger customers, suppliers, and competitors. The latter finding is broadly consistent with the literature

on information spillovers from mandatory reporting of public firms on private firms' investments and

business formation (e.g., Badertscher et al. 2013; Barrios et al. 2020; Bernard et al. 2020).

        In the German setting, we also find that forcing firms to provide financial reports is negatively

associated with the number of innovating firms in local markets, consistent with the European results.

But here, we even find that reporting mandates are significantly negatively associated with the total

innovation spending in local markets. This decline in spending at the county level appears to be driven

by firms operating in niche markets with few or any local competitors. These regional "monopolists"

frequently stop innovating altogether, likely because mandated reporting dissipates the gains from

innovation. In line with this proprietary-cost explanation for the effect of mandatory reporting on

innovation, we present results that the mandates are negatively associated with firms' profit margins,

sales from new-to-market innovations, and cost reductions due to process improvements.

        In supplemental tests, we investigate the impact of reporting mandates on firms' financing,

patenting, and financial-statement-based innovation measures. We first document that reporting

regulation reduces the likelihood that firms' innovative activities are hampered by financial constraints.

In line with a vast literature (e.g., Leuz & Wysocki 2016), this evidence suggests mandatory reporting

provides capital-market benefits. These benefits, however, appear limited for the private firms in our

setting and cannot offset the discouraging effect of the mandate on corporate innovation due to the

loss of proprietary information. Next, we find that reporting mandates exhibit an ambiguous relation

with patenting. On the one hand, mandatory financial reporting discourages innovations, and thus

implies fewer patents. On the other hand, mandatory reporting hurts secrecy, which in turn increases



                                                     6
the use of patenting to protect firms' remaining innovations. We finally document that reporting

mandates are negatively associated with financial-statement-based innovation measures (e.g., changes

in intangible assets), corroborating our innovation-survey-based findings.

         Our evidence is remarkably consistent across the two settings and designs: Mandatory

reporting discourages innovation, especially by (smaller) firms in niche markets with few competitors.

At the country-industry (and highest aggregation) level, the negative direct effect of mandatory

reporting appears to outweigh positive spillover effects on other firms. It is unclear whether the net

impact is still negative for the economy as a whole once potential cross-industry and cross-country

spillovers are accounted for. We leave this issue for future research. The result that comes through

regardless is that reporting regulation concentrates innovative activity among a few, typically larger

firms. This distributional effect can have important ramifications for market structure and the type

of innovations (e.g., Acs & Audretsch 1987, 1988; Holmstrom 1989; Rossi-Hansberg et al. 2019).

         Our study contributes to several streams of the literature. First and foremost, it belongs to

the literature on the real effects of financial reporting regulation (e.g., Leuz & Wysocki 2016;

Roychowdhury et al. 2019). We provide novel evidence on the aggregate and distributional effects of

reporting regulation on corporate innovation, a real activity central to economic growth. We jointly

examine direct and indirect impacts and show both negative forces as well as positive spillover effects

of mandatory disclosure on corporate innovation. Our study is closely related to concurrent work on

mandatory patent disclosures (e.g., Hedge et al. 2018; Kim & Valentine 2020). 3 Our focus, however, is

on reporting regulation, rather than disclosure regimes that are directly tied to innovative activity or its

patent protection. In this regard, our study is more similar to Allen et al. (2018). They examine the

impact of SOX on innovation and provide evidence that costly reporting regulation can negatively

affect young firms' innovative activity. Their study suggests that SOX did not increase transparency

3 The papers on mandatory patent disclosures exploit the 1999 American Investors Protection Act (AIPA). Using this law
change, Dass et al. (2018) and Saidi and Zaldokas (2019) document an increase in patenting, liquidity, and external financing
due to enhanced disclosure, while Kim and Valentine (2020) and Hussinger et al. (2018) document a reduction of firms'
incentives to innovate due to concerns about the loss of private information in the patenting process.


                                                             7
for these firms, yet diverted scarce resources away from innovative activities toward regulatory

compliance. In our setting, the inverse holds: firms are required to prepare full financial statements

irrespective of disclosure. Thus, incremental compliance costs from the reporting mandate are likely

small, yet the resulting increase in disclosure is substantial.

        Other studies on the link between disclosure and innovation tend to focus on the firm-level

relation between voluntary financial reporting and innovation, using proxies such as R&D expenses

or patents. The evidence is mixed. Some studies find that more transparent firms exhibit greater

innovative activities, consistent with reduced funding costs or agency conflicts (e.g., Brown &

Martinsson 2018; Zhong 2018). Other studies suggest innovative firms choose more opaque financial

reporting practices due to concerns about proprietary costs (e.g., Dambra et al. 2015; Barth et al. 2017;

Chaplinsky et al. 2017). Our study differs in three ways. First, we study mandatory rather than

voluntary financial reporting, which gives us plausibly exogenous variation in firms' reporting. Second,

and consistent with our focus on mandates, we estimate aggregate effects at the industry level, instead

of firm-level effects. 4 Third, we use detailed input and output data on various types of corporate

innovation. The latter is important because patents are a relatively narrow and potentially misleading

proxy for firms' overall innovative activity (e.g., Gittelman 2008; Nagaoka et al. 2010; Reeb & Zhao

2020). Moreover, our data do not stem from firms' financial reports, which mitigates concerns about

the strategic disclosure of R&D expenses (e.g., Koh & Reeb 2015).

        Our study also contributes to the literature on proprietary costs of financial reporting. Survey

evidence suggests that firms frequently point to concerns about the loss of proprietary information

when justifying secrecy or opposing demands for greater transparency (e.g., Graham et al. 2005; Minnis

& Shroff 2017). As these claims could have ulterior reasons, showing the effect of proprietary costs

on disclosure decisions or the impact from disclosure mandates is challenging (e.g., Berger 2011; Lang


4 Importantly, Brown and Martinsson (2018) and Kim (2019) also provide market-level tests. They find that greater
country-level transparency and patent disclosures, respectively, spur innovation. We find in our two settings that
mandatory financial reporting, on net, hurts innovation.


                                                        8
& Sul 2014). However, several recent studies provide evidence supporting the proprietary cost

hypothesis (e.g., Verrecchia 1983). For example, Bernard (2016), Breuer (2020), and Glaeser and

Omartian (2019) show that reporting mandates impose competitive costs on firms. Li et al. (2017),

Glaeser (2018), and Gassen and Muhn (2018), in turn, find that concerns about proprietary costs

reduce firms' disclosures. 5 Our study provides specific and detailed evidence of proprietary costs with

respect to firms' innovation activities by showing that mandatory reporting can hurt firms' return to

innovation and harm their innovation incentives.

         Finally, our patent results contribute to a nascent literature on the complementarities between

firms' disclosure and patenting strategies. This literature highlights that patenting is just one among

several ways in which firms can protect their innovations. Patenting provides legal protection in

exchange for disclosure of patent information. Alternatively, firms can choose to protect their

innovation through (trade) secrecy (Arundel 2001). The latter creates a link to financial reporting,

which can reveal proprietary information. Consistent with this link, Glaeser (2018) and Glaeser et al.

(2019) document that firms' patenting decisions are positively associated with firms' financial

reporting incentives. Our study adds evidence that mandatory reporting can increase the propensity

to use patenting, as secrecy is hampered by the mandate. This shift toward patenting could lead to

wrong inferences if one relies solely on patenting activity to measure overall innovative activity.

    2. Reporting Regulation and Innovation: Conceptual Underpinnings

         Firms that engage in innovative activities generate proprietary know-how, for instance, about

lucrative markets, products or services as well as about new technologies and processes. This know-

how allows firms to differentiate from competitors and to earn (quasi-)rents. To shield these rents

from competitors and contracting partners (e.g., customers and suppliers), firms protect proprietary

information through secrecy or by legal means, e.g., patenting.

5Aside from these studies with causal evidence, there is a large, earlier literature documenting associations between proxies
for proprietary costs and firms' disclosure choices (e.g., Harris 1998; Leuz 2004; Verrecchia & Weber 2006; Berger & Hann
2007; Dedman & Lennox 2009; Bens et al. 2011).


                                                             9
         Financial reports, however, reveal some of this proprietary information generated by firms'

business and innovative activities. For instance, the income statement shows R&D expenses, profit

margins, and cost structures. A firm's profit margin is typically indicative of its competitive position

(e.g., product differentiation, pricing power). Similarly, information about the cost structure (or gross

margin) could reveal cost-leadership advantages in production processes and sourcing (see also Berger

et al. 2019). The balance sheet provides information about a firm's financial resources as well as its

tangible and (sometimes) intangible assets (i.e. patents, copyrights, trademarks). 6 In addition, financial

reports provide extensive narrative disclosures, especially in the management report, which entails

discussing key products and services, a firm's strategy, and its R&D activities.

         Thus, the disclosure of financial reports could impose proprietary costs by facilitating direct

and indirect competitor learning. It could, for example, not only influence a competitor's strategic

decisions about new investments or which markets to enter, but also trigger further information

search. When a competitor learns from the financial report how profitable a firm is, the competitor

could invest additional resources in figuring out what drives the high profit margin or the distinctive

cost structure. The financial report could trigger a search for additional, more detailed information in

scientific or industry-specific publications, patent databases, by going to trade fairs, speaking to

suppliers or by reverse engineering products. While competitors operating in the same industry or

market are likely aware of a firm's products and services, the financial statements provide information

on how profitable these products and services are. 7 In addition, this information could induce new

firms to enter the industry or market (e.g., Darrough & Stoughton 1990; Wagenhofer 1990).

         Survey evidence supports the notion that firms are concerned about disclosing financial


6 For example, mentioning a patent or patent application in the narrative disclosures of the financial report or recording a
patent on the balance sheet can be informative, as either one points to the existence of a patent for which more detailed
information is publicly available in patent office online databases (Wyatt & Abernethy 2008).
7 Similar concerns are raised by managers and regulators. A review by the ICAEW (2013, p. 33) stated: "A firm's knowledge

of what is profitable and what is not is a form of intellectual capital--akin to an invention, but often much more transient.
If this information is disclosed, then the firm's competitors benefit as they learn which fields to move into and which to
avoid, without having to incur the costs of being first movers. In this situation, the winners from disclosure are the
imitators, and the losers are the pioneers."


                                                            10
statements to the public because it can reveal proprietary information. For example, Minnis & Shroff

(2017) find that 61% of firms are concerned that competitors download and view their financial

statements if they are publicly available. Moreover, 48% of surveyed firms state that they downloaded

financial statement information about one of their competitors in the past. Similarly, Graham et al.

(2005) document that 59% of CFOs fear giving away "company secrets" or hurting their competitive

position through voluntary disclosure.

         Importantly, financial reports are not only relevant to competitors, but could also impose

competitive costs by weakening a firm's bargaining power with its contracting partners. For example,

it could prompt a customer of a high-margin firm to re-negotiate prices or to search for alternative

producers with lower margins (e.g., Max-Planck-Institute 2009; Minnis & Shroff 2017). 8 Similarly, it

could enable a labor representative at a low-wage or high-margin firm to benchmark labor costs and

profitability across firms and bargain for higher wages (e.g., Palmer 1977; Amernic 1985; Liberty &

Zimmerman 1986; Aobdia & Cheng 2018). The disclosure of financial reports could also allow

suppliers and banks to identify new customers, resulting in outside options and hence competition for

existing procurement or lending relationships (e.g., Costello 2013; Breuer et al. 2018). The overall

thrust of these arguments is that financial reporting has the potential to spur new arm's length

transactions and change the resource allocation in the economy (e.g., Hombert & Matray 2016).

         Firms consider competitive costs resulting from the revelation of proprietary information to

competitors and contracting partners when making organizational, financing, and reporting choices.

Innovating firms, for example, tend to work with few trusted suppliers (e.g., Bönte & Wiethaus 2007;

Aobdia 2015), raise financial capital from a limited number of capital providers (e.g., Bhattacharya &

Chiesa 1995; Asker & Ljungqvist 2010; Kerr & Nanda 2015), and avoid disclosing their financial

reports or limit voluntary disclosures (e.g., Bhattacharya & Ritter 1983; Barth et al. 2017).


8 Survey evidence in Minnis & Shroff (2017) supports this notion. They document that 46% (37%) of companies download
the financial report of their customers (suppliers). According to survey evidence in Arrunada (2011), 85% (25%) of firms
use information services to access information about their clients (suppliers).


                                                          11
         Financial reporting regulation counters these tendencies by mandating the public disclosure

of firms' financial reports. The specific rationale for reporting mandates differs somewhat across

countries, but broadly speaking, the mandates typically aim to improve the functioning of capital

markets and to protect firms' investors and other stakeholders, by leveling the informational playing

field between corporate insiders and outsiders. However, in light of the discussed usefulness of

financial reports to competitors and contracting partners, a key concern is that mandatory reporting

not only brings capital-market benefits, but also imposes competitive costs on firms, especially

innovative ones (e.g., Max-Planck-Institute 2009; Zingales 2009). Consistent with this concern, firms

frequently oppose new reporting mandates, pointing to their proprietary or competitive costs (e.g.,

Graham et al. 2005; Minnis & Shroff 2017; Zhou 2018). 9 Thus, it is important to study the costs and

benefits of reporting regulation.

         Evaluating the effects of mandatory reporting on innovation is challenging because a mandate

may harm some firms, but help the competitive positions of others, necessitating an analysis at the

aggregate level, be it the market or the economy. The loss of proprietary information by one firm

may simply be a gain by another firm. For the economy as a whole, such information spillovers could

be desirable to the extent they disseminate knowledge and spur follow-on innovations (e.g., Hedge et

al. 2018). However, such redistribution could also be harmful if mandatory reporting reduces

aggregate innovative activity in the economy because firms anticipate that proprietary costs diminish

their returns to innovation (Arrow 1962). Thus, the net effect of mandatory reporting on corporate

innovation in the economy is ultimately an empirical question. 10

         While the net effect is ambiguous, firm-specific costs and benefits of reporting mandates likely

depend on a firm's competitive position and size (e.g., Max-Planck-Institute 2009; Bernard 2016;



9 However, as Berger and Hann (2007) and Leuz et al. (2008) discuss, firms could also oppose financial disclosures and

reporting mandates for agency or private benefit reasons, nevertheless citing proprietary costs to justify their opposition.
10 While the firm-level relation between competition and innovation is generally ambiguous, Schmutzler (2010) documents

that competition for ex-post rents (e.g., spurred by disclosure) is unambiguously negative for ex-ante innovation incentives.
Accordingly, the relevant question is whether the negative direct impact is offset by positive spillovers in the aggregate.


                                                             12
Bernard et al. 2018). For example, the proprietary costs of a mandate are likely higher for a local

monopolist than a firm operating in a competitive market. Absent the reporting mandate, the local

monopolist can protect its rents by hiding its profitability from its competitors and contracting

partners. A firm in a competitive market, by contrast, earns limited rents irrespective of whether it

has to report or not. In a similar vein, a small firm should be hit harder by a mandate than a large

firm. Absent the reporting mandate, a small firm can minimize proprietary costs by communicating

privately with its narrow stakeholder base. A large firm would report publicly, and incur proprietary

costs, even without a mandate, because it needs to communicate with a broad set of stakeholders (e.g.,

Buzby 1975). In addition, a large firm likely benefits more from the spillovers caused by mandating

other firms to report, compared to a small firm (e.g., Max-Planck-Institute 2009). A large firm, for

example, can leverage its extensive resources and bargaining power to extract a share of the other

firms' rents (e.g., Bernard 2016). A small firm would find it more difficult to take advantage of

investment opportunities in new markets or to bargain with its contracting partners for better prices

by threatening to switch to other suppliers or customers. Thus, this discussion highlights that

reporting regulation potentially has important distributional consequences that are worth studying.

    3. Institutional Background

   3.1. Reporting Regulation in Europe

        The EU Accounting Directives regulate firms' financial reporting in Europe since the 1980s.

The EU regulation requires limited-liability firms--private and public ones--to prepare and publicly

disclose a full set of audited financial statements. Typically, these financial statements include a

balance sheet, an income statement, an audit opinion, extensive notes, and a management report

discussing the competitive position and strategy, key products and services, business risks, investment

and financing plans as well as activities in the field of research and development (see example in Online

Appendix). To reduce the regulatory burden for smaller firms, EU regulation allows private firms

below certain size thresholds to report less and/or forgo a financial statement audit.            These


                                                   13
exemptions are based on a combination of thresholds defined for total assets, sales, and employees.

These thresholds uniformly apply to all industries within a given country. While the EU sets maximum

exemption thresholds, countries can set lower levels, subjecting more firms to the full reporting

requirements. This discretion has resulted in notable variation in the relevant thresholds for reporting

and auditing across EU countries. 11

         The threshold-based exemptions allow a substantial fraction of firms to reduce markedly what

information they have to provide publicly. In many countries, exempted firms must disclose only an

abbreviated balance sheet with abridged notes. Although these firms still have to prepare a full set of

financial statements for internal purposes and private reporting to their shareholders, the exemptions

allow them to hide proprietary information about (i) their innovation inputs (e.g., R&D expenses) and

outputs or successes (e.g., profit margins and the cost structure) that otherwise would be revealed in

the income statements as well as (ii) their R&D activities and future actions (e.g., investments,

financing, and strategy) that otherwise would have to be discussed in the management report. 12 In the

Online Appendix, we provide an example of exempted reporting and show for this firm how much

more it has to report once it crosses the thresholds and has to comply with full reporting. 13

     3.2. Enforcement Reform in Germany

         Germany, as a member state of the EU, transposed the EU Accounting Directives into

national law in the 1980s and hence German firms have been subject to the EU reporting regulation

for a long time. However, this mandate had been weakly enforced until a sweeping reform in 2007

(e.g., Bernard 2016). Before the reform, limited-liability firms were required to file their financial


11 The respective maximum thresholds set by the EU were around 4 million Euros in total assets, 8 million Euros in sales,
and 50 employees during the majority of our sample period. For country-specific threshold variation, see, for example,
Cna Interpreta (2011), Minnis and Shroff (2017), Bernard et al. (2018), and Accountancy Europe (2019).
12 There is some variation in what firms have to provide or they are exempt from. For instance, firms can use one of two

income-statement formats in Europe. They either classify expenses by nature (e.g., wage expense and material expense)
or function (e.g., cost of goods sold, advertising expense). The former is more prevalent in continental Europe, whereas
the latter is more prevalent in the UK. Thus, the estimated reporting mandate effect in the EU setting reflects the average
reporting format, exemption, and enforcement level across our sample countries, industries, and years.
13 While this example illustrates the increase in information under full reporting, we emphasize that our identification

strategy does not rely on such over-time variation when firms outgrow the thresholds.


                                                            14
statements with local courts and to publish their statements in local newspapers. The local courts

were not tasked to ensure compliance or to engage in proactive enforcement, and monetary sanctions

for non-compliance were low. As a result, the share of limited-liability firms complying with the

reporting mandate was as low as 5-10%.

         In 2007, Germany reformed its enforcement of the reporting mandate via the Bill on the

Electronic Registers for Commerce, Companies and Associations (EHUG), effective for financial

statements with fiscal years ending in December 2006 or later. Germany's reform efforts were a direct

response to mounting pressure from the European Commission and the transposition deadline for

the Company Law Disclosures Directive (EU Directive 2003/58/EC), which required the

implementation of a central electronic publication register by 2007. The reform created a central

electronic publication register in charge of the dissemination of limited-liability firms' financial

statements, instituted centralized and proactive enforcement of the mandate by the Ministry of Justice,

and introduced escalating fines for non-compliant firms. Following the reform, the share of limited-

liability firms providing the required financial reports increased to above 90%. This compliance

increase substantially enhanced corporate transparency in Germany as it meant that financial

statements of more than 900,000 firms became available to the public for the first time.

     4. Data and Level of Aggregation

         We combine financial and innovation data for limited-liability firms in Europe from several

sources. For the European sample, we obtain financial information from Bureau van Dijk's Amadeus

database and firm-patent links from Bureau van Dijk's Orbis database. We use patent data from the

European Patent Office's PATSTAT database as well as detailed information on corporate innovation

activity across Europe from Eurostat's Community Innovation Survey. 14                                  Importantly, the


14 We use the confidential micro-level data (called secure-use files) from all available survey waves (2000, 2004, 2006, 2008,
2010, 2012, and 2014). The survey waves are carried out by the EU member states and European Statistical System
members. In each country, the data are collected by a team of statisticians specializing in innovation studies and working
at an independent research institute or the national statistical office. The survey questions are harmonized across countries,



                                                             15
Community Innovation Survey is confidential and collects information about firms' innovation

activity irrespective of their reporting status under the mandate. In the Online Appendix, we provide

extensive details on survey methodology and data quality. We obtain information on European

countries' exemption thresholds for their reporting mandates from Breuer (2020). The resulting

sample covers up to 26 countries over a time span of 15 years from 2000 to 2014. Within each country,

we aggregate firm-level financial and patent data to the two-digit NACE industry level to create a

country-industry-year level dataset.            In aggregating the innovation-survey responses, we use

population weights to obtain measures that are representative for the entire population of firms in

each country, which is important for the estimation of aggregate effects.

         In choosing the level of aggregation, we face a tradeoff between accommodating spillovers

and statistical power. A higher level of aggregation naturally accounts for more spillovers but in the

extreme one can no longer assess statistical significance. Our two-digit industry-country level

aggregation for the European analysis includes any redistribution effects across firms, including

positive spillover effects from customers, suppliers, and customers, within the same coarse industry

in a given country. To illustrate, the average two-digit industry in Germany comprises more than

30,000 firms operating in more than 14 distinct five-digit subindustries. While we acknowledge that

spillovers could go beyond these broad industry boundaries as well as countries, we note that

information spillovers tend to be strongest within industries and local markets (e.g., Engelberg et al.

2018), and the typical firm in our sample operates in local markets. According to the Eurostat data,

the vast majority of our sample firms (80%) indicate that their largest market is at the local level or

national (other regions in same country). Consistent with this, the average firm's sales to customers

outside of its own country amount to only 2%. These statistics and considerations support the chosen

level of aggregation and suggest that our design captures most spillovers.



and cognitive tests are regularly conducted to assure that the questions elicit the desired information. Member states are
required to provide innovation statistics to the EU, and almost all Member States require firms to answer the survey.


                                                           16
         For the German sample, we obtain financial information on both limited- and unlimited-

liability firms from the Mannheim Enterprise Panel (MEP). The MEP is based on the firm-level data

of Creditreform, the dominant credit bureau in Germany. 15 It is the most comprehensive micro

database of companies in Germany outside the confidential business register maintained by the

Federal Statistical Office of Germany. The MEP database includes unique-patent identifiers, allowing

us to link our sample firms with all patents available in the PATSTAT database to construct patent

indicators (ZEW 2019a). We augment this data with detailed information on innovation inputs and

outputs from the Mannheim Innovation Panel (MIP), which is based on successive issues of the EU's

Community Innovation Survey. This German sample covers more than 20,000 unique firms over 12

years from 2002 to 2013. The firm-level panel, however, is unbalanced as the innovation surveys do

not ask the same questions every year and firms do not always respond to all questions. Moreover,

there is substantial churn due to the limited survival of especially smaller firms. The panel is

replenished to account for churn and adjusted for non-random response bias via representative re-

sampling (see Online Appendix), but firm-level data are sparse nevertheless. We again aggregate data

to the market level using two-digit industries and, in this case, counties as the relevant regional

aggregation. 16 Aggregating at the county-industry-level also mitigates the limitations of the firm-level

panel data because with this aggregation (and representative sampling) it is not important for the same

firm to answer the same question over time or around the enforcement reform in Germany.

     5. Research Design

         We exploit both of the aforementioned settings--threshold-based mandates in Europe and a

major enforcement reform in Germany--to empirically investigate the effect of mandated financial

reporting on corporate innovation. Both settings allow us to use difference-in-differences designs,



15See Bersch et al. (2014) for more details about the construction of the MEP database.
16In line with prior research (e.g., Huber 2018; Breuer 2020), we choose counties as a relevant regional aggregation level.
German counties represents an intermediate administrative level between municipalities and German states. They are
comparable to US counties (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics level 3).


                                                            17
which purge our estimates from various confounding differences across countries (e.g., code- vs.

common-law countries), industries (e.g., labor- vs. capital-intensive industries), or over time (e.g., crisis

vs. normal times). The two settings have complementary strength and weaknesses and allow us to

provide estimates from a cross-sectional as well as a time-series difference-in-differences design.

     5.1. Exemption Thresholds

         A central feature of the threshold-based regulation in Europe is that a given country's

exemption thresholds affect industries in different and, importantly, predictable ways. For example,

a regulation that exempts firms below the 50-employees threshold from full reporting affects labor-

intensive industries more strongly than capital-intensive industries. Analogous arguments can be made

for a threshold based on total assets, which likely affects capital-intensive industries more strongly.

Thus, the same threshold implies heterogeneous regulatory intensities across industries.

         We exploit this country-industry-level heterogeneity in regulatory intensity in the following

cross-sectional difference-in-differences design: 17

                            =Ycit  Reporting cit -1 +  ct +  it +  cit ,

where Ycit is the dependent variable (e.g., the share of patenting firms) in a given country c , industry

i , and year t ; Reporting cit -1 captures the regulatory intensity measured as the share of firms above

country c 's reporting-exemption thresholds in industry i and year t - 1 ; and  ct is a country-year

fixed effect, while  it is an industry-year fixed effect. 18

         To ensure that our regulatory intensity measure is not unduly confounded by endogenous

differences or changes in firm sizes across countries and over time (e.g., due to technology shocks or

firm growth), we use a simulated instruments approach following Currie and Gruber (1996) and


17 Our design exploits cross-sectional variation in country-industry-level treatment intensity. We explicitly do not focus
on time-series variation for several reasons. First, there were only few, limited changes in thresholds over time (Figure
A1). Second, these few changes coincided with other major changes at the country level. Third, market-wide innovation
effects likely take time to play out, rendering short-window time-series designs less useful than cross-sectional designs.
18 In alternative specifications, we use the share of firms exceeding both the reporting- and auditing-thresholds as our

(credible) reporting intensity measure.


                                                           18
Mahoney (2015). Instead of using the actual share of firms exceeding a given country's exemption

thresholds in a given country-industry-year, we use a standardized share of firms as our intensity

measure (i.e., our simulated instrument). To construct the standardized share, we calculate the

hypothetical fraction of firms that exceed a given country's exemption thresholds when applying one

representative firm-size distribution per industry (Breuer 2020). We construct this distribution by

pooling all firms in a given industry across countries and years. 19 The resulting distribution is not only

representative for the typical firm-size distribution for a given industry in Europe, but also does not

vary across countries (e.g., due to industrial specialization) or over time (e.g., due to technology

shocks). By using this distribution, we obtain a standardized measure of regulatory intensity that varies

only due to differences in country-level exemption thresholds and systematic differences in industry-

level firm-size distributions (see also Figure A1 illustrating this variation). This approach addresses

concerns about reverse causality (e.g., technology shocks causing firms to grow above the threshold)

and omitted variables correlated with countries' firm-size differences (e.g., industrial specialization).

            Using the standardized share of mandated firms, our cross-sectional difference-in-differences

design compares corporate innovation in more versus less intensively regulated industries in the same

year using (1) the difference in the shares of mandated firms in a given country across industries (due

to industry-level firm-size distributions) and (2) the difference in the shares of mandated firms in a

given industry across countries (due to exemption thresholds). By using a within-country-year design,

we control for any confounding cross-country differences (e.g., property rights, education, etc.) and

any country-specific changes over time, observed or unobserved. This feature addresses important

concerns about the endogeneity of thresholds chosen by countries at a given point in time (e.g., Ball

1980; Leuz 2010; Hail et al. 2017). It represents a substantial advantage over the usual (time-series)

difference-in-differences design that exploits a regulatory change in a given country as treatment.

            Our identifying assumption is that there are no other factors correlated with corporate


19   For a detailed description of the construction of the standardized firm-size distributions, see Breuer (2020).


                                                               19
innovation and our intensity measure at the country-industry level. A typical concern with this

assumption is that a multitude of country-industry-level factors could be correlated with corporate

innovation (e.g., growth opportunities or technology shocks). However, these factors do not vary

with our standardized intensity measures due to the construction of the simulated instrument. 20 A

remaining concern with the identifying assumption is that countries endogenously set their thresholds

at the country-industry level. The institutional details of our setting suggest this is unlikely to be the

case. Within a given country, the thresholds are set uniformly across industries. The thresholds appear

to be motivated by a desire to reduce the disproportionate regulatory burden for smaller firms (in all

industries) that results among other things from the fixed costs associated with financial reporting

requirements. 21 If the EU or specific countries really intended to treat industries differently, they

could have set at least some industry-specific exemption thresholds, but they chose not to do this. It

is therefore also unlikely that the uniform reporting thresholds are the result of some deliberate

tailoring of the thresholds to individual industries. And even if a country tailored its country-level

thresholds to one or a few specific industries (e.g., its most important ones), then this country-

industry-specific choice would make the chosen thresholds plausibly exogenous for all other

industries, except the specifically targeted one(s), and presumably these other industries would

dominate the analysis.




20 After accounting for country-year ( ct ) and industry-year ( it ) fixed effects, the (standardized) reporting treatment

essentially captures the interaction of country-level thresholds and industry-level firm-size distributions.
             Ni

 1
     Ni       1( s    ij
                              > sct ) ,
             j =1


where N is the number of firms in an industry, s is the size of firm j , and s is the exemption-threshold in a given
country at a given point in time. In contrast, the reporting treatment would capture endogenous changes and differences
in country-industry-specific firm-size distributions, even after accounting for the country-year and industry-year fixed
effects, if we were not using the standardized industry-distributions to calculate the share:
              N cit

 1
     N cit    1( s         cijt
                                  > sct ) .
              j =1

21 Fixed costs depress the profit margin more, the lower a firm's sales. This scale effect is not specific to a particular

industry and one reason why the EU prescribes a uniform sales-based exemption threshold for all industries (e.g.,
European Commission 2019)


                                                           20
   5.2. Enforcement Reform

        In the second design, we exploit the enforcement reform in Germany as a major shift in the

effective regulation of limited-liability firms' reporting over time and use the following temporal

difference-in-differences analysis with a continuous treatment variable:

                 =Ydit  LimitedSharedi × Postt +  dt +  it + di +  dit ,

where Ydit is the dependent variable (e.g., the share of innovating firms) in a given county (or district)

d , industry i , and year t ; LimitedSharedi captures cross-sectional variation in the intensity of the

reporting regulation at the county-industry level, measured as the average share of limited-liability

firms among all (limited- and unlimited-liability) firms in a given county d and industry i in the pre-

enforcement period (2002 to 2006); Postt is an indicator taking the value of one for all years after the

enforcement reform (2008 to 2013);  it is a county-year fixed effect,  it is an industry-year fixed

effect, and di is a county-industry fixed effect. 22

        The basic idea behind the market-level, difference-in-differences design is that industries in

counties with a greater share of limited-liability firms should be more affected by the enforcement

reform of the mandate. This county-industry "exposure" should explain changes in innovative

activities at the county-industry level around the reform, if there are any. The key identifying

assumption of this design is that, absent the enforcement reform, changes in county-industries'

innovation activity over time would have been unrelated to the (pre-existing) share of limited-liability

firms in a given county and industry, which is essentially a parallel-trends assumption.

        In supplemental tests, we complement this continuous-treatment, market-level design with

two firm-level (and more conventional) difference-in-differences designs. In the first firm-level


22 We measure the share of limited-liability firms in the population covered by the MEP. Aside from the confidential

German census data, this panel is the most comprehensive database, spanning various types of firms, including sole-
proprietorships, partnerships (e.g., OHG and KG), and corporations (e.g., GmbH and AG). Inclusion in the MEP is
independent of the reporting mandate and the share is not computed based on survey responses, but the actual share in
the MEP population.


                                                         21
alternative, we compare the innovation activity of limited-liability firms with the activity of unlimited-

liability firms before and after the enforcement reform. In the second alternative, we compare the

innovation activity of private (limited-liability) firms with the activity of public firms before and after

the enforcement reform. These two alternative designs differ in the choice of the control group.

Unlimited-liability firms were not required to report publicly before or after the reform. By contrast,

public (limited-liability) firms were required to report publicly and this requirement was strictly

enforced by the respective stock exchanges before and after the reform.

        An important assumption for our difference-in-differences designs to provide unbiased

estimates is that there are no spillovers from treated to control units (or vice versa). This assumption

is most plausible in our aggregate designs (e.g., where the unit of observation is at the country-industry

level) and least plausible for the firm-level designs. A violation of the no-spillover assumption biases

our estimates upward (in case of negative competition spillovers) or downward (in case of positive

information spillovers). Despite these potential biases, we complement our aggregate design with

more local designs, including firm-level analyses because their estimates can be informative with

respect to the distributional effects of reporting regulation, especially when interpreted in conjunction

with the aggregate estimates. For example, the firm-level estimates allow us to discern whether a null

result in the aggregate is due to a one-for-one redistribution of innovative activity between treated and

control firms or rather due to the absence of a treatment effect.

    6. Results

   6.1. Descriptive Statistics

        Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for our treatment and outcome variables. (For a list of

variable definitions, refer to the Variable Appendix.) In the European sample (Panel A), our main

variable of interest is the reporting intensity variable "Reporting," which captures the share of firms

subject to full reporting requirements in a country and two-digit industry. The distribution of this

intensity measure has several notable features. The average (median) intensity for two-digit industries


                                                    22
is 22% (12%). The intensity measure spans the full range from 0% to 100%, with the majority of the

values falling between 5% and 25%, which means that typically the largest 5 to 25% of the firms in an

industry have to report fully. In this sense, the treatment variable primarily captures variation in

mandatory reporting among the largest firms in a given industry. These firms are likely of substantial

importance for market- or industry-level outcomes. However, the intensity variable also extends to

relatively small firms in many industries, allowing us to capture an average effect over a meaningful

range of firm sizes. We provide extensive distributional information on the reporting intensities in

the Online Appendix (Figure A1). The figure shows the vast majority of the variation in the intensities

comes from differences in firm sizes across industries and differences in thresholds across countries,

which is the variation we exploit in our design (and not changes in the thresholds over time). The

alternative treatment variable "Reporting and Auditing" captures the share of firms facing mandates

for reporting and auditing. It has very similar statistics as "Reporting" but allows us to check if the

results are different if reported financials also have to be audited and hence are more credible.

        In the German sample (Panels B and C), the three treatment variables of interest are the share

of limited firms ("Limited Share"), an indicator for limited firms ("Limited"), and an indicator for

private firms ("Private"). The share of limited firms ("Limited Share"), calculated for all firms in a

given county, industry, and year in the broad MEP data, ranges from 0% to 100%. Its average

(median) is 59% (60%) at the market level (Panel B). In contrast, the share of "limited" firms in the

firm-level innovation-survey data is 97% (Panel C). The remaining 3% are unlimited-liability firms of

a particular type (KG, OHG), which are the most comparable to the limited firms. Similarly, the share

of "private" firms in the firm-level data is 99%. The remaining 1% are publicly listed firms. The rarity

of unlimited and publicly listed firms in the firm-level innovation-survey data is in part due to

representative sampling and in part due to better coverage of limited firms in the innovation focused

MIP data. The limited number of control firms reduces the power of firm-level analyses, which further

supports our market-level design in the German setting. As noted earlier, the market-level design also



                                                  23
addresses spotty time series at the firm level in the MIP data, which poses a challenge in a time-series

difference-in-differences design. Given the random sampling and replacement of the firms in the

MIP data, we can exploit changes at the market rather than firm-level over time without substantial

concerns about endogenous sample selection or attrition over time.

         With respect to innovation outcomes, the descriptive statistics for the European sample (Panel

A) suggest that 36% (33%) of firms in the average (median) two-digit industry are innovating (i.e.,

introducing new-to-the-firm or new-to-the-market products, services, or processes). 23 A little less

than half of these innovations (16% on average) are not only "new to the firm," but entirely "new to

the market." By contrast, the share of patenting firms is only between 1% (0%) to 6% (2%) in the

average (median) industry, highlighting that patenting captures only a very small share of corporate

innovation. These statistics suggest that innovative activities are widespread in the economy, i.e.,

performed by a large share of firms, but only few firms use patenting as a strategy to protect their

innovations.

         In the German sample, we find very similar patterns as in the European sample, although the

German sample is slightly more tilted toward innovative firms. In the average county, 55% (60%) of

firms are innovating in a given year, but again only 8% (8%) of firms apply for patents in a given year

and county in Panel B (C). The share of firms with entirely new-to-the-market innovations is 29% in

Panel B and 30% in Panel C. In sum, there is a substantial share of innovating firms in our sample.

   6.2. Reporting Regulation in Europe

         6.2.1. Main Effect of Regulation on Innovation

         We begin our analysis by investigating the impact of reporting regulation on aggregate



23 The Community Innovation Survey defines an innovation as "the introduction of a new or significantly improved

product, process, organisational method, or marketing method by your enterprise. An innovation must have characteristics
or intended uses that are new or which provide a significant improvement over what was previously used or sold by your
enterprise. However, an innovation can fail or take time to prove itself" (Community Innovation Survey 2014a). For more
details and examples, see methodological notes of the Community Innovation Survey (2014b) and the Online Appendix.



                                                          24
innovation in the European sample. Table 2 presents country-industry-level regressions for various

measures of innovation activity on reporting intensity. 24 Innovation activity is measured at the two-

digit industry level using population-weighted survey responses from the Community Innovation

Surveys. At this relatively high level of aggregation, the analysis captures potential spillovers within

broad industry groupings. The population-weighting ensures the representativeness of the survey-

based innovation measures for a given industry and country. 25

         In Panel A, mandatory reporting intensity is not significantly associated with the average

innovation spending (columns 1 and 2). However, reporting intensity is significantly negatively

associated with the share of innovating firms (column 3). This share captures firms adopting products,

processes, or services that are new to the firm or new to the market. Next, we decompose this broad

measure of innovation activity into its key components. We find that mandatory reporting or

mandatory reporting and auditing exhibit negative associations with all the key components, albeit at

varying levels of significance: the share of firms reporting new-to-the-market innovations (columns 5

and 6), product innovations (columns 7 and 8), and process innovations (columns 9 and 10). In Panel

B, we document similar evidence using total innovation spending and the total number of firms with

innovations as our outcomes. By using totals, rather than simple averages, we essentially present size-

weighted, aggregate results.

         In terms of economic magnitude, our estimates imply that increasing the share of limited-

liability firms that are subject to mandatory reporting by, for instance, 10 percentage points is

associated with a 1.2 percentage-point decrease in the share of innovating firms (column 1 of Panel


24 See Tables 3 and 8 in Breuer (2020) for a validation of the simulated reporting intensity and an assessment of correlated
factors.
25 Stratified random sampling was used to ensure the sample was representative. The stratification of the sample was based

on the economic activity of the enterprise (NACE Rev.2 classification), on the enterprise size, and in some countries also
on the geographical region (NUTS2 level). Weights are included to the responses to compensate for sampling design and
unit non-response. The population weights ensure that the averages are representative for the whole industry and country.
For example, in the few countries where the survey is not mandatory, it allows us to take into account that larger firms are
more likely to respond to the survey compared to smaller firms. In addition, some countries oversampled larger firms in
their survey, and by using population weights we adjust for such biases.



                                                            25
A). Considering the range in the reporting intensity, this effect is economically meaningful (but also

plausible). Importantly, this estimate represents the net effect at the two-digit industry level. It is net

of any redistribution across firms as well as positive spillovers among customers, suppliers, and

competitors within the same industry, including any potential financing benefits. 26 Moreover, it is net

of any long-run changes in the industries (e.g., a shift toward arm's length contracting and greater

entry into the industry) spurred by greater industry-wide transparency.

         Collectively, the results in Table 2 provide a first indication that reporting mandates reduce

corporate innovation even after allowing for industry-wide redistribution and spillovers.                            The

aggregate results, while economically significant, are statistically tenuous. The tenuous nature likely

reflects not only low statistical power (relatively few observations at the two-digit industry-country

level), but also the existence of countervailing forces, i.e., a negative direct impact for the firms that

are forced to report versus positive indirect effects or spillovers on the other firms in the market.

Consistent with potentially important spillovers and redistribution, the results in Table 2 document

that the number of innovating firms appears to decline, while aggregate innovation spending appears

unaffected. Together, these results already hint at a redistribution of innovative activity toward a

limited number of (likely larger) firms, resulting in a concentration of innovation in the economy.

         6.2.2. Direct versus Indirect Effects of Reporting Regulation

         Next, we explore the underlying forces and decompose the aggregate net effect of reporting

regulation into the direct effect of firms' own reporting mandates and the indirect spillover effects

resulting from other firms' reporting mandates.

         To empirically implement this decomposition, we construct reporting intensities capturing the

extent to which other, yet related firms are subject to reporting mandates. We identify such related

firms using input-output tables. Specifically, for each focal industry, we construct reporting intensities


26 In subsequent sections, we explore the channels that make up the net effect of mandatory reporting. We disentangle

the direct and indirect (redistribution and spillover) effects in section 6.2.2 and investigate the relative importance of
financing benefits vis-à-vis proprietary costs in section 6.4.


                                                           26
for its input ("supplier") and output ("customer") industries. We then weight the reporting intensities

of supplier and customer industries with their respective shares of inputs to and outputs from the

respective focal industry. Note that the focal industry could receive inputs from or deliver outputs to

firms in its own industry. But because not all suppliers and customers operate in the same two-digit

industry as firms in the focal industry, the resulting supplier and customer reporting intensities differ

from the focal industry's reporting intensity. This feature allows us to separately estimate the direct

impact of mandating firms in a given industry and the indirect spillover impact of mandating other

firms in the same industry and other industries (e.g., competitors, suppliers, or customers).

        Table 3 presents the estimates from country-industry-level regressions of innovation activity

on a focal industry's own reporting intensity and its supplier and customer reporting intensities.

Controlling for supplier and customer reporting intensities, we continue to find that more extensive

reporting mandates in a given industry decrease corporate innovation, consistent with our results in

Table 2, but the decline in innovation is now more pronounced (for all proxies). This result makes

sense because in this specification offsetting spillovers from suppliers and customers that face

reporting mandates are separately estimated and no longer in the main reporting coefficient.

Consistent with the notion that firms benefit from these spillovers, the coefficients on the supplier

and customer intensities are typically positive and often statistically significant.

        In terms of economic magnitude, our estimates imply that a 10 percentage-point increase in

the share of firms subject to mandatory reporting is associated with a 2.2 percentage-point decrease

in the share of innovating firms, after excluding supplier and customer spillovers (column 3 of Panel

A in Table 3). The same increase in the reporting share is associated with only a 1.2 percentage-point

decrease when including supplier and customer spillovers (column 3 of Panel A in Table 2). These

comparisons nicely illustrate the positive spillovers from reporting mandates for customers and, in

particular, suppliers. The results also highlight why it is important to conduct the regulatory analysis

at an aggregate level, as otherwise one does not capture the net impact.



                                                    27
         The results in Table 3 suggest the industry-level net effect of reporting mandates combines

negative direct effects with positive indirect effects on corporate innovation. They are consistent with

the notion that reporting mandates redistribute firms' gains from innovation to other related firms.

For instance, customers could strike tougher bargains with their suppliers when they see that

(reporting) suppliers have relatively high margins.

         To further explore the redistribution of gains from innovation, Table 4 presents estimates

from regressions of aggregate profitability (or productivity) on a focal industry's own reporting

intensity and its supplier and customer reporting intensities. We find that imposing mandates on

suppliers and customers enhances the aggregate profitability in the focal industry (columns 1 and 2),

consistent with a redistribution of gains from innovation. 27 We further find that the increase in

profitability due to supplier and customer mandates is primarily captured by larger firms (columns 3

and 4), as shown by an increase in the covariance between firms' market share (or size) and their

profitability (in the vein of Olley & Pakes 1996; Bartelsman et al. 2013). Firms' own reporting

mandates, by contrast, tend to hurt firms with high market shares and/or profitability, as shown by

negative (albeit not statistically significant) coefficients for the own reporting intensities.

         In sum, the results in Table 4 are consistent with a redistribution of innovation gains from

firms facing mandates, especially profitable ones, to other firms, especially larger ones. Thus, one

potential economic consequence of mandatory financial reporting is a concentration of innovation

activity among larger firms in industries that are relatively less affected by the reporting mandate.




27 We refer to revenue productivity as "profitability" because it essentially represents a ratio-based measure of profits
(Foster et al. 2008). We tabulate the results for labor productivity, a simple measure which relates firms' sales to their
amount of labor. The results are robust to using a measure of total factor productivity, which relates firms' sales to their
labor and capital inputs. In the European setting, we rely on these admittedly coarse profitability measures, because many
firms are exempt from reporting their profitability (limiting the availability of firms' profit information in the Amadeus
data). In the following German setting, by contrast, we can use direct profitability measures specifically tied to firms'
return to their innovation as reported in their survey responses.


                                                            28
   6.3. Enforcement Reform in Germany

         6.3.1. Main Effect of Regulation on Innovation

         We now switch in our analysis to a single-country setting and exploit the German enforcement

reform. In this setting, we can no longer aggregate at the country level and have to define markets

more narrowly at the regional level, aggregating at the county and two-digit-industry level. In return,

we have a more powerful setting to investigate the direct impact of mandatory reporting on affected

firms, because we can exploit finer local variation in the reporting mandate and observe more detailed

outcomes (e.g., firms' returns to innovation). These features also allow us to shed more light on the

channels through which reporting regulation affects corporate innovation in the aggregate.

         Table 5 presents the estimates from county-industry-level regressions of innovation activities

on the interaction of the share of limited firms and a post-enforcement indicator. This interaction

essentially captures the increase in the effective strength of the reporting mandate at the local market

level. That is, the enforcement reform had a larger effect in markets with a high share of limited firms,

which after the reform face a much more stringent reporting mandate. 28

         In column 1 of Panel A, we find that the increase in the strength of the mandate is associated

with significantly lower innovation spending. Figure 1 plots the innovation spending effect over time.

Consistent with the parallel trends assumption, we do not observe a differential trend between markets

with higher vis-à-vis lower shares of limited firms in the pre-enforcement period. After the reform,

innovation spending declines, at first gradually and then stabilizes at a significantly lower level. 29 In

addition to innovation spending, we find that the share of innovating firms (broadly defined) declines

after the enforcement reform. Similar declines are also observed for the individual components of


28 See Figure A1 in Breuer (2020) for evidence that county-industries with greater limited-liability-firm shares exhibit larger

increases in public financial reporting after the enforcement reform than county-industries with lower shares.
29 The enforcement regime became effective for fiscal years ending December 31, 2006, and later. There is an

approximately 12-months lag between the fiscal-year end and the publication date. Between December 31, 2006 and
December 31, 2007, 123,446 financial statement were publicly available. The following year, 1,079,235 financial statements
were publicly available, covering nearly all limited liability firms in Germany (Bundesanzeiger 2019). Given that the timing
of the reform overlaps with the 2007 financial crisis and the ensuing great recession, we corroborate in section 6.4.2 that
our results are not confounded by worsened access to external financing (see also Vanhaverbeke et al. 2019).


                                                             29
this measure: the share of firms with new-to-market innovations, product innovations, and process

innovations. Panel B documents that these declines are also observed for total spending and the total

number of firms with any of these types of innovation, which implies that the results not only hold

for the average firm in an industry and county, but also in the (size-weighted) aggregate.

        Collectively, the results in Table 5 suggest more extensive mandatory reporting reduces

innovation activity in local markets. These results are consistent with and corroborate the earlier

findings in the European setting. The negative impact of mandatory reporting is estimated with

greater power at the local level than in the European setting, as evidenced by much higher significance

levels. This increase in power is likely driven by two factors: (i) the larger number of observations and

(ii) the local market design, which is less aggregated and hence accommodates fewer offsetting

spillovers. As such, the local market results primarily capture the direct impact of the mandate on

innovation, not the net impact including spillovers. This feature could explain why we find a negative

effect on innovation spending in the German setting, but fail to find one in the more aggregated

European setting. To explore this explanation, we next examine whether the local impact of the

mandate depends on the number of firms in the market that can provide offsetting spillovers.

        6.3.2. Heterogeneous Effects in Competitive vs. Monopolistic Markets

        In this section, we estimate separate effects for the enforcement reform in local markets with

many firms (more competitive) and few firms (more monopolistic). Table 6 provides estimates from

county-industry-level regressions of innovation on the strength of the mandate, separately for local

markets with an above median number of firms ("high") and markets with a below median number

of firms ("low"). We find that mandatory reporting is more negatively associated with innovation

spending and innovating firms in markets with few firms, i.e., in regional oligopolies or monopolies.

Notably, the decline in spending in markets with few firms appears to be driven by local monopolists




                                                   30
stopping innovation activities altogether (column 4). 30

         The results in Table 6 provide an explanation for why we observe negative spending effects

in the local market design, yet do not observe a clear decline in the more aggregated European setting.

In the local market design, local markets with few firms tend to dominate or be overrepresented

compared to a sample using firm-level observations. Our results suggest that, in these markets, local

monopolists stop innovating, so spending goes down. In the economy-wide, European setting, the

spending declines of local monopolists are less relevant and/or offset by the shift in innovation

activities to other larger firms in the economy, as suggested by our results in Table 2 and Table 4.

         Collectively, the results in Table 6 suggest that mandatory reporting primarily discourages

innovation activity of local monopolists. This makes sense considering that local monopolists cannot

benefit from offsetting information spillovers from other local firms, whereas firms in crowded

markets at least benefit from other firms' reporting. Put differently, a mandate is less costly if firms

can reciprocally exploit each other's disclosures. The results in Table 6 are further consistent with the

idea that, absent any reporting mandate, local monopolists can protect their rents from innovation via

secrecy. Firms in more crowded markets, by contrast, are less likely to earn substantial rents to begin

with and cannot easily hide their profits and rents given the proximity of their competitors, which

facilitates the dissipation of proprietary information even absent reporting mandates (e.g., via

employee poaching) (Li et al. 2017; Glaeser 2018). To shed light on the importance of proprietary

costs from financial reporting for the negative innovation effect, we explicitly investigate the effects

on profitability and economic gains from innovation in the next section.




30 In supplemental tests, we document that the impact is concentrated along the extensive margin in the local market

design (Table A1). In the firm-level design, the impact of the mandate occurs primarily at the intensive margin, as this
design focuses on firms operating in the more crowded markets (due to the implicit requirement of the fixed effects, which
require at least one control firm in the same county-year and industry-year).


                                                           31
   6.4. Channels and Alternative Explanations

         6.4.1. Proprietary Costs versus Innovation Efficiency

         Our results are consistent with reporting regulation discouraging corporate innovation,

because it dissipates firms' gains from innovation. However, an alternative interpretation is that our

findings reflect improved innovation efficiency. Information on other firms' innovative activities can,

for example, help firms identify worthwhile activities and avoid duplicate innovation efforts. To

distinguish between these potential explanations, we investigate several measures that reflect the

economic returns to innovation. We expect to observe lower returns if mandatory reporting dissipates

gains from innovation, whereas we expect to observe unchanged or even improved returns if a

reporting mandate enhances innovation efficiency.

         Table 7 presents the estimates from county-industry-level regressions of various returns to

innovation measures on the effective strength of the German reporting mandate. We find that an

increase in the strength of the mandate is negatively associated with firms' profit margins, sales from

new-to-market innovations, the share of sales from new-to-market innovations among total sales, the

share of sales increases from quality improvements, and cost reductions from process improvements

(all at the county-industry level). 31 Thus, the returns to innovation decline across the board after the

enforcement reform strengthened the reporting mandate in Germany.

         In sum, the results in Table 7 support the interpretation that the channel for the effect of

reporting mandates on innovation is the proprietary costs of reporting. They do not appear consistent

with the alternative interpretation that reporting mandates enhance the efficiency of innovations.

Further supporting this conclusion are the results of our earlier analyses showing declines not just in

innovation inputs (e.g., spending), but especially in innovation outputs (e.g., product, process, or

service innovations). Notably, we find that even new-to-the-market innovations decline, which is

31 We calculate the aggregate percent of sales from new-to-market innovations by weighting the reported percentages with

available sales data. By contrast, we aggregate the share of sales increases due to quality improvements by simply calculating
the total and taking its logarithm (plus one) as the data does not allow us to observe the sales increase amount relative to
which the survey respondents stated the percentage number.


                                                             32
inconsistent with a mere reduction of duplicate efforts.

        6.4.2. Financing Frictions

        Another potential channel through which reporting regulation could affect innovation is

through its impact on firms' ability to finance new investments (e.g., Brown et al. 2009; Kerr & Nanda

2015; Brown & Martinsson 2018; Park 2018). Our results suggest that this channel is insufficient to

(over)compensate the decline in industry-wide innovation due to proprietary costs. Arguably, this

outcome is not particularly surprising in our setting. Capital-market benefits often motivate firms'

voluntary reporting. That is, firms that, on net, benefit from more disclosure can always provide it

voluntarily. As a result, mandatory reporting primarily expands the reporting of firms, for whom the

capital-market benefits of public reporting do not outweigh the corresponding costs (e.g., proprietary

costs). In our sample of private firms, the capital-market benefits from public reporting are limited

for most firms because they obtain financing from a limited number of capital providers (e.g., owner-

managers and relationship banks) with whom they can and do communicate privately. The private

communication allows firms to inform their main capital providers and to reduce financing frictions,

but avoids the leakage of proprietary information.

        Although we expect the capital-market benefits from a mandate to be smaller for private firms,

there may still be instances in which the mandate has financing benefits for some firms in the industry

or the industry as a whole (e.g., due to spillovers, standardization, and reduction of duplicate

information collection efforts; Minnis & Shroff 2017). 32 Consistent with this line of reasoning, Table

8 documents that firms report fewer external financing constraints as an impediment to innovation

after the enforcement reform strengthened the reporting mandate in Germany. We also find some

evidence suggesting fewer internal financing constraints. These results are consistent with a large

literature in accounting (Leuz & Wysocki 2016) and suggest mandatory reporting comes with capital-



32See, for example, Garmaise and Natividad (2016) for information spillovers from transparent firms to others and
improved access to credit. See (Zingales 2009) and Leuz (2010) for overviews on the benefits of mandatory reporting.


                                                        33
market benefits, in our case at the market level. Still, these benefits are not large enough to produce

a positive net effect with respect to market-wide innovation.

         Importantly, the evidence in Table 8 and Figure 1 also allays concerns that the negative impact

on innovation in the German setting reflects confounding influences from the financial crisis, which

occurred in the post-period of the enforcement reform. The documented reduction in financing

constraints is inconsistent with the explanation that the crisis hit limited-liability firms harder than

unlimited-liability firms (e.g., as a result of limited collateral), which in turn spuriously results in a

negative innovation effect. Note further that our analysis includes county-year fixed effects, which

should absorb much of the crisis impact on innovation. We nevertheless gauge if there is any residual

impact of the crisis on our results by controlling (locally) for firms' exposures to the distress of a major

German bank (Commerzbank) during the financial crisis (Huber 2018) and find that inferences are

largely unaffected (Table A2). 33

   6.5. Other Measures of Corporate Innovation

         Our results are based on fairly broad, yet concrete innovation measures derived from firms'

confidential responses to the Community Innovation Surveys. These survey-based measures are

frequently used in innovation research and policy. In contrast, studies in accounting, finance, and

economics tend to rely on patents and accounting information (R&D expenses) to measure corporate

innovation activity. In this section, we investigate the impact of reporting regulation on these

alternative measures of innovation to align our findings with the literature and also to validate the

survey responses used to measure innovation.

         6.5.1. Patents

         Patents reflect innovation but they also represent one particular form with which firms protect

rents from innovation. Moreover, patents grant formal legal protection only in exchange for mandated

33 It is worth noting that our German results are consistent with the European setting and that, in the latter, we do not

exploit changes over (crisis) time but instead rely on a cross-sectional identification strategy. Thus, it is unlikely that the
financial crisis or other major shocks during our sample period drive our results.


                                                             34
disclosure of patent information. These features have two important implications. First, patents

capture only a subset of innovations. Supporting this claim, our descriptive evidence documents that

only a small fraction of all innovation activity is patented (in line with, e.g., Arundel & Kabla 1998;

Argente et al. 2020; Granja & Moreira 2020). Second, patents are a form of disclosure. As such, firms'

patenting and reporting strategies are intertwined (e.g., Glaeser et al. 2019; Reeb & Zhao 2020).

        These institutional features render the effect of mandatory reporting on corporate patenting

ambiguous. On the one hand, a mandate could decrease patents through their negative impact on

innovation activity. On the other hand, the increase in reporting due to the mandate makes it more

important for firms to protect their innovations in some other way (as secrecy is less effective), which

in turn could increase the use of patents. Thus, patents are arguably a problematic measure of

innovative activity when studying the aggregate impact of reporting mandates.

        Consistent with an ambiguous relationship, we find in Table 9 that reporting mandates are

positively associated with patenting in the aggregate design of the European setting (Panel A), whereas

they are negatively associated with patenting in the local market design of the German setting (Panel

B). The positive association in the aggregate design likely reflects the increased use of patenting to

protect firms' remaining innovations. In the local market design, however, the negative association

reflects that local monopolists do not have (m)any remaining innovations to protect, as they often

stop innovating altogether. In line with this interpretation, Panel C shows (using the firm-level design)

that firms' survey responses indicate that secrecy has become less important after the reform

effectively expanded the mandate. At the same time, the importance of patenting and actual patent

applications increase after the reform (Panel C). Note that the firm-level analysis by construction is

tilted towards more crowded markets (as it is weighted by each firm-year). Firms in these markets

reduce their innovation spending only along the intensive margin, but do not stop innovating

altogether.   Accordingly, these firms shift from secrecy toward patenting for their remaining

innovations. Thus, our local-market and firm-level results are internally consistent.



                                                   35
        Besides illustrating the ambiguous relation between mandatory reporting and patenting, the

results in Table 9 document that firms' responses to the Community Innovation Survey align with

their actual patenting behavior recorded in PATSTAT. In each of the panels of Table 9, the respective

treatment variable is associated with firms' survey responses in the same direction as it is with firms'

actual patenting behavior. This correspondence validates the survey-based innovation measures.

        Lastly, the patenting results in Table 9 reinforce the proprietary costs explanation for the

negative effect of reporting on corporate innovation. In column 3 of Panel A, we find that reporting

mandates increase the share of patent citations originating from competitors in the same country-industry.

This finding is consistent with the interpretation that reporting mandates increase within-industry

competition by revealing the profitability of innovative firms to which innovative firms respond by

increasing their patenting (which in turn competitors have to cite).

        6.5.2. Accounting Information

        Financial statements reflect firms' innovation activity in various, though imperfect ways. The

balance sheet, for example, provides information on the investments in tangible and some intangible

assets. Most intangible assets, however, do not make it onto the balance sheet (e.g., Lev 2001). In

addition to the balance sheet, the income statement can, for example, provide an estimate of firms'

R&D expenses. Often, however, these expenses are not broken out separately and buried in other

expense line items (e.g., Koh & Reeb 2015). The absence of comprehensive and innovation-specific

items hampers the usefulness of individual accounting line items for our purpose of assessing the

aggregate impact of reporting mandates. This issue is compounded by the fact that reporting mandates

mechanically affect the availability of accounting-based innovation measures through their impact on

the availability of accounting information (e.g., for database providers). For example, aggregate R&D

may appear to be increasing after a reporting mandate simply because it forces more firms to disclose

R&D expenses. With these caveats in mind, we examine the relation between mandatory reporting

and accounting-based innovation measures, on one hand to check for consistency with our main



                                                   36
results and on the other hand to make our results comparable to other studies in the literature.

        Consistent with our earlier results, reporting mandates are negatively associated with measures

of innovation derived from accounting numbers (Table 10). We find that reporting mandates are

negatively associated with investments in tangible and, in particular, intangible assets. We further find

some evidence that reporting mandates are negatively associated with firms' R&D intensity (defined

as R&D expenses over sales), albeit insignificantly. The lack of significance is likely a consequence of

power as the coefficient magnitudes are sizeable. The R&D intensity results are estimated based on a

severely restricted subsample, as only few European companies provide as a separate R&D line item

in the income statement and hence is often missing in the Amadeus database. Despite these

limitations, the results for the accounting-based innovation measures support our conclusion that

mandatory reporting reduces corporate innovation.

    7. Discussion of the Results

        Using multiple settings and detailed innovation input and output data, we consistently find

that mandatory reporting reduces the prevalence of corporate innovation activities. This decline in

the prevalence of innovation activity does not appear to reflect a reduction in wasteful duplication of

innovation efforts and a corresponding increase in innovative efficiency. Instead, the results point to

reduced incentives to innovate, even after accounting for positive spillovers within broad two-digit

industries. They provide a plausible explanation for why Breuer (2020) finds that reporting mandates

spur competition, yet do not appear to have positive (or may even have negative) effects on industry-

level productivity growth. We emphasize, however, that the question of whether the negative net

impact of mandatory reporting on industry-level innovation generalizes to the economy-wide level is

still unclear as our aggregate analysis neglects potential cross-industry and cross-country spillovers.

What is clear though is that reporting regulation has important distributional consequences: some

firms win, others lose. This distributional impact can have important ramifications for market

structure and innovation incentives at the economy level.


                                                   37
       Our evidence is consistent with the notion that reporting regulation deters corporate

innovation due to the dissipation of proprietary information to competitors and contracting partners

(e.g., suppliers). Looking at our evidence as well as related work, we surmise that three interrelated

economic mechanisms are at play. First, reporting mandates diminish firms' bargaining power and

rents (Melitz & Ottaviano 2008; Breuer 2020), limiting the rewards from innovation. Consistent with

this mechanism, we find negative effects on profit margins and positive effects from customer and

supplier reporting, both of which are consistent with learning and increased bargaining power.

Second, reporting mandates have been shown to shorten the duration of firms' contracting

relationships (Dewatripont & Maskin 1995; Hombert & Matray 2016; Breuer et al. 2018; Sutherland

2018), which in turn likely hurts the incentives for long-term investments such as R&D. Third,

reporting mandates increase the number of contracting partners (Berger et al. 2001; Asker & Ljungqvist

2010; Saidi & Zaldokas 2019), reducing the efficacy of secrecy as a strategy to protect proprietary

information and know-how about innovative products, services and processes. Broadly speaking, the

three mechanisms are consistent with a shift away from relationships and the notion that disclosure

regulation is integral to and furthers arms' length transactions (e.g., Leuz & Wüstemann 2004).

       We find the strongest effects from mandatory reporting among smaller firms and in local

markets with few existing competitors. This pattern suggests smaller, local monopolists in niche

markets are particularly affected. Without a mandate, these firms can essentially hide their existence

or at least their profitability. By contrast, firms operating in crowded and competitive markets earn

limited rents and are well known, so they cannot hide much, irrespective of financial reporting. Similar

arguments can be made for firms that already make very active use of patenting and hence have to

provide substantial and detailed information about their innovations. They are likely less affected than

smaller and lesser known firms in niche markets using primarily secrecy to protect their innovations.

       Consistent with this line of arguments, we find the strongest effects of reporting regulation

along the extensive instead of the intensive margins of innovation spending, innovation outputs, and



                                                  38
patenting. An interesting implication of these findings and patterns is that mandatory reporting

appears to lead to a concentration of innovative activity at larger firms operating across several

industries. Consistent with such a concentration, Bernard (2016) and Breuer (2020), analyzing market

entry effects, document that it is predominantly larger competitors that enter into local niche markets

in response to reporting mandates.        As a result, reporting mandates can reduce market-share

concentration in local markets and narrow industries as shown in Breuer (2020), but still increase the

concentration of market power at the national level and across industries (Rossi-Hansberg et al. 2019).

Such concentration of market power and innovative activity among larger firms is consistent with

recent and broader trends in innovation activity (Rammer & Schubert 2018; EU 2019a). Similar to

other information technologies (e.g., Begenau et al. 2018; Farboodi et al. 2019), reporting mandates

appear to disproportionally benefit larger firms. It is plausible that the direct effect of a mandate on

corporate innovation tends to hit larger firms less than smaller firms. Larger firms often disclose

much more information voluntarily (e.g., Buzby 1975; Dedman & Lennox 2009; Breuer et al. 2020),

can hide sensitive information through complexity (e.g., Bens et al. 2011), and face smaller, resource-

constrained competitors. At the same time, the indirect (spillover) effect of a reporting mandate tends

to benefit larger firms more than smaller firms. The former can exploit investment opportunities that

are revealed by a competitor or contracting partner through the mandate more easily, given, among

others, their financial resources, data-processing capabilities, and existing advertising channels.

    8. Conclusion

        In this study, we examine the effects of financial reporting regulation on corporate innovation.

We analyze two different settings: threshold-based reporting mandates in the EU and a major

enforcement reform in Germany, both of which give rise to plausibly exogenous differences in the

intensity with which European and German firms face reporting mandates. The two settings have

different advantages and drawbacks, but provide remarkably consistent findings and conclusions.

        We find evidence that requiring firms to publicly disclose their financial reports reduces


                                                   39
mandated firms' innovation incentives, but increases their propensity to use patenting as a means to

protect their innovations. At the same time, we find that mandated firms' reporting spurs innovation

incentives of other firms (e.g., competitors, customers, or suppliers), especially larger ones. The net

impact of these countervailing forces on the prevalence of corporate innovation activity appears to be

negative, at least at our highest level of aggregation (i.e., the country-industry level).

        Our evidence is consistent with the notion that mandatory reporting deters firms' incentives

to innovate and generate proprietary know-how because of concerns about the loss of proprietary

information.    While our evidence suggests reporting regulation provides positive information

spillovers benefiting other firms, they appear not large enough to fully offset the decline in the number

of innovating firms at the industry level. In summary, our evidence suggests that proprietary costs and

the ensuing reduction or, at least, concentration of corporate innovation in the economy are important

considerations for regulators and policy makers when setting reporting regulation.

        In closing, we want to reiterate the following caveats. While we are ultimately interested in

whether innovation activity is lost to the economy due to reporting regulation, our ability to speak to

this overarching question is constrained by two important limitations. First, our highest level of

aggregation is at the country-industry level, not the economy level. We choose the country-industry

level because industry level variation enhances power (more observations) and affords identification

with respect to reporting regulation, which is endogenous at the economy level. Compared to the

commonly used firm-level analysis, this aggregation level makes an important step toward

accommodating spillovers among related firms. However, it neglects potential spillovers across broad

industries and country boundaries. Second, our survey-based innovation measures best capture the

prevalence of innovation activity rather than its aggregate value.        While our measures are more

innovation-specific and comprehensive than most other measures (e.g., patents or accounting

information), they do not perfectly capture the value-weighted aggregate of innovation activity, which

would be the ideal measure necessary to conclusively answer our motivating question.



                                                     40
References

Accountancy Europe, 2019. Audit Exemption Thresholds in Europe (2019 update). Accountancy in
        Europe,             Available           at:          https://www.accountancyeurope.eu/wp-
        content/uploads/181114_Audit-exemption-thresholds-in-Europe_2018_survey-
        update_3.pdf
Acs, Z., Audretsch, D., 1990. Innovation and Small Firms. The MIT Press.
Acs, Z.J., Audretsch, D.B., 1987. Innovation, Market Structure, and Firm Size. Review of Economics
        and Statistics 69, 567-574
Acs, Z.J., Audretsch, D.B., 1988. Innovation in Large and Small Firms: An Empirical Analysis.
        American Economic Review 78, 678-690
Allen, A., Lewis-Western, M.F., Valentine, K., 2018. The Innovation Consequences of Financial
        Regulation for Young Life-Cycle Firms. Working paper
Amernic, J.H., 1985. The roles of accounting in collective bargaining. Accounting, Organizations and
        Society 10, 227-253
Aobdia, D., 2015. Proprietary Information Spillovers and Supplier Choice: Evidence from Auditors.
        Review of Accounting Studies 20, 1504-39
Aobdia, D., Cheng, L., 2018. Unionization, product market competition, and strategic disclosure.
        Journal of Accounting and Economics 65, 331-357
Argente, D., Baslandze, S., Hanley, D., Moreira, S., 2020. Patents to Products: Product Innovation
        and Firm Dynamics. Working paper; Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3577811
Arrow, K., 1962. Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention. In: The Rate and
        Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors. National Bureau of Economic
        Research, pp. 609-626.
Arrunada, B., 2011. Mandatory Accounting Disclosure by Small Private Companies. European Journal
        of Law and Economics 32, 377-413
Arundel, A., 2001. The relative effectiveness of patents and secrecy for appropriation. Research Policy
        30, 611-624
Arundel, A., Kabla, I., 1998. What percentage of innovations are patented? Empirical estimates for
        European firms. Research Policy 27, 127-141
Asker, J., Ljungqvist, A., 2010. Competition and the Structure of Vertical Relationships in Capital
        Markets. Journal of Political Economy 118, 599-647
Badertscher, B., Shroff, N., White, H.D., 2013. Externalities of public firm presence: Evidence from
        private firms' investment decisions. Journal of Financial Economics 109, 682-706
Ball, R., 1980. Discussion of Accounting for Research and Development Costs: The Impact on
        Research and Development Expenditures. Journal of Accounting Research 18, 27-37
Barrios, J.M., Choi, J.H., Hochberg, Y., Kim, J., Liu, M., 2020. Informing Entrepreneurs: Public
        Corporate Disclosure and New Business Formation. Working paper
Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J., Scarpetta, S., 2013. Cross-Country Differences in Productivity: The
        Role of Allocation and Selection. American Economic Review 103, 305-334
Barth, M.E., Landsman, W.R., Taylor, D.J., 2017. The JOBS Act and Information Uncertainty in IPO
        Firms. The Accounting Review 92, 25-47
Begenau, J., Farboodi, M., Veldkamp, L., 2018. Big data in finance and the growth of large firms.
        Journal of Monetary Economics 97, 71-87
Bens, D.A., Berger, P.G., Monahan, S.J., 2011. Discretionary Disclosure in Financial Reporting: An
        Examination Comparing Internal Firm Data to Externally Reported Segment Data.
        Accounting Review 86, 417-449


                                                  41
Berg, T., Reisinger, M., Streitz, D., 2020. Handling Spillover Effects in Empirical Research. Working
        paper; Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3377457
Berger, A.N., Klapper, L.F., Udell, G.F., 2001. The ability of banks to lend to informationally opaque
        small businesses. Journal of Banking & Finance 25, 2127-2167
Berger, P.G., 2011. Challenges and opportunities in disclosure research--A discussion of `the financial
        reporting environment: Review of the recent literature'. Journal of Accounting and Economics
        51, 204-218
Berger, P.G., Choi, J.H., Tomar, S., 2019. Breaking it Down: Competitive Costs of Cost Disclosures.
        Working paper; available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3358435
Berger, P.G., Hann, R.N., 2007. Segment Profitability and the Proprietary and Agency Costs of
        Disclosure. The Accounting Review 82, 869-906
Bernard, D., 2016. Is the risk of product market predation a cost of disclosure? Journal of Accounting
        and Economics 62, 305-325
Bernard, D., Burgstahler, D., Kaya, D., 2018. Size management by European private firms to minimize
        proprietary costs of disclosure. Journal of Accounting and Economics 66, 94-122
Bernard, D., Kaya, D., Wertz, J., 2020. Entry and capital structure mimicking in concentrated markets:
        the role of incumbents' financial disclosures. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 101379
Bersch, J., Gottschalk, S., Müller, B., Niefert, M., 2014. The Mannheim Enterprise Panel (MUP) and
        Firm Statistics for Germany ZEW-Centre for European Economic Research Discussion
        Paper, 14-104
Bhattacharya, S., Chiesa, G., 1995. Proprietary Information, Financial Intermediation, and Research
        Incentives. Journal of Financial Intermediation 4, 328-357
Bhattacharya, S., Ritter, J.R., 1983. Innovation and Communication: Signalling with Partial Disclosure.
        Review of Economic Studies 50, 331-346
Bönte, W., Wiethaus, L., 2007. Knowledge Disclosure and Transmission in Buyer­Supplier
        Relationships. Review of Industrial Organization 31, 275-288
Breuer, M., 2020. How does financial reporting regulation affect industry-wide resource allocation?
        Journal of Accounting Research forthcoming
Breuer, M., Hombach, K., Müller, M.A., 2018. How does financial reporting regulation affect firms'
        banking? Review of Financial Studies 31, 1265-1297
Breuer, M., Hombach, K., Müller, M.A., 2020. The Economics of Firms' Public Disclosure: Theory
        and Evidence. Working paper; Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3037002
Brown, J.R., Fazzari, S.M., Petersen, B.C., 2009. Financing Innovation and Growth: Cash Flow,
        External Equity, and the 1990s R&D Boom. Journal of Finance 64, 151-185
Brown, J.R., Martinsson, G., 2018. Does Transparency Stifle or Facilitate Innovation? Management
        Science forthcoming
Bundesanzeiger, 2019. Query of financial statements at official website of federal gazette. Accessed
        on 09/04/2019: https://www.bundesanzeiger.de/ebanzwww/wexsservlet
Buzby, S.L., 1975. Company Size, Listed Versus Unlisted Stocks, and the Extent of Financial
        Disclosure. Journal of Accounting Research 13, 16-37
Chaplinsky, S., Hanley, K.W., Moon, S.K., 2017. The JOBS Act and the Costs of Going Public. Journal
        of Accounting Research 55, 795-836
Cna Interpreta, 2011. Study on Accounting requirements for SMEs. Directorate-General for
        Enterprise and Industry
Community Innovation Survey, 2014a. The Harmonised Survey Questionnaire, 23 July 2014.
Community Innovation Survey, 2014b. Methodological Notes for CIS 2014 Questionnaire,
        November 28.



                                                  42
Costello, A.M., 2013. Mitigating incentive conflicts in inter-firm relationships: Evidence from long-
        term supply contracts. Journal of Accounting and Economics 56, 19-39
Currie, J., Gruber, J., 1996. Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the Medicaid
        Eligibility of Pregnant Women. Journal of Political Economy 104, 1263
Dambra, M., Field, L.C., Gustafson, M.T., 2015. The JOBS Act and IPO volume: Evidence that
        disclosure costs affect the IPO decision. Journal of Financial Economics 116, 121-143
Darrough, M.N., Stoughton, N.M., 1990. Financial Disclosure Policy in an Entry Game. Journal of
        Accounting and Economics 12, 219-243
Dass, N., Nanda, V.K., Xiao, S.C., 2018. Intellectual Property Protection and Financial Markets:
        Patenting         vs.     Secrecy.     Working         paper;     Available      at     SSRN:
        www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=2648770
Dedman, E., Lennox, C., 2009. Perceived competition, profitability and the withholding of
        information about sales and the cost of sales. Journal of Accounting and Economics 48, 210-
        230
Dewatripont, M., Maskin, E., 1995. Credit and Efficiency in Centralized and Decentralized
        Economies. Review of Economic Studies, 541
Engelberg, J., Ozoguz, A., Wang, S., 2018. Know thy neighbor: Industry clusters, information
        spillovers and market efficiency. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 53, 1937-1961
EU, 2017. Annual report on European SMEs 2016/2017 Focus on self-employment.
        https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/26563/attachments/1/translations/en/renditi
        ons/native
EU, 2019a. Annual report on European SMEs 2018/2019: Research & Development and Innovation
        by                                                                                      SMEs.
        https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/38365/attachments/2/translations/en/renditi
        ons/native
EU,      2019b.      Fact     Sheets    on     the     European       Union    -     Company      Law.
        http://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/35/company-law
European Commission, 2019. Study on the accounting regime of limited liability micro companies.
        https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/business_economy_euro/company_reporting_an
        d_auditing/documents/190605-study-micro-companies_en.pdf
Farboodi, M., Mihet, R., Philippon, T., Veldkamp, L., 2019. Big data and firm dynamics. American
        Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings forthcoming
Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., Syverson, C., 2008. Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection
        on Productivity or Profitability? American Economic Review 98, 394-425
Garmaise, M.J., Natividad, G., 2016. Spillovers in Local Banking Markets. Review of Corporate
        Finance Studies 5, 139-165
Gassen, J., Muhn, M.N., 2018. Financial Transparency of Private Firms: Evidence from a Randomized
        Field Experiment. Working paper; Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract=3290710
Gittelman, M., 2008. A Note on the Value of Patents as Indicators of Innovation: Implications for
        Management Research. Academy of Management Perspectives 22, 21-27
Glaeser, S., 2018. The effects of proprietary information on corporate disclosure and transparency:
        Evidence from trade secrets. Journal of Accounting and Economics 66, 163-193
Glaeser, S., Guay, W.R., 2017. Identification and Generalizability in Accounting Research: A
        Discussion of Christensen, Floyd, Liu, and Maffett (2017). Journal of Accounting and
        Economics Forthcoming
Glaeser, S., Michels, J., Verrecchia, R.E., 2019. Discretionary Disclosure and Manager Horizon:
        Evidence         from      Patenting.     Working       paper;     Available      at    SSRN:
        www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=2939852


                                                  43
Glaeser, S., Omartian, J.D., 2019. Public Firm Presence, Financial Reporting, and the Decline of U.S.
        Manufacturing. Working paper; Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3435834
Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., Sorkin, I., Swift, H., 2020. Bartik Instruments: What, When, Why, and How.
        American Economic Review 110, 2586-2624
Graham, J.R., Harvey, C.R., Rajgopal, S., 2005. The economic implications of corporate financial
        reporting. Journal of Accounting and Economics 40, 3-73
Granja, J., Moreira, S., 2020. Product Innovation and Credit Market Disruptions. Working paper;
        Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3477726
Hail, L., Tahoun, A., Wang, C., 2017. Corporate Scandals and Regulation. Journal of Accounting
        Research 56, 617-671
Harris, M.S., 1998. The Association between Competition and Managers' Business Segment Reporting
        Decisions. Journal of Accounting Research 36, 111-128
Healy, P.M., Palepu, K.G., 2001. Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the capital
        markets: A review of the empirical disclosure literature. Journal of Accounting and Economics
        31, 405-440
Hedge, D., Herkenhoff, K., Zhu, C., 2018. Patent Disclosure Working paper
Holmstrom, B., 1989. Agency costs and innovation. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
        12, 305-327
Hombert, J., Matray, A., 2016. The Real Effects of Lending Relationships on Innovative Firms and
        Inventor Mobility. The Review of Financial Studies 30, 2413-2445
Huber, K., 2018. Disentangling the Effects of a Banking Crisis: Evidence from German Firms and
        Counties. American Economic Review 108, 868-98
Hussinger, K., Keusch, T., Moers, F., 2018. Insider Trading and Corporate Innovation: The Real
        Effects of Disclosure. Working paper
ICAEW, 2013. Financial Reporting Disclosures: Market and Regulatory Failures. Information for
        Better Markets Initiative
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sorensen, B., Villegas-Sanchez, C., Volosovych, V., 2015. How to Construct
        Nationally Representative Firm Level Data from the ORBIS Global Database. Working paper;
        Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=2660017
Kerr, W.R., Nanda, R., 2015. Financing Innovation. Annual Review of Financial Economics 7, 445-
        462
Kim, J., 2019. Mandatory Corporate Patent Disclosures and Innovation Working paper
Kim, J., Valentine, K., 2020. The Innovation Consequences of Mandatory Patent Disclosures. Journal
        of Accounting and Economics forthcoming
Koh, P.-S., Reeb, D.M., 2015. Missing R&D. Journal of Accounting and Economics 60, 73-94
Lang, M., Sul, E., 2014. Linking industry concentration to proprietary costs and disclosure: Challenges
        and opportunities. Journal of Accounting and Economics 58, 265-274
Leuz, C., 2004. Proprietary versus Non-Proprietary Disclosures: Evidence from Germany. In: Leuz
        C, Pfaff D & Hopwood A (eds.) The Economics and Politics of Accounting. Oxford
        University Press, pp. 164­197.
Leuz, C., 2010. Different approaches to corporate reporting regulation: how jurisdictions differ and
        why. Accounting and Business Research 40, 229-256
Leuz, C., Triantis, A., Wang, T.Y., 2008. Why do firms go dark? Causes and economic consequences
        of voluntary SEC deregistrations. Journal of Accounting and Economics 45, 181-208
Leuz, C., Wüstemann, J., 2004. The Role of Accounting in the German Financial System. In: Krahnen
        JP & Schmidt RH (eds.) The German Financial System. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.
        450-481.
Leuz, C., Wysocki, P.D., 2016. The Economics of Disclosure and Financial Reporting Regulation:


                                                  44
         Evidence and Suggestions for Future Research. Journal of Accounting Research 54, 525
Lev, B., 2001. Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting. Brookings Institution Press.
Li, Y., Lin, Y., Zhang, L., 2017. Trade Secrets Law and Corporate Disclosure: Causal Evidence on the
         Proprietary Cost Hypothesis. Journal of Accounting Research 56, 265-308
Liberty, S.E., Zimmerman, J.L., 1986. Labor Union Contract Negotiations and Accounting Choices.
         The Accounting Review 61, 692-712
Mahoney, N., 2015. Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance. American Economic Review 105, 710-
         746
Max-Planck-Institute, 2009. Rechnungslegung und Wettbewerbsschutz im deutschen und
         europäischen Recht [Financial Accounting and Protection of Fair Competition in German and
         European Law] Springer, Heidelberg.
Melitz, M.J., Ottaviano, G.I.P., 2008. Market Size, Trade, and Productivity. Review of Economic
         Studies 75, 295-316
Minnis, M., Shroff, N., 2017. Why Regulate Private Firm Disclosure and Auditing? Accounting and
         Business Research 47, 473-502
Nagaoka, S., Motohashi, K., Goto, A., 2010. Chapter 25 - Patent Statistics as an Innovation Indicator.
         In: Hall BH & Rosenberg N (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Innovation. North-
         Holland, pp. 1083-1127.
Olley, G.S., Pakes, A., 1996. The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment
         Industry. Econometrica 64, 1263-1297
Palmer, J.R., 1977. The use of accounting information in labor negotiations. National Association of
         Accountants, New York :
Park, K., 2018. Financial reporting quality and corporate innovation. Journal of Business Finance &
         Accounting 45, 871-894
Rammer, C., Peters, B., 2014. Dokumentation zur Innovationserhebung 2014: Innovationen im Bezug
         zur Energiewende, Finanzierung von Innovationen. http://ftp.zew.de/pub/zew-
         docs/docus/dokumentation1502.pdf
Rammer, C., Schubert, T., 2018. Concentration on the few: mechanisms behind a falling share of
         innovative firms in Germany. Research Policy 47, 379-389
Reeb, D.M., Zhao, W., 2020. Patents Do Not Measure Innovation Success. Critical Finance Review
         9, 157-199
Rossi-Hansberg, E., Sarte, P.-D., Trachter, N., 2019. Diverging Trends in National and Local
         Concentration.       NBER       Working       Paper      No.      25066;      Available     at:
         www.nber.org/papers/w25066
Rothwell, R., 1978. Small and Medium Sized Manufacturing Firms and Technological Innovation.
         Management Decision 16, 362-370
Roychowdhury, S., Shroff, N., Verdi, R., 2019. The Effects of Financial Reporting and Disclosure on
         Corporate Investment: A Review. Journal of Accounting and Economics 68, 1-27
Saidi, F., Zaldokas, A., 2019. How Does Firms' Innovation Disclosure Affect Their Banking
         Relationships? Management Science forthcoming
Schmutzler, A., 2010. Is Competition Good for Innovation? A Simple Approach to an Unresolved
         Question. Foundations and Trends in Microeconomics 5, 355-428
Schneider, C., Veugelers, R., 2010. On young highly innovative companies: why they matter and how
         (not) to policy support them. Industrial and Corporate Change 19, 969-1007
Sutherland, A.G., 2018. Does credit reporting lead to a decline in relationship lending? Evidence from
         information sharing technology. Journal of Accounting and Economics 66, 123-141
Vanhaverbeke, S., Balsmeier, B., Doherr, T., 2019. Corporate Financial Transparency and Credit
         Ratings. Working paper


                                                  45
Verrecchia, R.E., 1983. Discretionary disclosure. Journal of Accounting and Economics 5, 179-194
Verrecchia, R.E., Weber, J., 2006. Redacted Disclosure. Journal of Accounting Research 44, 791-814
Vossen, R.W., 1998. Relative Strengths and Weaknesses of Small Firms in Innovation. International
       Small Business Journal 16, 88-94
Wagenhofer, A., 1990. Voluntary Disclosure with a Strategic Opponent. Journal of Accounting and
       Economics 12, 341-363
Wyatt, A., Abernethy, M., 2008. Accounting for Intangible Investments. Australian Accounting
       Review 18, 95-107
ZEW,         2019a.      https://www.zew.de/en/forschung/patent-firm-panel-infrastructure-panel-
       containing-patent-and-trademark-strategies-of-german-
       companies/?cHash=b9baa6ff48fb34680a0b842ba61a3ecb
ZEW, 2019b. Mannheim innovation Panel. https://kooperationen.zew.de/en/zew-fdz/provided-
       data/mannheim-innovation-panel.html
Zhong, R., 2018. Transparency and firm innovation. Journal of Accounting and Economics 66, 67-93
Zhou, Y., 2018. A Lobbying Approach to Evaluating the Competitive Harm of Mandatory Disclosure
       of Proprietary Information: The Case of Segment Reporting. Working paper; Available at
       SSRN: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3106787
Zingales, L., 2009. The Future of Securities Regulation. Journal of Accounting Research 47, 391-425




                                                46
Variable Appendix
                                   VARIABLE DEFINITIONS
Panel A: Exemptions in Europe
Treatment                     Source                 Description
                                                     Share of firms above country-level reporting
Reporting                         Amadeus            threshold calculated using a standardized
                                                     firm-size distribution per industry
                                                     Share of firms above country-level auditing
Auditing                          Amadeus            threshold calculated using a standardized
                                                     firm-size distribution per industry
Reporting and Auditing            Amadeus            Minimum of "Reporting" and "Auditing"
                                                     Reporting share of domestic supplier
                                                     industries (calculated by weighting reporting
Supplier Reporting                Amadeus/Eurostat   shares with domestic input shares for a given
                                                     focal industry using Eurostat's FIGARO
                                                     input-output table)
                                                     Reporting share of domestic customer
                                                     industries (calculated by weighting reporting
Customer Reporting                Amadeus/Eurostat   shares with domestic output shares for a
                                                     given focal industry using Eurostat's
                                                     FIGARO input-output table)
                                                     Minimum of reporting and auditing share of
                                                     domestic supplier industries (calculated by
Supplier Reporting and Auditing   Amadeus/Eurostat   weighting reporting shares with domestic
                                                     input shares for a given focal industry using
                                                     Eurostat's FIGARO input-output table)
                                                     Minimum of reporting and auditing share of
                                                     domestic customer industries (calculated by
Customer Reporting and                               weighting reporting shares with domestic
                                  Amadeus/Eurostat
Auditing                                             output shares for a given focal industry
                                                     using Eurostat's FIGARO input-output
                                                     table)
Outcomes                          Source             Description
                                                     Log of total innovation spending (includes
                                                     in-house and external R&D, acquisition of
                                                     external knowledge, equipment, machinery
Innovation Spending               Eurostat           or software for innovation purposes,
                                                     product design and professional
                                                     development of innovation activities and
                                                     marketing of innovation) plus one
                                                     Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Innovating Firm                   Eurostat           that introduce new or significantly improved
                                                     products, processes, or services
                                                     New-to-the-market innovations (the
New-To-Market Innovation          Eurostat           enterprise was the first one to market these
                                                     products/services)
                                                     Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Product Innovation                Eurostat
                                                     that introduce new or significantly improved


                                               47
                                                 products
                                                 Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Process Innovation               Eurostat        that introduce new or significantly improved
                                                 services
Sales per Employee               Amadeus         Log sales less log employees
                                                 Log sales less 0.3 times log tangible assets
Sales per Employee and Capital   Amadeus
                                                 and 0.7 log employees
                                                 Covariance between market share and sales
                                                 per employee calculated as the difference
Market Share and Sales per
                                 Amadeus         between the market-share weighted sales per
Employee
                                                 employee and the simple average of sales per
                                                 employee
                                                 Covariance between market share and sales
                                                 per employee and capital calculated as the
Market Share and Sales per                       difference between the market-share
                                 Amadeus
Employee and Capital                             weighted sales per employee and capital less
                                                 and the simple average of sales per employee
                                                 and capital
                                                 Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Patenting Firm                   Eurostat
                                                 that apply for a patent
                                                 Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Patent Application Firm          PATSTAT
                                                 that apply for a patent
                                                 Share of forward patent cites from
Competitor-Forward Cites         PATSTAT
                                                 competitors in same country-industry
Change in Tangible Assets        Amadeus         Log difference in tangible assets over time
Change in Intangible Assets      Amadeus         Log difference in intangible assets over time
R&D Intensity                    Amadeus         R&D expense scaled by sales




                                            48
Panel B: Enforcement Reform in Germany
Treatment                     Source                      Description
                                                          Share of limited-liability firms among firms
Limited Share                     Creditreform
                                                          in county, industry, and year
                                                          Indicator taking the value of one for limited-
                                                          liability/affected firms (GmbH, GmbH &
Limited                           Creditreform
                                                          Co. KG), and zero for unlimited-liability
                                                          firms (KG, OHG)
                                                          Indicator taking the value of one for private
                                                          limited-liability firms, and zero for publicly-
Private                           Creditreform
                                                          listed firms (sample restricted to: GmbH,
                                                          GmbH & Co. KG, and AG)
                                                          Limited-liability share of local supplier
                                                          industries for a given industry (calculated by
                                                          weighting the limited share of supplier
Supplier Limited Share            Creditreform/Eurostat
                                                          industries of a given industry in a given
                                                          county by domestic input shares from
                                                          Eurostat's FIGARO input-output table)
                                                          Limited-liability share of local customer
                                                          industries for a given industry (calculated by
                                                          weighting the limited share of customer
Customer Limited Share            Creditreform/Eurostat
                                                          industries of a given industry in a given
                                                          county by domestic output shares from
                                                          Eurostat's FIGARO input-output table)
                                                          Indicator taking the value of one for years
Post                              Creditreform
                                                          after 2007, and zero before
Outcomes                          Source                  Description
                                                          Log (plus 1) of total innovation spending
                                                          (includes in-house and external R&D,
                                                          acquisition of external knowledge,
Innovation Spending               MIP                     equipment, machinery or software for
                                                          innovation purposes, product design and
                                                          professional development of innovation
                                                          activities and marketing of innovation)

                                                          Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Innovation Spending (Extensive)   MIP                     with positive total innovation spending, and
                                                          zero for firms with zero spending
                                                          Log of total innovation spending (for firms
Innovation Spending (Intensive)   MIP
                                                          with positive spending only)
                                                          New-to-the-market innovations (the
New-To-Market Innovations         MIP                     enterprise was the first one to market these
                                                          products/services)
                                                          Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Innovating Firm                   MIP                     that introduce new or significantly improved
                                                          products, processes, or services



                                                 49
                                                      Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Product Innovation              MIP                   that introduce new or significantly improved
                                                      products
                                                      Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Process Innovation              MIP                   that introduce new or significantly improved
                                                      processes

                                                      Importance of secrecy as a means to protect
Importance of Secrecy           MIP
                                                      innovations (scale: 0 to 3)

                                                      Importance of patents as a means to protect
Importance Patenting            MIP
                                                      innovations (scale: 0 to 3)
Patent Applications             PATSTAT               Log (plus 1) of number of applied patents
Patenting Firm                  PATSTAT               Patent application indicator
Profit Margin                   MIP                   Level of profit margin (scale: 1 to 9)
Sales from New-to-Market                              Log (plus 1) of sales from new-to-market
                                MIP
Innovations                                           innovations
Share of Sales from New-to-                           Share of sales attributable to new-to-market
                                MIP
Market Innovations                                    innovations
Share of Sales Increase from                          Log (plus 1) share of sales increase
                                MIP
Quality Improvements                                  attributable to quality improvements
                                                      Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Cost Reduction from Process
                                MIP                   with a cost reduction due to process
Improvements
                                                      improvements
                                                      Indicator taking the value of one for firms
External Financing Constraint   MIP                   for which external financing constitutes a
                                                      constraint to innovation
                                                      Indicator taking the value of one for firms
Internal Financing Constraint   MIP                   for which internal financing constitutes a
                                                      constraint to innovation
Controls                        Source               Description
Employees                       Amadeus/Creditreform Log (plus 1) number of employees




                                              50
Figures & Tables

                                                                             Figure 1

                                                     REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
                                                           ENFORCEMENT IN GERMANY
                                         5
          Average Innovation Spending




                                         0




                                         -5




                                        -10
                                              2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007 2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
                                                                                     Year

         Notes: The figure presents the relation between innovation spending and the intensity of the
         enforcement of reporting mandates over time. The black dots represent difference-in-
         differences coefficients for each year (with 2007 as the base year) from a regression of average
         innovation spending at the county, industry, and year level on the share of affected (limited)
         firms in the pre-enforcement period interacted with individual year indicators. The gray area
         represents a pointwise 90% confidence interval.




                                                                                  51
                                                                    Table 1

                                                          DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Panel A: Exemptions in Europe (Country-Industry Level)
Variable                                        Market Level       N       Mean     SD       p1       p25      p50      p75       p99
Reporting                                                           31,953    0.220    0.271    0.001    0.054    0.123     0.252      1.000
Reporting and Auditing                                              31,953    0.159    0.176    0.001    0.050    0.111     0.209      1.000
Supplier Reporting                                                  16,971    0.224    0.264    0.009    0.092    0.143     0.210      0.997
Customer Reporting                                                  16,662    0.244    0.264    0.009    0.103    0.164     0.245      0.999
Supplier Reporting and Auditing                                     16,971    0.158    0.155    0.009    0.088    0.136     0.187      0.993
Customer Reporting and Auditing                                     16,662    0.178    0.158    0.009    0.098    0.156     0.220      0.997
Innovation Spending                             Simple Average       6,316   11.206    2.949    0.000  10.147   11.543    12.828      16.725
Innovation Spending                             Total                6,326   16.067    3.857    0.000  14.847   16.630    18.282      22.056
Innovating Firm                                 Simple Average       6,662    0.362    0.221    0.000    0.196    0.333     0.496      1.000
Innovating Firm                                 Total                6,672  218.280  598.071    0.000  11.398   43.480   153.798   2786.903
New-To-Market Innovations                       Simple Average       6,694    0.161    0.167    0.000    0.041    0.113     0.232      0.911
New-To-Market Innovations                       Total                6,704   83.566  250.299    0.000    3.180  15.077    56.750   1104.041
Product Innovation                              Simple Average       6,703    0.258    0.207    0.000    0.101    0.215     0.370      1.000
Product Innovation                              Total                6,713  146.072  422.455    0.000    7.000  28.590   101.414   1913.684
Process Innovation                              Simple Average       6,631    0.273    0.188    0.000    0.142    0.246     0.362      1.000
Process Innovation                              Total                6,641  161.052  432.180    0.000    8.083  32.270   115.614   2210.229
Sales per Employee                              Weighted Average    30,977   12.676    1.481    9.766  11.780   12.544    13.302      17.518
Sales per Employee and Capital                  Weighted Average    30,802    9.341    1.122    7.127    8.652    9.234     9.832     12.876
Market Share and Sales per Employee             Covariance          30,273    1.089    0.916  -0.401     0.499    0.920     1.477      4.230
Market Share and Sales per Employee and Capital Covariance          30,044    0.705    0.735  -0.584     0.242    0.570     1.012      3.262
Patenting Firm                                  Simple Average       3,198    0.059    0.120    0.000    0.000    0.016     0.062      0.562
Patent Application Firm                         Simple Average      31,936    0.008    0.025    0.000    0.000    0.000     0.004      0.114
Actual Reporting                                Simple Average      31,953    0.194    0.270    0.000    0.022    0.074     0.231      1.000
Competitor-Forward Cites                        Simple Average      11,773    0.022    0.072    0.000    0.000    0.000     0.012      0.307
Change in Tangible Assets                       Simple Average      31,688   -0.028    0.499  -2.642    -0.056   -0.001     0.067      0.618
Change in Tangible Assets                       Weighted Average    31,353    0.015    0.575  -2.669    -0.037    0.031     0.116      1.049
Change in Intangible Assets                     Simple Average      30,865   -0.189    0.578  -2.898    -0.265   -0.150    -0.038      0.850
Change in Intangible Assets                     Weighted Average    30,276   -0.062    0.776  -3.068    -0.223   -0.049     0.120      2.047
R&D Intensity                                   Simple Average       2,990    0.912   11.942    0.000    0.003    0.021     0.085     15.122
R&D Intensity                                   Weighted Average     2,990    0.107    1.771    0.000    0.002    0.014     0.049      1.012




                                                                       52
Panel B: Enforcement Reform in Germany (County-Industry Level)
Variable                                          Market Level       N       Mean       SD           p1     p25     p50     p75       p99
Limited Share                                                         56,929      0.589        0.231  0.000   0.436   0.596     0.764       1.000
Supplier Share                                                        37,425      0.603        0.164  0.161   0.520   0.627     0.712       0.926
Customer Share                                                        37,425      0.606        0.139  0.225   0.529   0.621     0.698       0.898
Post                                                                  56,929      0.371        0.483  0.000   0.000   0.000     1.000       1.000
Innovation Spending ('000 Euros)                  Simple Average      29,702  4,587.016   83,351.990  0.000   0.000  30.000  400.000   42,600.040
Innovation Spending ('000 Euros)                  Total               29,702  7,017.119  118,556.900  0.000   0.000  40.000  510.000   61,999.950
Innovation Spending                               Simple Average      29,702      7.446        6.365  0.000   0.000  10.309   12.899       17.567
Innovation Spending                               Total               29,702      7.648        6.540  0.000   0.000  10.597   13.142       17.943
Spending (Extensive)                              Simple Average      29,702      0.531        0.467  0.000   0.000   0.500     1.000       1.000
Spending (Extensive)                              Total               29,702      0.809        1.157  0.000   0.000   1.000     1.000       4.000
Spending (Intensive)                              Simple Average      17,704     12.650        2.188  8.006  11.238  12.612   14.021       18.310
Spending (Intensive)                              Total               17,704     12.831        2.291  8.006  11.290  12.766   14.316       18.661
New-To-Market Innovations                         Simple Average      26,725      0.291        0.424  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.667       1.000
New-To-Market Innovations                         Total               26,725      0.432        0.741  0.000   0.000   0.000     1.000       3.000
Innovating Firm                                   Simple Average      49,466      0.551        0.445  0.000   0.000   0.600     1.000       1.000
Innovating Firm                                   Total               49,466      1.090        1.890  0.000   0.000   1.000     1.000       7.000
Product Innovation                                Simple Average      48,876      0.441        0.444  0.000   0.000   0.400     1.000       1.000
Product Innovation                                Total               48,876      0.877        1.619  0.000   0.000   1.000     1.000       6.000
Process Innovation                                Simple Average      48,800      0.367        0.426  0.000   0.000   0.000     1.000       1.000
Process Innovation                                Total               48,800      0.715        1.253  0.000   0.000   0.000     1.000       5.000
Importance Patenting                              Simple Average      30,063      0.577        1.005  0.000   0.000   0.000     1.000       3.000
Importance Patenting                              Total               30,063      0.895        1.784  0.000   0.000   0.000     2.000       7.000
Patent Applications                               Simple Average      56,929      0.139        0.497  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.000       2.565
Patent Applications                               Total               56,929      0.210        0.667  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.000       3.367
Patenting Firm                                    Simple Average      56,929      0.077        0.229  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.000       1.000
Patenting Firm                                    Total               56,929      0.165        0.474  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.000       2.000
Profit Margin                                     Simple Average      26,851      3.605        1.724  1.000   2.000   3.500     5.000       7.000
Profit Margin                                     Total               26,851      5.302        6.747  1.000   2.000   4.000     6.000      26.000
Sales from New-to-Market Innovation               Simple Average      26,293     10.529        9.943  0.000   0.000  16.305   19.729       24.960
Sales from New-to-Market Innovation               Weighted Average    26,293     10.699       10.106  0.000   0.000  16.540   20.060       25.386
Share of Sales from New-to-Market Innovation      Simple Average      26,293      0.037        0.103  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.025       0.500
Share of Sales from New-to-Market Innovation      Total               26,219      0.037        0.106  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.020       0.510
Share of Sales Increase from Quality Improvements Simple Average      22,619      0.021        0.059  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.005       0.262
Share of Sales Increase from Quality Improvements Total               22,619      0.029        0.077  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.010       0.405
Cost Reduction from Process Improvements          Simple Average      24,168      0.265        0.415  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.500       1.000


                                                                            53
Cost Reduction from Process Improvements   Total            24,168          0.364       0.613   0.000    0.000    0.000     1.000        2.000
External Financing Constraint              Simple Average   24,562          0.329       0.440   0.000    0.000    0.000     1.000        1.000
External Financing Constraint              Total            24,562          0.489       0.832   0.000    0.000    0.000     1.000        3.000
Internal Financing Constraint              Simple Average   24,451          0.369       0.452   0.000    0.000    0.000     1.000        1.000
Internal Financing Constraint              Total            24,451          0.551       0.903   0.000    0.000    0.000     1.000        3.000
Employees                                  Simple Average   55,601        401.813   4,482.303   1.000   14.000   45.000   143.000    4,153.000
Employees                                  Total            55,601        868.681   8,925.645   1.000   17.000   69.000   261.000   10,808.000
Employees (Log)                            Simple Average   55,601          3.950       1.606   0.693    2.708    3.829     4.970        8.332
Employees (Log)                            Total            55,601          4.360       1.847   0.693    2.890    4.248     5.568        9.288




                                                                     54
 Panel C: Enforcement Reform in Germany (Firm Level)
 Variable                                    N        Mean       SD          p1     p25     p50     p75       p99
 Limited                                      129,739      0.972       0.166  0.000   1.000   1.000     1.000       1.000
 Private                                      123,692      0.991       0.093  1.000   1.000   1.000     1.000       1.000
 Post                                         135,437      0.565       0.496  0.000   0.000   1.000     1.000       1.000
 Innovation Spending ('000 Euros)              51,500  4,083.832  85,419.280  0.000   0.000  10.000  280.000   36,300.000
 Innovation Spending                           51,500      6.646       6.417  0.000   0.000   9.210   12.543       17.407
 Spending (Extensive)                          51,500      0.533       0.499  0.000   0.000   1.000     1.000       1.000
 Spending (Intensive)                          27,449     12.470       2.156  8.006  11.002  12.429   13.816       18.120
 New-To-Market Innovations                     44,462      0.297       0.457  0.000   0.000   0.000     1.000       1.000
 Innovating Firm                              110,582      0.564       0.496  0.000   0.000   1.000     1.000       1.000
 Product Innovation                           108,796      0.453       0.498  0.000   0.000   0.000     1.000       1.000
 Process Innovation                           108,476      0.369       0.482  0.000   0.000   0.000     1.000       1.000
 Importance Secrecy                            38,191      0.991       1.257  0.000   0.000   0.000     2.000       3.000
 Importance Patenting                          55,249      0.591       1.079  0.000   0.000   0.000     1.000       3.000
 Patent Applications                          135,437      0.113       0.474  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.000       2.398
 Patenting Firm                               135,437      0.080       0.271  0.000   0.000   0.000     0.000       1.000
 Employees                                    131,797    408.530   5,942.451  1.000  11.000  33.000  117.000    4,129.000
 Employees (Log)                              131,797      3.748       1.640  0.693   2.485   3.526     4.771       8.326
Notes: The table presents descriptive statistics for treatment and outcome variables. Corresponding variable definitions can be found in the "Variable Appendix" table.
Panel A provides the statistics for the country-industry (two-digit NACE) analysis in the European setting. Panel B provides the statistics for the county-industry (two-
digit NACE) analysis in the German setting. Panel C provides the statistics for the firm-level analysis in the German setting. Simple averages are the unweighted averages
of variables within a given country, industry, and year. Weighted averages are computed as the market-share-weighted sums of variables (where the market share is
calculated using sales) within a given country, industry, and year. Totals are the sums of variables within a given country, industry, and year. Covariances are the
differences between weighted averages and simple averages of variables within a given country, industry, and year. Logarithm (plus 1) transformations are applied after
taking averages within a given country, industry, and year.




                                                                                   55
                                                              Table 2

                                     REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
                                             EXEMPTIONS IN EUROPE
Panel A: Country-Industry Level (Average: 2-digit NACE)
Outcome                                 Innovation        Innovating            New-To-Market             Product             Process
                                         Spending            Firm                 Innovations           Innovation          Innovation
Market Level                         Simple Average     Simple Average          Simple Average        Simple Average      Simple Average
Column                                (1)         (2)    (3)       (4)           (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)
Reporting                           0.613                -0.121**               -0.046              -0.098*                -0.100*
                                   (0.90)               (-2.05)                (-1.11)              (-1.76)               (-1.73)
Reporting and Auditing                        0.059                   -0.081              -0.082*              -0.152**               -0.024
                                             (0.07)                  (-1.30)             (-1.68)              (-2.61)                (-0.43)
Country-Year FE                      X         X           X            X         X          X        X           X         X            X
Industry-Year FE                     X         X           X            X         X          X        X           X         X            X
Observations                         6,129      6,129      6,473       6,473     6,503      6,503     6,514       6,514     6,444       6,444
Clusters (Country-Industry)          1,394      1,394      1,406       1,406     1,407      1,407     1,411       1,411     1,404       1,404
Clusters (Country-Year)                127        127        133         133       133        133       133         133       133         133
Adj. R2                              0.614      0.614      0.668       0.668     0.579      0.579     0.646       0.647     0.584       0.584




                                                                    56
 Panel B: Country-Industry Level (Aggregate 2-digit NACE)
 Outcome                      Innovation            Innovating                             New-To-Market                 Product                         Process
                               Spending                Firm                                 Innovations                Innovation                      Innovation
 Market Level                     Total               Total                                     Total                     Total                           Total
 Column                      (1)        (2)      (3)          (4)                           (5)       (6)            (7)         (8)               (9)           (10)
 Reporting                            0.339                -286.206**                     -37.106                -144.001*                    -217.254**
                                     (0.40)                  (-2.29)                       (-0.75)                 (-1.77)                      (-2.31)
 Reporting and Auditing                          0.200                     -301.651**                 -45.600                   -145.309*                     -238.566***
                                                (0.21)                       (-2.59)                  (-0.99)                     (-1.90)                       (-2.67)
 Country-Year FE                        X          X            X               X             X          X            X             X              X                X
 Industry-Year FE                       X          X            X               X             X          X            X             X              X                X
 Observations                          6,135      6,135         6,489           6,489        6,519      6,519         6,529          6,529         6,460          6,460
 Clusters (Country-Industry)           1,393      1,393         1,419           1,419        1,423      1,423         1,421          1,421         1,418          1,418
 Clusters (Country-Year)                 127        127           133             133          133        133           133            133           133            133
 Adj. R2                               0.677      0.676         0.579           0.579        0.573      0.573         0.576          0.576         0.561          0.560
Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of innovation measures on the share of firms subject to full reporting (and auditing) requirements in the European
setting. In Panel A, the innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given country, industry, and year. In Panel B, the innovation measures are totals
calculated for a given country, industry, and year. "Reporting" is the share of simulated firms exceeding reporting-related exemption thresholds in a given country,
industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries and years. "Reporting and Auditing" is the share of simulated firms
exceeding reporting- and auditing-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all
countries and years. The regressions include industry-year fixed effects and country-year fixed effects. We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their
distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the country-industry level and the country-year
level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                                                     57
                                                        Table 3

                                     REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
                                         INNOVATION SPILLOVERS (EUROPE)
Panel A: Reporting only
Outcome                         Innovation       Innovating        New-To-Market       Product           Process
                                 Spending           Firm             Innovations      Innovation       Innovation
Market Level                  Simple Average   Simple Average      Simple Average   Simple Average   Simple Average
Column                              (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)              (5)
Reporting                         0.032           -0.221***            -0.053          -0.182**         -0.210***
                                 (0.03)          (-2.72)              (-0.85)         (-2.19)          (-2.65)
Supplier Reporting               -2.707            0.394**              0.177           0.390***         0.375**
                                (-1.26)           (2.52)               (1.58)          (2.80)           (2.53)
Customer Reporting                3.010**          0.102               -0.006           0.051            0.032
                                 (2.51)           (1.06)              (-0.08)          (0.55)           (0.38)
Country-Year FE                      X               X                    X                X                X
Industry-Year FE                     X               X                    X                X                X
Observations                       3,502            3,667                3,672           3,682             3,649
Clusters (Country-Industry)          749              750                  751             751               747
Clusters (Country-Year)              121              126                  126             126               126
Adj. R2                            0.636            0.693                0.622           0.688             0.608




                                                              58
 Panel B: Reporting and Auditing
 Outcome                                                 Innovation               Innovating            New-To-Market                Product                  Process
                                                          Spending                   Firm                 Innovations               Innovation              Innovation
 Market Level                                          Simple Average           Simple Average          Simple Average            Simple Average          Simple Average
 Column                                                      (1)                      (2)                     (3)                       (4)                     (5)
 Reporting and Auditing                                     -1.529                  -0.129                    -0.100                  -0.217**                 -0.151*
                                                           (-1.26)                 (-1.48)                   (-1.42)                 (-2.45)                  (-1.80)
 Supplier Reporting and Auditing                            -2.101                   0.223                     0.122                   0.270*                   0.295*
                                                           (-0.94)                  (1.34)                    (1.03)                  (1.80)                   (1.89)
 Customer Reporting and Auditing                             2.004*                  0.028                    -0.099                  -0.006                   -0.032
                                                            (1.66)                  (0.32)                   (-1.19)                 (-0.07)                  (-0.42)
 Country-Year FE                                                X                       X                        X                       X                        X
 Industry-Year FE                                               X                       X                        X                       X                        X
 Observations                                                  3,502                  3,667                     3,672                   3,682                    3,649
 Clusters (Country-Industry)                                     749                    750                       751                     751                      747
 Clusters (Country-Year)                                         121                    126                       126                     126                      126
 Adj. R2                                                       0.636                  0.691                     0.623                   0.687                    0.607
Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of innovation measures on the shares of firms, suppliers, and customers subject to full reporting (and auditing)
requirements in the European setting. The innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given country, industry, and year. In Panel A, "Reporting" is the
share of simulated firms exceeding reporting-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry
across all countries and years. "Supplier Reporting" is the input-share-weighted intensity of reporting mandates in the supplier industries of a given country, industry,
and year. "Customer Reporting" is the output-share-weighted intensity of reporting mandates in the customer industries of a given country, industry, and year. In Panel
B, "Reporting and Auditing" is the share of simulated firms exceeding reporting- and auditing-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using
a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries and years. "Supplier Reporting and Auditing" is the input-share-weighted intensity of reporting and
auditing mandates in the supplier industries of a given country, industry, and year. "Customer Reporting and Auditing" is the output-share-weighted intensity of reporting
and auditing mandates in the customer industries of a given country, industry, and year. The regressions include industry-year fixed effects and country-year fixed effects.
t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the country-industry level and the country-year level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively




                                                                                      59
                                                   Table 4

                               REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
                                  PROFITABILITY SPILLOVERS (EUROPE)
Panel A: Reporting Only
Outcome                       Sales per Employee   Sales per Employee    Market Share and     Market Share and
                                                       and Capital      Sales per Employee   Sales per Employee
                                                                                                 and Capital
Market Level                  Weighted Average     Weighted Average        Covariance            Covariance
Column                               (1)                  (2)                 (3)                     (4)
Reporting                          -0.170               -0.194              -0.390                -0.348
                                  (-0.45)              (-0.64)             (-1.21)               (-1.38)
Supplier Reporting                  1.339**              1.391**             1.094*                1.139**
                                   (2.15)               (2.43)              (1.93)                (2.31)
Customer Reporting                  0.677*               0.459               0.691**               0.560**
                                   (1.88)               (1.29)              (2.24)                (1.99)
Country-Year                           X                    X                   X                     X
Industry-Year                          X                    X                   X                     X
Observations                         16,169               16,129              15,937                15,845
Clusters (Country-Year)                1,125               1,122                1,121                1,120
Clusters (Country-Industry)              372                 372                  368                  369
Adj. R2                                0.792               0.743                0.490                0.491




                                                     60
 Panel B: Reporting and Auditing
 Outcome                                                         Sales per Employee          Sales per Employee            Market Share and              Market Share and
                                                                                                 and Capital              Sales per Employee            Sales per Employee
                                                                                                                                                            and Capital
 Market Level                                                     Weighted Average            Weighted Average                 Covariance                   Covariance
 Column                                                                  (1)                         (2)                          (3)                            (4)
 Reporting and Auditing                                                -0.162                      -0.001                       -0.465                        -0.298
                                                                      (-0.40)                     (-0.00)                      (-1.26)                       (-1.00)
 Supplier Reporting and Auditing                                        1.634***                    1.484***                     1.293**                       1.130**
                                                                       (2.66)                      (2.70)                       (2.31)                        (2.33)
 Customer Reporting and Auditing                                        0.787**                     0.544                        0.713**                       0.624**
                                                                       (2.17)                      (1.56)                       (2.29)                        (2.24)
 Country-Year                                                              X                           X                            X                              X
 Industry-Year                                                             X                           X                            X                              X
 Observations                                                            16,169                      16,129                        15,937                       15,845
 Clusters (Country-Year)                                                  1,125                        1,122                        1,121                         1,120
 Clusters (Country-Industry)                                                372                          372                           368                          369
 Adj. R2                                                                  0.792                        0.744                        0.491                         0.492
Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of profitability (or productivity) measures on the shares of firms, suppliers, and customers subject to full reporting
(and auditing) requirements in the European setting. The profitability measures are sales-weighted averages or covariances (differences between sales-weighted and
equally weighted measures) in a given country, industry, and year. In Panel A, "Reporting" is the share of simulated firms exceeding reporting-related exemption
thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries and years. "Supplier Reporting" is the input-
share-weighted intensity of reporting mandates in the supplier industries of a given country, industry, and year. "Customer Reporting" is the output-share-weighted
intensity of reporting mandates in the customer industries of a given country, industry, and year. In Panel B, "Reporting and Auditing" is the share of simulated firms
exceeding reporting- and auditing-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all
countries and years. "Supplier Reporting and Auditing" is the input-share-weighted intensity of reporting and auditing mandates in the supplier industries of a given
country, industry, and year. "Customer Reporting and Auditing" is the output-share-weighted intensity of reporting and auditing mandates in the customer industries of
a given country, industry, and year. The regressions include industry-year fixed effects and country-year fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard
errors clustered at the country-industry level and the country-year level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                                                       61
                                                            Table 5

                                     REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
                                           ENFORCEMENT IN GERMANY
Panel A: County-Industry Level (Average: 2-digit NACE)
Outcome                              Innovation          Innovating     New-To-Market       Product           Process
                                      Spending              Firm          Innovations      Innovation       Innovation
Market Level                       Simple Average      Simple Average   Simple Average   Simple Average   Simple Average
Column                                   (1)                 (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
Limited Share×Post                   -3.026***            -0.132***        -0.073            -0.126***       -0.086**
                                    (-4.06)              (-3.46)          (-1.29)           (-3.30)         (-2.32)
County-Industry FE                       X                     X                X              X                X
County-Year FE                           X                     X                X              X                X
Industry-Year FE                         X                     X                X              X                X
Observations                           26,774               47,283           23,597          46,680            46,592
Clusters (County-Industry)              5,857                 8,193            5,459          8,163             8,156
Adj. R2                                 0.528                 0.393            0.412          0.415             0.322




                                                                62
 Panel B: County-Industry Level (Aggregate: 2-digit NACE)
 Outcome                                 Innovation                            Innovating             New-To-Market                Product                 Process
                                          Spending                                Firm                 Innovations                Innovation             Innovation
 Market Level                                Total                               Total                    Total                     Total                   Total
 Column                                       (1)                                  (2)                     (3)                       (4)                     (5)
 Limited Share×Post                                     -3.050***                -0.510***                 -0.213***                 -0.462***              -0.340***
                                                       (-4.02)                  (-6.09)                   (-2.73)                   (-5.89)                (-4.94)
 County-Industry FE                                        X                        X                          X                       X                      X
 County-Year FE                                            X                        X                          X                       X                      X
 Industry-Year FE                                          X                        X                          X                       X                      X
 Observations                                            26,778                   47,279                    23,597                   46,672                  46,589
 Clusters (County-Industry)                               5,861                    8,178                      5,460                   8,150                   8,148
 Adj. R2                                                  0.528                    0.561                      0.377                   0.550                   0.440
Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of innovation measures on the intensity of enforcement of reporting mandates in the German setting. In Panel A,
the innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given county, industry, and year. In Panel B, the innovation measures are totals calculated for a given county,
industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is captured by the interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms in the pre-enforcement period in a given
county and industry ("Limited Share") and a post-enforcement reform indicator ("Post"). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and industry-year fixed
effects. We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on
standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                                                    63
                                                                                 Table 6

                                                   REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
                                                         NUMBER OF FIRMS (GERMANY)
 Outcome                                                       Innovation Spending                     Innovation Spending                        Innovating Firm
                                                                                                             (Extensive)
 Market Level                                                     Simple Average                           Simple Average                         Simple Average
 Number of Firms                                               High           Low                     High                Low                  High          Low
 Column                                                         (1)            (2)                     (3)                 (4)                  (5)           (6)
 Limited Share×Post                                            -2.554            -4.373***           -0.005                -0.313***          -0.100            -0.132***
                                                              (-1.51)           (-4.56)             (-0.03)               (-4.52)            (-1.09)           (-2.83)
 County-Industry FE                                              X                 X                    X                     X                  X                X
 County-Year FE                                                  X                 X                    X                     X                  X                X
 Industry-Year FE                                                X                 X                    X                     X                  X                X
 Observations                                                  12,273            12,673               12,307                 12,642            22,825           23,234
 Clusters (County-Industry)                                     2,466             3,110                2,474                  3,108             3,640            4,446
 Adj. R2                                                        0.500             0.538                0.449                  0.508             0.363            0.403
Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of innovation measures on the intensity of enforcement of reporting mandates for county-industries with a high vis-
à-vis low number of firms in the pre-enforcement period (median split) in the German setting. The innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given
county, industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is captured by the interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms in the pre-enforcement period in a
given county and industry ("Limited Share") and a post-enforcement reform indicator ("Post"). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and industry-year
fixed effects. We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based
on standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                                                     64
                                                            Table 7

                                    REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
                                  ECONOMIC RETURNS TO INNOVATION (GERMANY)
Panel A: County-Industry Level (Average: 2-digit NACE level)
Outcome                              Profit               Sales from   Share of Sales from    Share of Sales   Cost Reduction
                                     Margin            New-To-Market    New-To-Market         Increase from     from Process
                                                         Innovations      Innovations            Quality       Improvements
                                                                                             Improvements
Market Level                    Simple Average        Simple Average    Simple Average       Simple Average    Simple Average
Column                                (1)                   (2)               (3)                  (4)               (5)
Limited Share×Post                  -0.356*               -3.798***          -0.017*             -0.010*           -0.085
                                   (-1.69)               (-3.30)            (-1.84)             (-1.65)           (-1.54)
County-Industry FE                     X                     X                  X                   X                X
County-Year FE                         X                     X                  X                   X                X
Industry-Year FE                       X                     X                  X                   X                X
Observations                        24,768                23,141             23,088               19,154           20,846
Clusters (County-Industry)           5,787                 5,388              5,329                4,748            5,086
Adj. R2                              0.535                 0.553              0.403                0.311            0.433




                                                               65
 Panel B: County-Industry Level (Aggregate: 2-digit NACE level)
 Outcome                              Profit              Sales from                              Share of Sales from           Share of Sales           Cost Reduction
                                      Margin           New-To-Market                               New-To-Market                Increase from             from Process
                                                         Innovations                                 Innovations                   Quality               Improvements
                                                                                                                                Improvements
 Market Level                                      Total                       Total               Weighted Average                 Total                      Total
 Column                                             (1)                         (2)                       (3)                        (4)                        (5)
 Limited Share×Post                               -1.112**                     -3.911***                 -0.021**                   -0.013                     -0.145*
                                                 (-2.40)                      (-3.35)                   (-2.13)                    (-1.49)                    (-1.89)
 County-Industry FE                                  X                            X                         X                          X                         X
 County-Year FE                                      X                            X                         X                          X                         X
 Industry-Year FE                                    X                            X                         X                          X                         X
 Observations                                      24,767                      23,140                    23,016                      19,165                    20,850
 Clusters (County-Industry)                         5,778                       5,387                     5,323                       4,765                     5,087
 Adj. R2                                            0.576                       0.553                     0.415                       0.266                     0.352
Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of profitability measures on the intensity of enforcement of reporting mandates in the German setting. In Panel A,
the innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given county, industry, and year. In Panel B, the profitability measures are totals or sales-weighted averages
calculated for a given county, industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is captured by the interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms in the pre-
enforcement period in a given county and industry ("Limited Share") and a post-enforcement reform indicator ("Post"). The regressions include county-industry, county-
year, and industry-year fixed effects. We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in
parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed),
respectively.




                                                                                       66
                                                          Table 8

                           REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
                               FINANCING CHANNEL (GERMANY)
 Outcome                               External Financing Constraint                  Internal Financing Constraint
 Market Level                        Simple Average         Total                  Simple Average          Total
 Column                                    (1)               (2)                         (3)                 (4)
 Limited Share×Post                       -0.123*                -0.403***              -0.033                  -0.393***
                                         (-1.78)                (-3.68)                (-0.48)                 (-3.49)
 County-Industry FE                          X                      X                      X                       X
 County-Year FE                              X                      X                      X                       X
 Industry-Year FE                            X                      X                      X                       X
 Observations                              22,528                 22,535                22,418                  22,420
 Clusters (County-Industry)                 5,199                  5,197                  5,191                  5,184
 Adj. R2                                    0.666                  0.580                  0.663                  0.573
Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of financing constraints on the intensity of enforcement of reporting
mandates in the German setting. The financial constraints measures are simple averages or totals calculated at the county,
industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is captured by the interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms
in the pre-enforcement period in a given county and industry ("Limited Share") and a post-enforcement reform indicator
("Post"). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and industry-year fixed effects. We truncate the outcomes
at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are
based on standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                              67
                                                               Table 9

                                          REPORTING REGULATION AND PATENTS
Panel A: Country-Industry Level in Europe (Average: 2-digit NACE)
Source                                              CIS Survey                         PATSTAT                        PATSTAT
Outcome                                              Patenting                     Patent Application             Competitor-Forward
                                                       Firm                               Firm                          Cites
Market Level                                     Simple Average                     Simple Average                  Simple Average
Column                                                  (1)                                (2)                            (3)
Reporting                                              0.041                             0.015***                         0.058***
                                                     (0.87)                             (2.88)                           (3.27)
Country-Year FE                                         X                                  X                               X
Industry-Year FE                                        X                                  X                               X
Observations                                           3,106                             31,298                          11,454
Clusters (Country-Industry)                            1,292                              2,188                           1,407
Clusters (Country-Year)                                   66                                387                             378
Adj. R2                                                0.542                              0.645                           0.206
Panel B: County-Industry Level in Germany (Average: 2-digit NACE)
Source                                                  CIS Survey                                             PATSTAT
Outcome                                           Importance Patenting                                    Patent Applications
Market Level                            Simple Average                 Total                    Simple Average                Total
Column                                        (1)                       (2)                           (3)                      (4)
Limited Share×Post                           -0.375***                 -0.597***                     -0.032                  -0.076**
                                            (-2.68)                   (-2.68)                       (-1.59)                 (-2.48)
County-Industry FE                              X                         X                             X                       X
County-Year FE                                  X                         X                             X                       X
Industry-Year FE                                X                         X                             X                       X
Observations                                  27,976                     27,980                       54,947                  54,955
Clusters (County-Industry)                     5,621                      5,621                        8,560                   8,571
Adj. R2                                        0.726                      0.616                        0.691                   0.645




                                                                 68
 Panel C: Firm Level in Germany
 Source                                                                     CIS Survey                          CIS Survey                           PATSTAT
 Outcome                                                               Importance Secrecy                 Importance Patenting                   Patent Applications
 Column                                                                 (1)             (2)                 (3)            (4)                  (5)               (6)
 Limited×Post                                                         -0.575***                              0.063                            0.016**
                                                                     (-3.59)                                (0.74)                           (2.00)
 Private×Post                                                                            -0.233                              0.150                                 0.086***
                                                                                        (-0.86)                             (1.22)                                (3.03)
 Controls                                                                X                   X                X               X                 X                    X
 Firm FE                                                                 X                   X                X               X                 X                    X
 County-Year                                                             X                   X                X               X                 X                    X
 Industry-Year FE (4-digit)                                              X                   X                X               X                 X                    X
 Observations                                                           32,275             32,238           46,084           46,150           112,106              110,809
 Clusters (Firm)                                                         9,130              9,054           11,138           11,048            22,418               21,494
 Adj. R2                                                                 0.943              0.941            0.912            0.913             0.882                0.898
Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of patenting measures on variation in reporting mandates. In Panel A, the patent measures are simple averages
calculated for a given country, industry, and year in the European setting using Eurostat and PATSTAT data. The treatment variation, "Reporting", is the share of
simulated firms exceeding reporting-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all
countries and years. The regressions include industry-year fixed effects and country-year fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered
at the country-industry level and the country-year level. In Panel B, the patent measures are simple averages and totals calculated for a given county, industry, and year
in the German setting using the MIP and PATSTAT data. The treatment variation is the interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms in the pre-enforcement
period in a given county and industry ("Limited Share") and a post-enforcement reform indicator ("Post"). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and
industry-year fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. In Panel C, the patent measures are calculated
at the firm-level in the German setting using the MIP and PATSTAT data. "Limited" is an indicator taking the value of one for affected (limited-liability) firms, and
zero for unaffected (unlimited-liability) firms. "Private" is an indicator taking the value of one for affected (private limited-liability) firms, and zero for unaffected
(publicly-listed limited-liability) firms. "Post" is an indicator taking the value of one for the post-enforcement reform period. The regressions include firm, county-year,
and industry-year fixed effects (where the industries are defined using four-digit NACE classifications). In all panels, we truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th
percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the firm level. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                                                      69
                                                                                        Table 10

                                             REPORTING REGULATION AND ACCOUNTING INFORMATION
Outcome                                     Change in Tangible Assets                           Change in Intangible Assets                              R&D Intensity
Market Level                           Simple Average     Weighted Average                 Simple Average      Weighted Average                Simple Average Weighted Average
Column                                  (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)                   (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)                  (9)    (10)    (11)    (12)
Reporting                            -0.090***                  -0.019                   -0.116**                   -0.168**                   -1.528                 -0.133
                                      (-2.92)                   (-0.43)                  (-2.50)                   (-2.17)                     (-1.45)               (-0.84)
Reporting and Auditing                             -0.019                    0.074                    -0.150**                    -0.182**                -1.351                   -0.332
                                                   (-0.49)                  (1.44)                    (-2.56)                    (-2.02)                  (-0.84)                 (-1.53)
Country-Year FE                         X              X          X           X             X            X             X             X            X          X          X            X
Industry-Year FE                        X              X          X           X             X            X             X             X            X          X          X            X
Observations                          31,055         31,055     30,727       30,727        30,249       30,249        29,671        29,671       2,695      2,695       2,691      2,691
Clusters (Country-Industry)            2,177          2,177      2,168         2,168        2,153        2,153         2,143         2,143         310        310         311        311
Clusters (Country-Year)                  387            387        387           387          387          387           387           387          90         90          89         89
Adj. R2                                0.950          0.950      0.886         0.886        0.856        0.856         0.604         0.604       0.417      0.416       0.258      0.259
Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of financial-statement-based innovation measures on the share of firms subject to full reporting (and auditing) requirements
in the European setting. The innovation measures are simple averages or sales-weighted averages calculated for a given country, industry, and year. "Reporting" is the share of
simulated firms exceeding reporting-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries
and years. "Reporting and Auditing" is the share of simulated firms exceeding reporting- and auditing-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a
standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries and years. The regressions include industry-year fixed effects and country-year fixed effects. We truncate the
outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the country-
industry level and the country-year level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                                                            70
Online Appendix
 (for online publication only)
Table of Contents

1. Community Innovation Survey: Definition of Innovation, Examples, and Methodology
2. Reporting Examples: Exempted Reporting versus Full Reporting
3. Figure A1: Distribution of Reporting Intensities
4. Table A1: Reporting Regulation and Innovation ­ Innovation Spending Margins
5. Table A2: Reporting Regulation and Innovation ­ Robustness to Crisis Exposure
Community Innovation Survey
Definition of Innovation
The following description is provided on the first page of the 2014 Community Innovation Survey
questionnaire (Community Innovation Survey 2014a):
       An innovation is the introduction of a new or significantly improved product, process, organisational method, or
       marketing method by your enterprise.

       An innovation must have characteristics or intended uses that are new or which provide a significant improvement over
       what was previously used or sold by your enterprise. However, an innovation can fail or take time to prove itself.

       An innovation need only be new or significantly improved for your enterprise. It could have been originally developed or
       used by other enterprises or organisations.

       Innovation activities include the acquisition of machinery, equipment, buildings, software, and licenses; engineering
       and development work, feasibility studies, design, training, R&D and marketing when they are specifically undertaken
       to develop and/or implement a product or process innovation. This includes also all types of R&D consisting of
       research and development activities to create new knowledge or solve scientific or technical problems.

Examples
The following examples are provided in the official methodological notes accompanying the 2014
Community Innovation Survey questionnaire (Community Innovation Survey 2014b):
       Enterprise managers are unlikely to have difficulty in recognizing major innovations such as the iPhone, ABS braking
       systems, new anti-cancer drugs, `sharing economy' innovations such as Lyft, Uber and AirBandB, or financial
       derivatives. For this reason, the examples given below describe innovations that can be significant but might not be
       easy to recognize as an innovation. This should help the respondent to think of similar types of innovations in their own
       enterprise.
       4.1 Product innovations
       Product innovations cover goods and services with characteristics or intended uses that differ significantly from
       previous products produced by the enterprise. This includes new or significantly improved technical specifications,
       components and materials, incorporated software, user friendliness or other functional characteristics.
       The product innovations can consist of goods or services that are entirely new to the firm or new to the firm's market,
       or goods or services that have been significantly improved.
       Product innovations exclude the following:

            ·    Minor changes or improvements.
            ·    Routine upgrades.
            ·    Seasonal changes (such as for clothing lines).
            ·    Customisation for a single client that does not include significantly different attributes compared to products
                 made for other clients.
            ·    Design changes that do not alter the function or technical characteristics of a good or service.
            ·    The simple resale of new goods and services purchased from other enterprises, but include goods and
                 services developed and produced by foreign affiliates for your enterprise.
       4.1.1 Examples of new or significantly improved goods

            ·    Replacing existing materials with materials with improved characteristics (breathable textiles, light but strong
                 composites, environmentally-friendly plastics, etc).
            ·    Introducing new or improved components in existing product lines (cameras in mobile telephones, fastening



                                                              1
          systems in clothing, hybrid technologies in cars, etc).
     ·    Equipment that incorporate software that improves user friendliness or convenience, such as toasters that
          automatically shut off when the bread is toasted or GPS systems that identify the location of specific types of
          shops or services.
     ·    Adding new functions: bicycle lights that can be recharged through a USB port, rubbish bins that signal when
          they are full, products that can fold for easy storage, new smartphone apps, etc.
     ·    Wearable technology, clothing and accessories incorporating computer and advanced electronic
          technologies
4.1.2 Examples of innovative services

     ·    Improving customers' access, such as a home pick-up and drop-off service for rental cars, same-day delivery
          of online purchases, etc.
     ·    'Sharing economy' services such as Uber, Lyft, AirBandB, Listia (recycling and reusing goods), TaskRabbit,
          etc. First time introduction of internet services such as banking, bill-payment systems, electronic purchase
          and ticketing of travel and theatre tickets, social networking sites, online backup services, cloud-computing,
          on-demand internet streaming media etc.
     ·    New forms of warranty, such as an extended warranty on new or used goods, or bundling warranties with
          other services, such as with credit cards, bank accounts, or customer loyalty cards.
     ·    Installing gas heaters in outdoor restaurant and bar terraces or video on demand screens in the back of
          airline, bus or train seats.
4.1.3 Differentiating between goods and services
A respondent may not always be sure if their innovative product is a good or a service. The respondent's industrial
classification is not always a reliable indicator, since firms that are assigned to the manufacturing sector can produce
services and service sector firms can produce goods.
Goods are usually tangible, owned by the consumer, and can be used multiple times, for instance furniture, appliances,
electronic equipment, packaged software, and clothing. There are exceptions, such as food purchased in a
supermarket or diesel purchased from a refinery, which can only be used once, and downloaded movies and music,
which are intangible.
Services are usually intangible, can only be used once and are not owned by the consumer. They include banking,
retailing, hotel accommodation, insurance, educational courses, air travel, entertainment such as tours, theatres, and
sporting events, repair and renovation work, consulting, cloud computing, streaming video and music (in contrast to
downloadable video and music), etc.
Some aspects of utilities (gas, sewage, water, electricity, etc) and of construction can have characteristics of both a
good and a service. Many utilities appear to provide a product (gas, water, etc) to domestic and commercial users, but
they are intermediaries that often do not produce the product (gas or water), but only deliver it to their consumers.
Electrical generators are also classified as a service, even when they both produce and deliver electricity. Construction
enterprises that build houses or commercial buildings for clients act as a service, but a construction enterprise could
also build housing to sell. In the latter case the respondent might see their enterprise as producing a product instead of
a service.
In some cases, such as when construction firms build houses to sell, it may be best to leave it to the respondent to
determine if they are providing a product or a service.
4.2 Process innovations
Process innovations occur in both service and manufacturing sectors and include new or improved production
methods; logistics, delivery and distribution systems, and `back office' activities, such as maintenance, purchasing, and
accounting operations. They include significant changes in specific techniques, equipment and/or software, intended to
improve the quality, efficiency or flexibility of a production or supply activity, or a reduction in environmental and safety
hazards.
Some process innovations, particularly involving logistics or distribution, are closely linked to organisational
innovations, such as for supply chain management. For these, it can be almost impossible to provide clear guidance on


                                                        2
the type of innovation. It is best left to the respondent to decide if the innovation is primarily a process innovation,
organisational innovation, or even both.
Process innovations exclude the following:

     ·    Minor changes or improvements.
     ·    An increase in production or service capabilities through the addition of manufacturing or logistical systems
          that are very similar to those already in use.
     ·    Innovations that have an important client interface, such as a pick-up or delivery service (these are product
          innovations).
4.2.1 Examples of innovative methods of producing goods or services

     ·    Installation of new or improved manufacturing technology, such as automation equipment or real-time
          sensors that can adjust processes or 3D printing techniques.
     ·    New equipment required for new or improved products.
     ·    Computer-assisted product development or other technology to improve research capabilities, such as bio-
          imaging equipment. More efficient processing that reduces material or energy requirements per unit of
          output.
     ·    More efficient processing that reduces material or energy requirements per unit of output.
4.2.2 Examples of innovative logistics, delivery or distribution methods

     ·    Introduction of passive radio frequency identification (RFID) chips to track materials through the supply chain.
     ·    GPS tracking systems for transport equipment.
     ·    Automated feed-back to suppliers using electronic data exchange.
     ·    Content delivery network, large distributed system of servers deployed in multiple data centers across the
          Internet to serve content to end-users.
     ·    Using natural energy sources for logistics, for instance wind energy in maritime logistics, use of
          meteorological data and navigational algorithms to find and make use of optimum wind angles to reduce
          energy consumption of ships.
4.2.3 Examples of innovative supporting activities

     ·    Introduction of software to identify optimal delivery routes.
     ·    New or improved software or routines for purchasing, accounting or maintenance systems.
4.3 Organisational innovations
Organisational innovations involve the implementation of a significant change in business practices, the organisation of
work responsibilities and decision-making, which includes training or education to increase skills and responsibilities;
and the organisation of external relationships with other enterprises or public institutions. They are intended to improve
the enterprise's innovative capacity or performance characteristics, such as the quality or efficiency of workflows or
response time to opportunities and crises. Organisational innovations usually involve changes to more than one part of
the enterprise's supply chain and are less technology dependent than process innovations.
Organisational innovations exclude the following:

     ·    Changes in management strategy, unless accompanied by the introduction of significant organisational
          change.
     ·    Introduction of new technology that is only used by one division of an enterprise (for example in production).
          These are usually process innovations.
     ·    Simple extensions of organisational changes that have already been implemented in the past or in one part
          of the enterprise. For example, the reorganisation of work tasks in one establishment is not an organisational
          innovation if the same reorganisation was already implemented in a different establishment owned by the
          enterprise.
     ·    Mergers or acquisitions.
4.3.1 Examples of business practice innovations


                                                         3
    ·    Establishment of formal or informal work teams to improve the access and sharing of knowledge from
         different departments, such as marketing, research, production, etc.
    ·    Introduction of quality control standards for suppliers and subcontractors.
    ·    Supply management systems to optimize the allocation of resources from sourcing inputs to the final delivery
         of products.
    ·    First introduction of group or individual performance incentives.
    ·    First introduction of teleworking or a "paperless" office.
4.3.2 Examples of work organisation innovations

    ·    Reduction or increase in the hierarchical structure for decision making.
    ·    Change in responsibilities, such as giving substantially more control and responsibility over work processes
         to production, distribution or sales staff.
    ·    Introduction of a High Performance Work System (HPWS) characterised by a holistic organisation featuring
         flat hierarchical structures, job rotation, self-responsible teams, multi-tasking, a greater involvement of lower-
         level employees in decision making and the replacement of vertical by horizontal communication channels.
    ·    New training or education systems, such as regular videos on each employee's work station that describe
         ongoing challenges for the enterprise or provide skill upgrading, with the goal of improving the ability of
         employees to recognize problems and take responsibility.
    ·    Creation of a new division, for example by splitting the management of marketing and production into two
         divisions, or alternatively a change to integrate divisions.
4.3.3 Examples of external relations innovations

    ·    First use of outsourcing of research or production if it requires a change in how work flows are organised
         within the enterprise.
    ·    First use of alliances that require staff to work closely with staff from another organisation, including
         temporary staff exchanges.
4.4 Marketing innovations
Marketing innovations cover significant changes in how an enterprise markets its goods and services, including
changes to design and packaging. Many of them must be the first use by the enterprise. For example, the first use of
product placement on the internet for one product line is an innovation, but the second use of internet product
placement for a different product line or for a different geographical market is not an innovation.
Marketing innovations exclude the following:

    ·    Routine or seasonal changes, such as clothing fashions.
    ·    Advertising, unless based on the use of new media for the first time.
    ·    Design or packaging changes that alter the functionality or user characteristics, these are product
         innovations.
4.4.1 Examples of design & packaging innovations

    ·    Novel designs of existing products such as flash card memory sticks designed to be worn as jewelry.
    ·    New designs for consumer products, such as appliances or kitchen units designed for very small apartments.
    ·    Adapting packaging for specific markets (different covers and typeface for children and adult versions of the
         same book).
4.4.2 Examples of product promotion innovations

    ·    First time use of a new advertising media. For instance the first time use of product promotion on television,
         radio, cinema, in books, films, internet, social media etc.
    ·    First time use of product seeding through opinion leaders, celebrities, or particular groups that are fashion or
         product trend setters.
    ·    First time use of a loyalty program. A loyalty card, rewards card, point card, advantage card or club card.
    ·    Bundling existing goods or services in new ways to appeal to market segments.



                                                       4
            ·    Developing trademarks for new product lines.
            ·    Mobile marketing (applications). Providing customers with time and location sensitive, personalized
                 information that promotes goods and services.
        4.4.3 Examples of product placement innovations

            ·    First use of in-store sales that are only accessible to holders of the store's credit card or reward card.
            ·    First use of media programming for a specific institution, such as closed circuit television for hospitals, buses,
                 or trains that contain programs to stimulate specific product sales.
            ·    First use of direct marketing via email, telephone or mail using a customer database obtained through
                 individuals that visit websites for information or join `frequent user or buyer' reward plans.
            ·    First use of exclusive retailing, such as only selling high-end products in special stores.
            ·    First use of franchising or distribution licenses.
            ·    First use of new concepts for product presentation.
        4.4.4 Examples of pricing innovations

            ·    First use of variable pricing, with the price varying by time of purchase, location of purchaser, etc.
            ·    First use of penetration pricing or loss leaders to establish market share and brand recognition.
            ·    First use of discount systems such as loyalty cards.

Further Information on the Community Innovation Survey: Methodology and Quality
The Community Innovation Survey is commissioned by the EU Commission and conducted by
national research centers (e.g., the German version of the CIS is conducted by ZEW ­ Leibniz Centre
for European Economic Research). The collection of CIS data at the national level is strictly regulated
by the European Commission. 1 Member states are required to provide innovation statistics to the
EU, and almost all Member States require firms to answer the survey. The data are used for the annual
European Innovation Scoreboard, and anonymized micro data can be used for academic research at
Eurostat's Safe Center in Luxembourg. The data has to be collected and compiled in a standardized
way across all countries.
From 2006 onwards, Eurostat discloses Synthesis Quality Reports about the CIS data. These reports
highlight that countries were conforming to the regulations on innovation statistics, and provide an
overview of the quality of the data. The following sections contain a summary of the different so-
called "Synthesis Quality Reports" that were released by Eurostat. 2
1. Methodological Recommendations and Assessments
According to the Synthesis Quality Reports, all countries follow the methodological guidelines of the
European Commission concerning the production and development of Community statistics on
Innovation.
All countries covered the core population of NACE sections, and all countries were in compliance
with the breakdowns by size classes. In addition, all countries included all the harmonized mandatory
questions in their survey. Small deviations are reported across the different synthesis quality reports
regarding data collection. For example, some countries added additional non-core questions to the

1 Commission Regulation No.1450/2004 implementing Decision No. 1608/2003 concerning the production and
development of Community statistics on innovation.
2 For available metadata on the various survey waves see: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/science-technology-

innovation/data/database.


                                                               5
survey, or did not include some of the optional questions.
As prescribed in the methodological guidelines of Eurostat, almost all countries used the national
business register as a sampling frame. According to the national quality reports, the databases that
were used for sampling were up-to-date, and provided information on identification characteristics of
the enterprise, its economic activity and the number of employees.
All countries applied a stratified random sampling methodology, as proposed by Eurostat. The
stratification of the sample was based on a firm's industry (NACE classification), the firm's size, and
in some countries also on the geographical region (NUTS2 level). To further improve the accuracy
of the data for certain strata, most countries oversampled larger firms, while smaller enterprises were
randomly sampled.
Because of the stratified random sampling technique, weights have to be given to each observational
unit to construct meaningful aggregated statistics. It is recommended by Eurostat to use the inverse
of the sampling fraction. For example, the weights of a specific stratum would be equal to Nh/nh
where Nh is the total number of enterprises or employees in stratum h of the population, and nh is the
number of enterprises or employees in the realized sample in stratum h of the population. The
proposed method will automatically adjust the sample weights of the respondents to compensate for
unit non-response. If a different methodology is used to construct a stratum (e.g. not random
sampling, but oversampling of larger firms, or oversampling firms with previously known R&D
activities in certain stratum) the weights are adjusted. In addition, if the non-response rate is too high
for a specific stratum (i.e. response rate < 70%), countries are required to conduct a non-response
survey to assess if there is a difference between the answers of the respondents and non-respondents.
If this is the case, the results of the non-response analysis are used to calculate the final weighting
factors.
The vast majority of countries made use of both an electronic and mail survey. This approach follows
the recommendation for methods alternations, which is considered to be the most effective practice.
In many cases, the login and password of the electronic questionnaire were sent by mail. Enterprises
that wanted to reply electronically could fill in the electronic questionnaire available on the website
through a web-based platform that is specifically developed for the CIS. Respondents could also print
the electronic questionnaire and send the questionnaire back by mail or email. Some countries also
contacted the enterprises by telephone. This mode served in most countries mainly as a reminder for
replying to the survey, and secondly as a follow-up to clarify non-responses and missing data. Cyprus
is an exception in this regard, the data is exclusively collected via face-to-face interviews.
2. Conclusions on Quality of Methodology
The Synthesis Quality Reports highlight that the overall assessment of the quality of the CIS
methodology is positive. All countries follow the required regulations and guidelines from the
Commission. The national CIS quality reports also highlight some of the strengths and weaknesses
of the mandated survey methodology. For example, in the CIS 2012 quality reports, fifteen out of
twenty-eight countries explicitly highlighted as a main strength the good quality of the data. Nine
countries highlighted the high response rate as a main strength, and six national authorities also
explicitly highlight the existence of a high coherence with other data sources (e.g. national R&D
surveys, SBS data). Regarding weaknesses, the CIS report of 2012 highlights that seven out of twenty-


                                                    6
eight countries indicate that some respondents had difficulties in quantifying innovation expenditures
(e.g. difficulties in splitting R&D from other activities), and five countries highlight that some
companies have difficulties to assess their own activities as innovative or not innovative. This stands
in contrast to eight countries that explicitly highlight that a main strength of the methods used is that
respondents have a better knowledge and understanding of the questionnaire. Overall, the general
tone of Eurostat and the national research centers is that the overall quality of the required
methodology is perceived as high.
3. Accuracy of the CIS Data
The Synthesis Quality Reports also contain an overall assessment of the accuracy of the CIS data.
According to the reports, all countries make considerable efforts to reduce errors or at least to identify
and correct them.
3.1.     Measurement Error
Measurement errors occur during data collection and cause recorded values of variables to be different
from the true ones. Such errors are usually caused by the survey questionnaire and/or the
respondents. The reports conclude that measurement error is limited due to the continuous efforts
taken by all countries. Efforts that are undertaken to reduce measurement error are the following:
    1. Experts regularly review cognitive test questions and answers to assure that the questions elicit
        the desired information.
    2. Staff receives training to help and assistant respondents to fill in the questionnaire correctly.
        In addition, firms receive detail guidelines on how to fill in the survey.
    3. Comprehensive data validation is the norm during and after data collection. The micro and
        the aggregated data are checked and corrected for inconsistencies. Quality controls are done
        on aggregated and micro data at the national level, but Eurostat also carries out independent
        quality checks. For example, the answers given in the survey are cross-checked on consistency.
        In addition, variables are compared to firm-level data from other sources (e.g. prior CIS data
        if available, national R&D surveys, and SBS statistics). If inconsistencies exist, firms are
        contacted to clarify their answer.
Next to these measures, the general methodological guidelines regarding data collection and
availability are further intended to eliminate any reporting bias.
    1. Respondents are made aware that only highly aggregated statistics at the country-industry level
        (NACE 1) are made available to the public. All micro data is anonymized, and not accessible
        to the public, and neither to politicians. Moreover, if too few observations are available in a
        specific country-industry cluster, such information is aggregated at a higher level ­ or not
        disclosed at all.
    2. Only researchers affiliated to recognized research institutes are allowed to access anonymized
        micro data at the SAFE center of Eurostat in Luxembourg. 3
    3. In many countries, the survey is conducted by an independent research organization, and not
        by a government agency itself. For example, in Germany the survey is conducted by ZEW ­
        Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research. This increases the credibility that data will

3Some countries also provide access to their micro-data at similar safe centers. For example, the German version of the
CIS data can be accessed by researchers at the premises of ZEW in Mannheim.


                                                          7
          be treated strictly confidentially, and will not be disclosed to any party.
       4. Aggregated CIS indicators are made available only after several years, making it in essentially
          useless for business managers. Similarly, micro data is only released after a significant period.
          For example, CIS 2014 was the last available data wave in 2020 that was available for
          researchers.
The collection of data by independent research organization, the disclosure of highly aggregated data,
the significant data release delay, and quality checks performed by the countries and Eurostat allay
concerns about measurement error.
3.2.      Sampling and Non-Sampling Errors
Sampling and non-sampling errors are eliminated by making use of appropriate sampling techniques.
The required sampling techniques lead to smaller sampling errors and make it possible to ensure that
there are enough units in the respective domains to produce results of good quality. The non-sampling
errors are minimized because most national authorities use the national business registers to draw their
sample from. According to Eurostat and the national agencies that conduct the survey, the databases
used to draw the sample were up-to-date and of high-quality.
3.3.      Non-Response Errors
Non-response errors are reduced by sending reminders to enterprises. Most countries send at least
two or three paper reminders to non-responding enterprises. Additionally, these enterprises are
contacted by phone or e-mail in order to remind them to fill in and deliver the survey questionnaire.
When the response rate is sufficiently high (for each individual stratum), data can be used to
extrapolate the findings to the full population.
According to the CIS survey of 2014, the response rate is above 70% in most countries. In the few
countries where the non-response rate exceeds 30%, Eurostat requires the country to do an additional
non-response survey to assess if differences exist between respondents and non-respondents. If there
is a statistical difference between the original survey and the non-response survey for certain strata,
the information from the non-response survey is used to recalibrate weights.
More information on the Eurostat Community Innovation Survey Page can be found:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/microdata/community-innovation-survey

Mannheim Innovation Panel
The German version of the Community Innovation Survey is conducted by ZEW ­ Leibniz Centre
for European Economic Research in Germany. The survey data is based on a harmonized CIS
questionnaire sent to a representative sample of firms. Similarly like in other countries, they take
various measures to ensure the quality and representativeness of the data. ZEW provides the
following abstract description of its data collection and the resulting Mannheim Innovation Panel
(ZEW 2019b):
          Since 1993, the ZEW ­ Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research has been gathering data regarding the
          innovation behaviour of the German economy on an annual basis. The innovation survey covers firms from various
          industries including mining, manufacturing, energy- and water- supply, waste disposal, construction, business-related
          services and distributive services. The survey is representative for Germany and allows projections for the German firm



                                                               8
       population as well as for individual industries and size classes. The survey is conducted on behalf of BMBF (Federal
       Ministry of Education and Research) in cooperation with infas (Institute of Applied Social Science) and Fraunhofer ISI
       (Institute for Systems and Innovation Research). The MIP is the German contribution to the European Commission's
       Community Innovation Surveys (CIS).
       The annual innovation survey is designed as a panel survey including the same firms every year. Sample size varies
       among the survey years. In 2010 e.g., more than 6000 firms answered the written questionnaire. Every two years the
       sample is refreshed by a random sample of newly founded firms in order to substitute firms that are closing or left the
       market through mergers. The MIP provides important information about the introduction of new products, services and
       processes, expenditures for innovations, ways to achieve economic success with new products, new services and
       improved processes. In addition, the MIP collects information on a number of competition-related issues which allows
       studying various topics in industrial economics.

For more information on the sampling and testing, see Rammer and Peters (2014).




                                                             9
Reporting Examples
These examples below illustrate the substantial difference in the amount of reported information when
a firm is below and above the exemption threshold. While this increase takes place right as the firm
crosses the exemption threshold, we emphasize that our analysis does not use such endogenous firm-
level increases in disclosure over time.
Exempted Reporting




Notes: The example reproduces the report published by BioNTech GmbH (later AG), the German biotech firm which
recently developed the first FDA and EMA approved COVID-19 vaccine in collaboration with Pfizer, for fiscal year 2016
in the Bundesanzeiger (i.e., the German Federal Gazette). For the fiscal year 2016, the private limited-liability firm qualified
for "small" firm reporting exemptions and hence it provides only an abbreviated balance sheet (Bilanz) and brief notes
(Anhang), but no income statement.




                                                              10
Full Reporting




                 11
12
Notes: The example reproduces the report published by BioNTech AG for fiscal year 2017 in the Bundesanzeiger (i.e., the
German Federal Gazette). For the fiscal year 2017, the private (i.e., unlisted) limited-liability firm no longer qualified for
the "small" firm reporting exemption due to its increased size and hence provides a full report. Full reporting features a
management report (Lagebericht) discussing (A) the economic and competitive environment, (B) strategy, (C) business


                                                             13
development, (D) research and development activities (including product-level progress reports and investment plans),
(E) personnel, (F) financial position and performance, (G) business risks and opportunities, and (H) connected entities.
In terms of financial statements for fiscal year 2017, BioNTech AG provides an extended balance sheet (Bilanz), income
statement (Gewinn- und Verlustrechnung), detailed notes (Anhang), which include additional information on balance sheet
and income statement items and a statement of changes in tangible and intangible assets (Anlagespiegel), and an audit
opinion (Bestätigungsvermerk).




                                                          14
                                                                                                   Figure A1
                                                          DISTRIBUTION OF REPORTING INTENSITIES

                                                Panel A:                                                                                               Panel B:
                                           Intensities by Time                                                                                  Intensities by Industry
               1.00                                                                                                     1.00
                                                                                                                        0.90
               0.90
                                                                                                                        0.80
               0.80                                                                                                     0.70
                                                                                                                        0.60




                                                                                                            Reporting
               0.70
                                                                                                                        0.50
               0.60                                                                                                     0.40
   Reporting




                                                                                                                        0.30
               0.50                                                                                                     0.20
               0.40                                                                                                     0.10
                                                                                                                        0.00
               0.30




                                                                                                                                                                     at e




                                                                                                                                                                      ce
                                                                                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                                                                                      on
                                                                                                                                                                      od
                                                                                                                                                                       es


                                                                                                                                                                        s




                                                                                                                                                                       es




                                                                                                                                                                        g


                                                                                                                                                                    ing
                                                                                                                                                                    ce




                                                                                                                                                                  t io




                                                                                                                                                                  yin
                                                                                                                                                                 vi c




                                                                                                                                                                   ic


                                                                                                                                                                  an




                                                                                                                                                                 ct i
                                                                                                                                                               , fo
                                                                                                                                                                est




                                                                                                                                                                sh
                                                                                                                                                               r vi
               0.20




                                                                                                                                                               rv
                                                                                                                                                              ic a




                                                                                                                                                              arr
                                                                                                                                                                r




                                                                                                                                                            tru
                                                                                                                                                              er




                                                                                                                                                             su




                                                                                                                                                           , fi
                                                                                                                                                            se




                                                                                                                                                              e




                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                            al


                                                                                                                                                          un




                                                                                                                                                           u
                                                                                                                                                          rs




                                                                                                                                                         cs




                                                                                                                                                        t io
                                                                                                                                                       , in
                                                                                                                                                       Re




                                                                                                                                                       try
                                                                                                                                                       ,q




                                                                                                                                                        ns
                                                                                                                                                        al




                                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                                                                     he




                                                                                                                                                     b li




                                                                                                                                                    da
                                                                                                                                                   ion




                                                                                                                                                   Co
                                                                                                                                                  re s
                                                                                                                                                  ing
                                                                                                                                                    ce
                                                                                                                                                 om
                                                                                                                                                 Ot




                                                                                                                                                 Pu
               0.10




                                                                                                                                               mo
                                                                                                                                                an
                                                                                                                                              ess




                                                                                                                                               in


                                                                                                                                              fo
                                                                                                                                             ,c




                                                                                                                                              n


                                                                                                                                            m


                                                                                                                                          ,m


                                                                                                                                           e,
                                                                                                                                           of




                                                                                                                                           Fi
                                                                                                                                          on




                                                                                                                                          o




                                                                                                                                        ur
                                                                                                                                       Pr




                                                                                                                                      in g
                                                                                                                                     ac c
                                                                                                                                      ati




                                                                                                                                    ult
               0.00




                                                                                                                                 t ur
                                                                                                                                 rm




                                                                                                                                 e,




                                                                                                                                ric
                                                                                                                               ad


                                                                                                                              ac
                                                                                                                              fo




                                                                                                                            Ag
                                                                                                                           Tr


                                                                                                                            uf
                                                                                                                           In




                                                                                                                         an
                      01

                              02

                                    03

                                           04

                                                05

                                                     06

                                                          07

                                                               08

                                                                    09

                                                                         10

                                                                              11

                                                                                   12

                                                                                        13

                                                                                             14

                                                                                                  15




                                                                                                                        M
                      20

                            20

                                   20

                                         20

                                                20

                                                     20

                                                          20

                                                               20

                                                                    20

                                                                         20

                                                                              20

                                                                                   20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                  20


                      excludes outside values                                                                                  excludes outside values


                                              Panel C:                                                                                        Panel D:
                                       Intensities by Country                                                                  Intensities by Country (Decomposed)
               1.00                                                                                                     1.00
                                                                                                                                                Over time
               0.90                                                                                                     0.90
                                                                                                                                                Across industries
               0.80                                                                                                     0.80
               0.70                                                                                                     0.70
               0.60                                                                                                     0.60
   Reporting




                                                                                                            Reporting




               0.50                                                                                                     0.50
               0.40                                                                                                     0.40
               0.30                                                                                                     0.30
               0.20                                                                                                     0.20
               0.10                                                                                                     0.10
               0.00                                                                                                     0.00
                       d K ov d




                                                                                                                                d K ov d
                           th d

                            Gr an d




                                                                                                                                    th u d

                                                                                                                                     G lan d
                            Au nd s




                                                                                                                                     Au nd s
                           Sw ark




                                                                                                                                    Sw ark
                              to l




                                                                                                                                         t on l
                                     g




                                                                                                                                               g
                       h or y
                         De ub y




                                                                                                                              ec No gary
                                                                                                                                     e p way
                             nm lic




                            erl ny




                                                                                                                                      nm lic
                           m m

                           Fi It aly




                                                                                                                                       r la y


                                                                                                                                   m m
                              Sp m




                                                                                                                                    Fi It aly
                         Ro lga r e


                             rt e




                                                                                                                                        Sp m
                      N Germ atia


                     Lu Be st ria




                                                                                                                                               e
                            C r enia




                                                                                                                                       rt e
                           in a kia




                                                                                                                                  G ro a
                                                                                                                               N e erm atia


                                                                                                                              Lu Be st ria
                            Po ania




                                                                                                                                    ing a kia
                             m a ia
                            F nia


                                  nia




                                                                                                                                     Po nia



                                                                                                                                       m ia
                                                                                                                                      F ia



                                                                                                                                             ia
                          Slo e den




                                                                                                                                         v n
                            Ire a in




                                                                                                                                  Li relann
                           Es uga




                                                                                                                                    Es uga
                          Re wa




                          B u ee c


                          Po ran c




                                                                                                                                   B u ec


                                                                                                                                   Po ran c
                                                                                                                                  th e an
                                                                                                                                     C eni
                     ec N gar




                                                                                                                                     I ai
                                  ur




                                                                                                                                            ur
                                                                                                                                   Slo e de
                   ite Sl nlan




                                                                                                                            ite Sl nlan
                         Li lan




                                                                                                                                  Ro lga r
                                                                                                                                           an
                                  o




                                                                                                                                          do
                        xe giu




                                                                                                                                 xe lgiu
                        eth a




                                                                                                                                  De ub




                                                                                                                                           a

                                                                                                                                           e
                             bo




                                                                                                                                       bo
                             gd
                                a
                                o




                                l




                                                                                                                                hR r
                              u
                               v
                              n




                                                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                                                         r
                             p




                              l
                          Hu




                                                                                                                                   Hu
                  Cz




                                                                                                                           Cz
                 Un




                                                                                                                          Un




                      excludes outside values                                                                                  excludes outside values


Notes: The figure summarizes the distribution of reporting intensities. Panel A plots the distribution of reporting intensities
by year. Panel B plots the distribution of reporting intensities by (one-digit) industry. Panel C plots the distribution of
the reporting intensities by country. Panel D shows a decomposition of the reporting intensities by country, plotting
variation related to changes over time (i.e., the distribution of the median country-year intensities) and variation from
industry differences (i.e., the distribution of the median country-industry intensities). The box plots provide the median
(horizontal line within the boxes), the 25th and 75th percentile (lower and upper bound of the boxes), and adjacent values
(end points of vertical lines/whiskers). Adjacent values are defined as the lowest and highest observations that are still
inside the region spanned by the following limits: 25th (75th) percentile ­ (+) 1.5 × (75th ­ 25th percentile). Values
outside are excluded from the plots.

The figure illustrates that there is substantial variation in reporting intensities. The vast majority of this variation comes
from differences in firm sizes across industries (even within coarse one-digit industries) and differences in thresholds
across countries. By contrast, the reporting intensities vary little over time, as only few countries' reporting thresholds
change much over time and firm-size changes are purged, by construction, from the reporting intensities. Our research
design deliberately focuses on the rich cross-sectional variation arising from the interaction of country-level differences in
thresholds and industry-level differences in firm sizes, instead of the relatively scarce and possibly confounded time-series
variation (e.g., concurrent with a country's EU accession or other major changes at the country level).




                                                                                                       15
                                                           Table A1

                            REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
                                INNOVATION SPENDING MARGINS
 Panel A: Market Level
 Outcome                                                                     Innovation Spending
 Margin                                                      Extensive                             Intensive
 Market Level                                     Simple Average              Total     Simple Average                  Total
 Column                                                 (1)                    (2)             (3)                       (4)
 Limited Share×Post                                   -0.180***               -0.347***     -0.590                      -0.741*
                                                     (-3.18)                 (-3.65)       (-1.50)                     (-1.80)
 County-Industry FE                                      X                      X               X                         X
 County-Year FE                                          X                      X               X                         X
 Industry-Year FE                                        X                      X               X                         X
 Observations                                         26,780                  26,779        14,105                     14,106
 Clusters (County-Industry)                            5,864                   5,860         3,579                       3,579
 Adj. R2                                               0.491                   0.500         0.555                       0.549
 Panel B: Firm Level
 Outcome                                                                     Innovation Spending
 Margin                                                         Extensive                                  Intensive
 Column                                                   (1)                   (2)                  (3)                (4)
 Limited×Post                                          -0.060                                     -0.029
                                                      (-1.62)                                    (-0.13)
 Private×Post                                                                -0.058                                     -0.337**
                                                                            (-1.58)                                    (-2.18)
 Controls                                                 X                     X                   X                     X
 Firm FE                                                  X                     X                   X                     X
 County-Year                                              X                     X                   X                     X
 Industry-Year FE (4-digit)                               X                     X                   X                     X
 Observations                                          36,896                 36,771             15,228                15,783
 Clusters (Firm)                                        9,755                  9,599              4,592                  4,696
 Adj. R2                                                0.692                  0.697              0.846                  0.864
Notes: Panel A presents estimates from regressions of the extensive and intensive margins of market-level innovation
spending on the intensity of enforcement of reporting mandates. The market level outcomes represent simple average at
the county, industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is instrumented by the interaction of the share of affected
(limited-liability) firms in the pre-enforcement period in a given county and industry ("Limited Share") and a post-
enforcement reform indicator ("Post"). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and industry-year fixed
effects (where the industries are defined using two-digit NACE classifications). t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on
standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. Panel B presents estimates from regressions of the extensive and
intensive margins of firm-level innovation spending on two different treatment indicators. "Limited" is an indicator taking
the value of one for affected (limited-liability) firms, and zero for unaffected (unlimited-liability) firms. "Private" is an
indicator taking the value of one for affected (private limited-liability) firms, and zero for unaffected (publicly-listed limited-
liability) firms. "Post" is an indicator taking the value of one for the post-enforcement reform period. The regressions
include firm, county-year, and industry-year fixed effects (where the industries are defined using four-digit NACE
classifications). We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed
effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                                16
                                                            Table A2

                                      REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
                                          ROBUSTNESS TO CRISIS EXPOSURE
Panel A: County-Industry Level (Average: 2-digit NACE)
Outcome                             Innovation           Innovating     New-To-Market       Product           Process
                                     Spending                Firm         Innovations      Innovation       Innovation
Market Level                      Simple Average       Simple Average   Simple Average   Simple Average   Simple Average
Column                                   (1)                  (2)               (3)            (4)              (5)
Limited Share×Post                    -3.006***            -0.128***         -0.074         -0.125***         -0.087**
                                     (-4.04)              (-3.37)           (-1.30)        (-3.27)           (-2.34)
Commerzbank Share×Post                -0.519               -0.062             0.013         -0.025             0.022
                                     (-0.74)              (-1.54)            (0.22)        (-0.58)            (0.56)
County-Industry FE                        X                    X                 X              X                X
County-Year FE                            X                    X                 X              X                X
Industry-Year FE                          X                    X                 X              X                X
Observations                           26,774               47,283           23,597           46,680           46,592
Clusters (County-Industry)              5,857                8,193             5,459           8,163            8,156
Adj. R2                                 0.528                0.393             0.412           0.415            0.322




                                                                17
 Panel B: County-Industry Level (Aggregate: 2-digit NACE)
 Outcome                             Innovation           Innovating                               New-To-Market               Product                     Process
                                      Spending                Firm                                  Innovations               Innovation                 Innovation
 Market Level                           Total                Total                                      Total                     Total                     Total
 Column                                   (1)                  (2)                                       (3)                       (4)                       (5)
 Limited Share×Post                    -3.027***            -0.506***                                  -0.212***                 -0.457***                 -0.343***
                                      (-4.00)              (-6.02)                                    (-2.72)                   (-5.80)                   (-4.96)
 Commerzbank Share×Post                -0.610               -0.066                                     -0.010                    -0.098                     0.051
                                      (-0.83)              (-0.74)                                    (-0.12)                   (-1.22)                    (0.70)
 County-Industry FE                        X                    X                                         X                         X                         X
 County-Year FE                            X                    X                                         X                         X                         X
 Industry-Year FE                          X                    X                                         X                         X                         X
 Observations                           26,778               47,279                                    23,597                     46,672                    46,589
 Clusters (County-Industry)              5,861                8,178                                     5,460                      8,150                     8,148
 Adj. R2                                 0.528                0.561                                     0.376                      0.550                     0.440
Notes: The table assesses the robustness of our German enforcement results to controlling for firms' exposures to a large, distressed German bank during the financial
crises. Note first that the county-year fixed effects are likely to absorb much of the crisis impact on innovation. So this robustness analysis primarily checks if there is
any residual impact that is not purged by our main design. Following Huber (2018), we use the share of firms with bank relationships with Commerzbank as our crisis
exposure measure ("Commerzbank Share"). We calculate the share as the average Commerzbank dependence of firms in a given county-industry using only pre-crisis
data from 2006 and 2007. (Given scarce bank data before the enforcement, we set missing Commerzbank share values at the county-industry level to zero. Irrespective
of the treatment of missing values, the Commerzbank share is only little correlated with the Limited share (correlation coefficient of about 0.1).) Our enforcement results
(coefficients of interest) are largely unaffected by the additional control for crisis exposure. In Panel A the innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given
county, industry, and year. In Panel B, the innovation measures are totals calculated for a given county, industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is captured by the
interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms in the pre-enforcement period in a given county and industry ("Limited Share") and a post-enforcement reform
indicator ("Post"). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and industry-year fixed effects. We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of
their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                                                     18
