                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DOES MEDICARE COVERAGE IMPROVE CANCER DETECTION AND MORTALITY
                            OUTCOMES?

                                     Rebecca Mary Myerson
                                     Reginald Tucker-Seeley
                                         Dana Goldman
                                      Darius N. Lakdawalla

                                       Working Paper 26292
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26292


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2019, Revised November 2019




The authors thank participants of the Southern California Conference in Applied
Microeconomics, Population Association of America conference, and Academy Health Annual
Research Meeting for helpful comments. Tianyi Lu provided excellent research assistance.
Research reported in this publication was supported by the Leonard D. Schaeffer Center for
Health Policy and Economics and the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of
Health under award 2P30AG043073. Tucker-Seeley additionally reports funding from a National
Cancer Institute K01 Career Development Grant (K01 CA169041). The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institutes of Health or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26292.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Rebecca Mary Myerson, Reginald Tucker-Seeley, Dana Goldman, and Darius N.
Lakdawalla. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Does Medicare Coverage Improve Cancer Detection and Mortality Outcomes?
Rebecca Mary Myerson, Reginald Tucker-Seeley, Dana Goldman, and Darius N. Lakdawalla
NBER Working Paper No. 26292
September 2019, Revised November 2019
JEL No. I13,I18,I28

                                         ABSTRACT

Medicare is a large government health insurance program in the United States which covers about
60 million people. This paper analyzes the effects of Medicare insurance on health for a group of
people in urgent need of medical care: people with cancer. We used a regression discontinuity
design to assess impacts of near-universal Medicare insurance at age 65 on cancer detection and
outcomes, using population-based cancer registries and vital statistics data. Our analysis focused
on the three tumor sites for which screening is recommended both before and after age 65: breast,
colorectal, and lung cancer. At age 65, cancer detection increased by 72 per 100,000 population
among women and 33 per 100,000 population among men; cancer mortality also decreased by 9
per 100,000 population for women but did not significantly change for men. In a placebo check,
we found no comparable changes at age 65 in Canada. This study provides the first evidence to
our knowledge that near-universal access to Medicare at age 65 is associated with improvements
in population-level cancer mortality and provides new evidence on the differences in the impact
of health insurance by gender.

Rebecca Mary Myerson                            Dana Goldman
University of Wisconsin Madison                 Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics
Department of Population Health Sciences        University of Southern California
University of Wisconsin School of               635 Downey Way
Medicine and Public Health                      Los Angeles, CA 90089-3333
610 Walnut Street, 701 WARF                     and NBER
Madison, WI 53703                               dana.goldman@usc.edu
rmyerson@wisc.edu
                                                Darius N. Lakdawalla
Reginald Tucker-Seeley                          University of Southern California
USC School of Gerontology                       635 Downey Way, VPD 414-K
Los Angeles, CA 90089                           Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics
tuckerse@usc.edu                                Los Angeles, CA 90089-7273
                                                and NBER
                                                dlakdawa@usc.edu
INTRODUCTION


Medicare is the largest government insurance program in the United States, providing coverage

for over 60 million people in 2018 (Centers for Medicare, 2019). Medicare's beneficial impacts

on patients' financial outcomes are well-established (Barcellos & Jacobson, 2015; Finkelstein &

McKnight, 2008). However, in the overall population, Medicare appears to have only modest

effects on mortality. While mortality for hospitalized patients is lower for those with Medicare

insurance, multiple studies have found no detectable effect of Medicare on population-level

mortality (Card, Dobkin, & Maestas, 2009; Finkelstein & McKnight, 2008; Polsky et al., 2009).

While some have concluded that Medicare has little impact on mortality, others have pointed out

the difficulty of deriving reliable empirical inferences on this question (Black, Espín-Sánchez,

French, & Litvak, 2017; Kronick, 2009; McWilliams, Meara, Zaslavsky, & Ayanian, 2010; Polsky

et al., 2010). We hypothesize that small average effects could mask important heterogeneity in the

effect of Medicare on population health. We study the health effects of Medicare for a group of

people for whom access to health insurance could have important short-run impacts on health

outcomes ­ people with cancer.


In the United States, cancer is the second leading cause of death nationwide and the first leading

cause of death in certain states, and people over age 65 account for 70% of all cancer deaths

(Harding et al., 2018; Kochanek, Murphy, Xu, & Tejada-Vera, 2016; National Cancer Institute

Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program, 2019; White et al., 2014). Timely detection

of certain cancers can improve treatment outcomes and reduce mortality risk (Humphrey, Helfand,

Chan, & Woolf, 2002; Maciosek, Solberg, Coffield, Edwards, & Goodman, 2006; Mandelblatt et

al., 2009; Moyer & U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2012, 2014; Nelson et al., 2009; Pignone,

Saha, Hoerger, & Mandelblatt, 2002; US Preventive Services Task Force et al., 2016; Siu & U.S.

                                                2
Preventive Services Task Force, 2016). The Institute of Medicine noted that uninsured people

experience longer delays in diagnosis and worse health outcomes than patients with private

insurance (Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Health Insurance Status and Its

Consequences, 2009). Yet, economists have questioned whether such associations represent a

causal effect of insurance or confounding factors (Levy & Meltzer, 2008). Because approximately

half of newly diagnosed cancer patients are over age 65, Medicare is the largest payer of cancer

care in the United States; thus resolving uncertainty about the effects of public insurance is crucial

for ongoing public policy discussions (National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and

End Results Program, 2019).


The goal of this study was to determine the impact of Medicare's nearly universal coverage at age

65 on cancer detection and cancer mortality. Because cancer detection and treatment is considered

health improving for some cancers but not others, we focused on the tumor sites with A and B

grade screening recommendations from United States Preventive Services Task Force, which

indicate a recommendation of the service, for people both below and above age 65 (US Preventive

Services Task Force, 2018). We therefore analyzed breast, colorectal, and lung cancer, as

screening is recommended for these tumors both above and below age 65. We used the most recent

15 years of data on cancers reported to population-based cancer registries, survey data, and vital

statistics databases across the United States.


We found that concurrent with near-universal Medicare coverage at age 65, cancer detection

increased by 72 per 100,000 population among women and 33 per 100,000 population among men;

cancer mortality also decreased by 9 per 100,000 population for women but did not significantly

change for men. Multiple checks, including comparison with data from Canada as a placebo check,

suggested the robustness of findings. Increases in access to health care and cancer screenings at

                                                  3
age 65 suggested possible pathways underlying these changes in cancer detection and outcomes.

In summary, this study provides the first evidence to our knowledge that near-universal access to

Medicare at age 65 is associated with improvements in population-level cancer mortality, and

provides new evidence on the differences in the impact of health insurance by gender.


Comparison with the literature


The association between insurance and cancer outcomes varies by source of insurance coverage,

with some publicly insured patients faring no better than the uninsured (Ellis et al., 2018; Halpern

et al., 2008; Niu, Roche, Pawlish, & Henry, 2013; Ward, Fedewa, Cokkinides, & Virgo, 2010). To

understand which of these associations represent causal effects, researchers can study insurance

experiments or leverage a policy change as a natural experiment. Many such studies have focused

on insurance expansions among the non-elderly, i.e., expansions of Medicaid or private insurance.

While some studies found that access to insurance increased cancer screening, others found that

the impact of insurance on cancer screening and detection varied by tumor site or the length of

follow-up after a policy change (Han, Zang Xiong, Kramer, & Jemal, 2016; Kolstad & Kowalski,

2012; Robbins et al., 2015; Sabik & Bradley, 2016; Soni, Simon, Cawley, & Sabik, 2017). The

Oregon Health Insurance Experiment, a randomized expansion of Medicaid insurance, found that

insurance increased cancer screening, but cancer detection and outcomes were not assessed

(Baicker et al., 2013; Conlin, Allen, Tsui, Carlson, & Li, 2016).


Given the lower incidence of cancer and lower rates of cancer mortality among the non-elderly,

these studies of Medicaid or private insurance expansions in the non-elderly face limited statistical

power to detect effects on cancer mortality outcomes (National Cancer Institute Surveillance,

Epidemiology, and End Results Program, 2019; White et al., 2014). In contrast, by studying an


                                                 4
elderly population, our research has enhanced statistical power to detect changes in population-

level cancer mortality.


Prior research has linked Medicare to improvements in self-reported health, survival after acute

care hospital visits, racial/ethnic gaps in measures of cardiovascular health, and access to inpatient

and outpatient care (Card, Dobkin, & Maestas, 2008; Card et al., 2009; S. L. Decker, 2005;

McWilliams, Meara, Zaslavsky, & Ayanian, 2009, 2013). The results of studies linking Medicare

and mortality are more mixed, with population-level studies often finding no effect (Finkelstein &

McKnight, 2008; Card et al., 2009; Polsky et al., 2009). A study of the impacts of Medicare Part

D found an impact on cardiovascular mortality but not cancer mortality; however, as the authors

note, the majority of cancer treatments were already covered by Medicare Part B prior to the onset

of Part D (Dunn & Shapiro, 2017). Studies of the mortality effects of health insurance expansions

among non-elderly adults have found mixed effects; a randomized trial found no impact on

mortality, though confidence intervals were large (Black et al., 2017; Finkelstein et al., 2012;

Sommers, Baicker, & Epstein, 2012; Woolhandler & Himmelstein, 2017). Yet, we hypothesize

that these small or null average relationships between health insurance and mortality could mask

important heterogeneity, including significant health effects for policy-relevant groups such as

patients with cancer.


Researchers have also compared cancer survival outcomes across different Medicare plans, and

examined the relationship between cancer diagnosis and Medicare plan selection. Medicare

beneficiaries can choose to receive their benefits via traditional Medicare (the publicly

administered Medicare plan) or Medicare Advantage (a Medicare plan paid for by the federal

government but administered by a private company). After a cancer diagnosis, patients become

less likely to leave traditional Medicare for a private Medicare Advantage plan, and become more

                                                  5
likely to switch from a private Medicare Advantage plan to traditional Medicare (Lissenden, 2019).

The literature comparing cancer survival across traditional Medicare and private Medicare

Advantage plans has found mixed results depending on the year of the data, tumor site of interest,

and controls used to address patients' self-selection into plans (Lee-Feldstein, Feldstein, &

Buchmueller, 2002; Lee-Feldstein, Feldstein, Buchmueller, & Katterhagen, 2001; Lissenden,

2019; Merrill et al., 1999; A. L. Potosky et al., 1999; Arnold L. Potosky et al., 1997; R. G.

Roetzheim et al., 2000; R G Roetzheim et al., 2000; Richard G. Roetzheim et al., 2008).


Our research question is distinct from this literature, in that we examine the effect of access to the

full suite of publicly funded Medicare plans, including both publicly and privately administered

plans, rather than simply the impact of private provision of some Medicare plans. Additionally,

these previous analyses focused on post-diagnosis survival rather than cancer mortality, our

outcome of interest. As will be discussed further below, post-diagnosis survival measures are

subject to diagnosis-related biases: when disease is detected earlier, the patient will appear to

survive longer with the disease even if early detection did not actually extend his or her life.


We are not aware of any prior study of the effect of Medicare coverage on population-level cancer

mortality. The most closely related study to ours focused on the impact of Medicare on post-

detection survival, a different outcome from the one we study, using data from a different time

period. Decker examined the impact of Medicare on breast cancer detection, and survival after

breast cancer detection. Almost all adults in the United States become automatically eligible for

Medicare coverage at age 65 (Card et al., 2008). Exploiting this change as a natural experiment,

Decker used data on older adults and found that access to Medicare coverage produced small

increases in detection of early-stage breast cancer and post-detection survival (S. L. Decker, 2005).

Decker's study used data from 1980-2001. However, since the 1980's and 1990's, changes have

                                                  6
occurred which could alter the impact of Medicare on breast cancer detection and outcomes,

including new treatments, changes in screening guidelines, and increases in prevalence of obesity,

which is associated with breast cancer risk and outcomes, and changes in the Medicare program

(American Cancer Society, 2018; De Pergola & Silvestris, 2013; PiconRuiz, MorataTarifa,

ValleGoffin, Friedman, & Slingerland, 2017; Renehan, Tyson, Egger, Heller, & Zwahlen, 2008).

Additionally, although the Decker study examined breast cancer, treatment data from Medicare

claims suggest that effects may vary by tumor site (Huesch & Ong, 2016a, 2016b).


Importantly, the outcome of survival after cancer detection employed in these prior studies may

be subject to diagnosis bias (Lakdawalla et al., 2010; Manning & Zelen, 1969; Pinsky, 2015).

Diagnosis bias includes lead and length time bias, which can be explained as follows. First, when

people are diagnosed with cancer earlier, they may appear to survive longer after detection simply

due to becoming classified as a cancer patient earlier ­ i.e., "lead-time bias." Second, the additional

tumors detected might be so slow-growing that they would never have killed the patient if left

undetected, resulting in overdiagnosis and overtreatment ­ i.e., "length bias" (Diederich, 2011;

Duffy et al., 2008; Morrison, 1982).


For both these reasons, expansions in cancer detection may improve post-diagnosis survival even

when they do not actually improve health or save lives (Ahn, Kim, & Welch, 2014; Shwartz, 1980).

Therefore, changes in post-diagnosis survival for cancer patients after changes in screening and

detection should be interpreted with caution (Barratt, Bell, & Jacklyn, 2018; Croswell, Ransohoff,

& Kramer, 2010; Grubbs et al., 2013).


Our study addresses the issues of diagnosis bias by analyzing disease-specific mortality rates on

the population-level. Diagnosis bias changes when people are diagnosed, but not when they die.


                                                  7
As a result, analyzing population-level disease-specific mortality rates is considered a best practice

to eliminate diagnosis bias (Croswell et al., 2010; Duffy et al., 2008; Morrison, 1982; Pinsky,

2015).


A final contribution of our study to the literature is our analysis by gender. Prior studies of the

impacts of Medicare rarely stratified the data by gender except when studying gender-specific

health care such as mammography (Barcellos & Jacobson, 2015; Card et al., 2008, 2009; S. L.

Decker, 2005; Dunn & Shapiro, 2017; McWilliams, Meara, Zaslavsky, & Ayanian, 2007;

McWilliams, Zaslavsky, Meara, & Ayanian, 2003). Yet, it is plausible that gender could play an

important role in determining the impact of insurance on health. Several studies have found women

to be more likely than men to use preventive health care, and less likely than men to delay seeking

needed health care (Bertakis, 2000; Galdas, Cheater, & Marshall, 2005; Pinkhasov et al., 2010;

Springer & Mouzon, 2011; Vaidya, Partha, & Karmakar, 2012). Gaps by gender in socio-economic

resources could also play a role, as the impact of Medicare could be larger among patients with

less-generous prior insurance coverage and fewer financial resources (Blau & Kahn, 1992; Card

et al., 2008; Ruel & Hauser, 2013; Sierminska, Frick, & Grabka, 2010). The prior literature has

largely overlooked gender differences in the impact of insurance on health.


In summary, the impact of Medicare insurance on cancer mortality outcomes is not known. Given

that the Medicare population is projected to increase from 54 million in 2015 to 80 million by 2030

and that the older adults served by Medicare will account for 70% of cancer patients by 2030,

understanding the influence of Medicare coverage on these outcomes is warranted (Medicare

Payment Advisory Commission, 2015; Smith, Smith, Hurria, Hortobagyi, & Buchholz, 2009).




                                                  8
METHODS


We employed a regression discontinuity research design. This design assessed the impact of near-

universal Medicare coverage on cancer detection and outcomes at age 65 by comparing data from

people aged 65 or slightly older with data from people slightly younger than age 65 (Imbens &

Lemieux, 2008). Regression discontinuity designs have been used in prior studies of the impact of

Medicare insurance coverage on patient outcomes (Barcellos & Jacobson, 2015; Card et al., 2008;

Finkelstein & McKnight, 2008). We use recommended inference practices for regression

discontinuity designs (Kolesár & Rothe, 2018). Additional details are provided below.


Data


We extracted data on cancer detection, cancer mortality on the population-level, as well as cancer

screening, insurance coverage, and access to care by age in the United States from multiple

sources. For use in a placebo test, we additionally extracted data on cancer detection and outcomes

just before and after age 65 in Canada, a country without comparable changes in eligibility for

public health insurance at age 65.


Population-level Cancer Mortality


Our key outcomes of interest were breast, colorectal, and lung cancer mortality per 100,000

population. We used vital statistics data from 2001 through 2015 compiled by the Centers for

Disease Control and Prevention, and used the ICD-10 based 113 cause list to identify deaths

attributed to malignant breast, colorectal, and lung cancer (Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention, 2018; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) National Death Index (NDI),

2019). Data were tabulated by location of the cancer, single year of age at death, gender, race


                                                9
(Black vs. non-Black), and year of death. (Tabulating by state of residence would lead some data

to be masked due to low counts. The decision to not tabulate by state is not essential to our

findings.) For our main specification which included people aged 59-71, this yielded 1.2 million

cancer-related deaths over 1.3 billion patient-years at risk.


Cancer Detection


We extracted data on population-level cancer detection from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and

End Results (SEER) program database from 2001 through 2015, the most recent data available.

SEER collects information from population-based cancer registries covering one-quarter of the

United States population (SEER, 2017). These data include information on patient characteristics

and characteristics of the tumor at the time of detection. The SEER data also include information

on survival after cancer detection. However, because the data on years of survival after cancer

detection are subject to diagnosis bias, we analyzed population-level cancer mortality rates instead.


Our sample included all breast, colorectal, and lung cancers among people in our age range of

interest. Our main specification included people aged 59-71, i.e., about 750,000 tumors diagnosed

from 136 million patient-years at risk. Data on detected cancers and at-risk population were

tabulated by year, SEER cancer registry, single year of age, patient gender, and patient race (Black

vs. non-Black), yielding 13,650 rows of data in our main specification.


Our outcomes of interest from these data were total and early-stage cancer detection for breast,

colorectal, and lung cancer per 100,000 population. Early-stage cancer included in situ, localized,

or regional by direct extension in the SEER classification. Late-stage cancer included regional with

only lymph node involved, regional with lymph nodes involved and by direct extension, regional



                                                 10
not otherwise specified, or distant. Cancers without a stage classification were still included in the

analysis of total cancers detected.


Comparator Data from Canada on Cancer Detection and Cancer Mortality

In contrast to the abrupt changes in health insurance options at age 65 in the United States, there

are no abrupt changes in health insurance options at age 65 in Canada. Therefore, in a placebo

check, we extracted data on cancer detection and cancer mortality in Canada over 2001-2015 from

publicly available vital statistic data available from Statistics Canada. Statistics Canada releases

data for both these outcomes by five-year age bins. Data on cancer deaths from Statistics Canada

were not available by tumor site, and therefore we extracted data for all tumor sites combined.

Data on cancer detection were available by tumor site, and therefore we extracted data for our

three tumor sites of interest. When comparing data from the United States and Canada, we

aggregated the United States data to the same level of aggregation as the Canadian data.


Insurance Coverage, Access to Health Care, Cancer Screening, and Other Changes at Age 65


To examine potential mechanisms underlying the results, we extracted information on health

insurance coverage, access to health care, use of cancer screening, and economic changes relevant

to health at age 65. Our data source for these variables was the 2001-2015 Behavioral Risk Factor

Surveillance System (BRFSS). The BRFSS is a repeated cross-sectional survey that provides

nationally representative annual estimates of demographic, economic, and health related variables.


Our outcomes of interest from the BRFSS included health insurance coverage; whether the

respondent reported having at least one personal doctor or health care provider; whether the

respondent reported having a routine checkup in the past year; and whether there was a time in the

past 12 months when the respondent needed to see a doctor but could not because of cost. We also

                                                 11
tracked receipt of cancer screenings during the past 12 months. Respondents were considered as

having been screened for breast cancer during the past 12 months if they reported having a clinical

breast exam or a mammography, and were considered as having been screened for colorectal

cancer during the past 12 months if they reported having a blood stool test, a colonoscopy, or a

sigmoidoscopy. We are not aware of any nationally representative data measuring lung cancer

screening consistently over 2001-2015, and therefore we were unable to assess changes in lung

cancer screening at age 65 during our time period of interest. This may reflect the fact that the

randomized trials of lung cancer screening were published relatively recently and reviewed by the

United States Preventive Services Task Force in 2014, near the end of our time period of interest

(Moyer & U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2014). We extracted detailed data on respondent

race, age, gender, state of residence, and year of the interview as covariates to use in multivariate

modeling. Finally, for use in balance checks, we extracted data on retirement, employment, veteran

status, and education.


Research Design


We used a regression discontinuity (RD) research design to examine the impact of near-universal

Medicare eligibility at age 65 on cancer detection and outcomes. Regression discontinuity designs

are frequently used to analyze policies that cause a sudden change in a treatment of interest that

cannot be easily manipulated by patients or providers. Birth weight criteria for neonatal intensive

care is one example; intensive care is recommended for infants under 1500 grams. Comparing

1502-gram infants to 1498-gram infants illustrates how intensive care influences outcomes, since

the 4-gram difference is not otherwise likely to materially influence outcomes (Almond, Doyle,

Kowalski, & Williams, 2010). Time of day is another example, since some hospital patients lose

insurance coverage precisely at midnight. Comparing data just before or after midnight identifies

                                                 12
how patient insurance status influences hospital treatment decisions (Almond & Doyle, 2011). We

exploited patient age as a source of change in insurance coverage: Medicare coverage is nearly

universally available at age 65, but not one day before it. The key assumption in our analysis was

that outcomes would have continued along a smooth trend at age 65 in the absence of the Medicare

program, but Medicare creates a break in that trend. Because smooth trends by age are accounted

for in the analysis, it would not invalidate our research design if cancer mortality were to increase

with age overall.


Our research design followed previous studies that used regression discontinuity models to

estimate the impact of Medicare insurance (Barcellos & Jacobson, 2015; Card et al., 2009; S. L.

Decker, 2005). We restricted the data to a small window around the Medicare eligibility threshold

(age 65) to compare outcomes for people just over age 65 to people just under age 65. To select

the size of this window, we used the rdbwselect Stata command, which identifies the bandwidth

with the best mean squared error for a given application and data set (Calonico, Cattaneo, &

Farrell, 2018; Calonico, Cattaneo, Farrell, & Titiunik, 2017). This procedure yielded an optimal

bandwidth of six years in our application. We subsequently assessed the robustness of our findings

to changes in the bandwidth.


To estimate the size of the discontinuities in cancer detection and survival at age 65, we employed

standard methods for analysis of a regression discontinuity analysis (Imbens & Lemieux, 2008;

Lee & Lemieux, 2010), and used recommended inference methods for discretely measured running

variables (Kolesár & Rothe, 2018). We estimated the following model for people of age a, gender

g, and race r, living in state s in year t:

       ~(0 + 1 (  65) + 2 (  65)() + 3 (  65)() +  +  +  )


                                                 13
 indicates the outcomes analyzed, such as cancers detected or cancer mortality per 100,000

population. The indicator variable (  65) indicates age groups who have reached the age cutoff

for Medicare (that is, strictly over age 64). This model adjusted for patient gender and race

(covariates in vector ), as well as year and state fixed-effects ( and  ). The effects of age were

allowed to vary above vs. below the cutoff using a polynomial in age centered at age 65 (()).

Our main specification used a quadratic polynomial but we present results from linear and cubic

functions in robustness checks. 1 is the coefficient of interest, capturing the additional change in

the outcome of interest at age 65. We used Eicker-Huber-White (EHW) heteroscedasticity-robust

standard errors for inference, based on the superior coverage properties of these standard errors

compared to clustering standard errors by the running variable for small to moderate size

bandwidths such as ours (Kolesár & Rothe, 2018). We assessed whether findings varied by race

or tumor site, or from before versus after the introduction of Medicare Part D in 2006, by stratifying

the data.

The functional form of the models used varied by the outcome analyzed. We used negative

binomial models to assess changes in rates such as cancer detection per population or cancer deaths

per population, and used logit models to assess changes in binary outcomes such as health

insurance coverage or cancer screening during the past year. We presented average marginal

effects capturing the additional change at age 65 as our quantity of interest from each of these

models.


Sensitivity Checks


We assessed the assumption that outcomes would have remained smooth at age 65 in the absence

of the Medicare program in two ways. First, we examined changes in other socio-economic


                                                 14
variables such as retirement at age 65 using the BRFSS data, following previous studies that

studied Medicare using a regression discontinuity design (Barcellos & Jacobson, 2015; Card et al.,

2008; Finkelstein & McKnight, 2008). Second, we examined changes in our outcomes of interest

at age 65 using data from Canada, a country which does not have a change in public insurance

coverage at age 65.


We further assessed the robustness of findings by changing the model specifications. First, we

assessed the sensitivity of our results to our chosen age window by re-estimating our models on a

narrower sample of patients aged 61 to 69, and a broader sample of patients aged 57 to 73. Second,

we changed the order of the polynomial used to adjust for the aging process to a linear or cubic

polynomial. Third, we used an alternate modeling approach, implementing a quadratic polynomial

estimator with robust bias-corrected confidence intervals under second-order Holder smoothness

class using the LPPHonest function from the RDHonest package in R (Kolesár & Rothe, 2018). 1

This method used a triangular kernel to place a higher weight on observations closer to age 65.


All analyses used data from 2001-2015. Analyses were conducted using Stata MP, version 14.1,

and R, version 3.6.0. We assessed statistical significance at the 0.05 level using two-sided tests,

and calculated 95% confidence intervals for each quantity of interest.




1
 The current release of the RDHonest R package does not accommodate sample weights or covariates, and does not
provide exact p-values. Therefore, we implemented this robustness check only for our data sources that do not
require sample weights; incorporated covariates through a first-stage partial regression process; and denoted findings
as statistically significant at the 0.05 level only, deduced based on the bounds of the 95% confidence intervals. The
package additionally requires the user to specify an assumed bound of the second derivative of the conditional mean
function. We chose this bound using the data-based optimal selection procedure in the R package (RD_MROT.fit).

                                                         15
RESULTS


Figures 1 and 2 depict cancer detection rates and cancer mortality rates in the United States over

2001-2015, just before and after near-universal eligibility for Medicare at age 65. These data have

three notable characteristics. First, cancer detection and cancer mortality increase with age in

general, reflecting the overall aging process. Second, there are visible increases in cancer detection

at age 65 for both men and women. Third, cancer mortality appear to decline ­ i.e., increase by

less than expected based on prior trends - at age 65 among women, whereas there is no break in

trend at age 65 among men.


Our regression discontinuity estimates assessing the change in cancer detection and mortality

outcomes at age 65, after adjusting for aging and other factors, are shown in Table 1. The first two

columns of Table 1 present results when data from men and women were pooled together. Cancer

detection increased by 50 per 100,000 population (95% CI 31 to 69 per 100,000 population), and

early-stage cancers accounted for much of the increase (33 per 100,000 population, 95% CI 21 to

44 per 100,000 population). This represented a 10% decrease in cancer detection and a 12%

increase in early-stage cancer detection among 65 year-olds compared to people aged 63-64, the

"untreated" group in our analysis. When data from men and women were pooled together, there

was not a statistically significant change in cancer mortality, and findings were similar for Black

and non-Black patients. The changes in cancer detection and mortality were similar before and

after the onset of Medicare Part D in 2006.


The remaining columns of Table 1 show the changes at age 65 when the data were stratified by

gender. At age 65, cancer detection increased by 72 per 100,000 population among women, or

11%, and 33 per 100,000 population among men, or 11% (95% CI 52 to 92 and 16 to 51,


                                                 16
respectively). Cancer mortality declined among women by 9 per 100,000 population, or 4.5%

(95% CI 1 to 17 per 100,000 population); we did not find a significant change in cancer mortality

among men. Breast cancer accounted for the additional cancers detected among women, whereas

lung cancer accounted for the decline in cancer mortality when all women were analyzed together.

Figures A1 and A2 in the Appendix depict the data stratified by tumor site and gender.


Data stratified by gender and race are shown in Table 1, Table A1 in the Appendix, and Figures

A3 and A4 in the Appendix. Racial disparities in stage of cancer detection and mortality prior to

age 65 are notable. At ages 63-64, only 56% of Black women with cancer had been diagnosed

prior to metastasis, compared with 63% of non-Black women. Additionally, at ages 63-64, Black

women had a cancer mortality rate that was 20% higher than non-Black women. Subsequently, at

age 65, Black women experienced a particularly large increase in early-stage cancer detection (62

per 100,000 population or 15%, compared to an increase of 47 per 100,000 or 11% among non-

Black women). Black women also experienced a particularly large decline in cancer mortality at

age 65, of 20 per 100,000 population (95% CI: 9 to 32), or 8%. Breast cancer mortality and lung

cancer mortality may have both contributed to this mortality decline among Black women,

although the changes were only statistically significant at the 10% level: declines for breast and

lung cancer mortality were 7 per 100,000 population (95% CI -1 to 14) and 9 per 100,000

population (95% CI -1 to 19), respectively. In contrast to Black women, we found no significant

change in cancer detection or mortality among Black men.


The first identifying assumption of the regression discontinuity design is that cancer detection and

outcomes would have remained smooth at age 65 if the onset of Medicare coverage had not

occurred. To assess the plausibility of this assumption, we examined data from Canada. Canada

does not have a change in access to health insurance coverage at age 65, given that permanent
                                                17
residents and citizens of any age are provided access to public health insurance under the Canada

Health Act. Figure 3 compares data from the United States and Canada. Cancer mortality was

nearly identical in the United States and Canada prior to age 65, but at ages 65 and older the

outcomes diverged, with the mortality rates ultimately becoming lower in the United States.

Additionally, cancer detection remained on a smooth path before and after age 65 in Canada, but

showed a break in trend at age 65 in the United States.


To further assess the plausibility that our outcomes of interest would have remained smooth at age

65 if the onset of Medicare coverage had not occurred, we assessed trends in economic

determinants of health at age 65. Prior studies that also used a regression discontinuity design to

analyze Medicare have assessed trends in economic determinants of health at age 65, but these

studies used data from earlier time periods (Barcellos & Jacobson, 2015; Card et al., 2008). We

performed similar tests using BRFSS data from our time period of interest, 2001-2015, and our

results were similar to these previous studies. See Table A2 and Figure A5 in the Appendix. We

found no statistically significant discontinuity at age 65 in the proportion of survey respondents

who were currently working, who had a college education, or who were veterans. Despite the lack

of a change in the proportion of respondents currently working, we found a statistically significant

change in the proportion of respondents who considered themselves retired of 1.2 percentage

points (95% CI 0.03 to 2.5 percentage points). This change in retirement was smaller in magnitude

than the changes in health insurance coverage at age 65, as Card and colleagues also found, and

could reflect the impact of publicly provided health insurance on employment lock (Card et al.,

2008; Garthwaite, Gross, & Notowidigdo, 2014).




                                                18
The second identifying assumption of the regression discontinuity design is that people do not

manipulate their age in order to gain access to the program. Multiple aspects of the Medicare

program and the data used in this paper suggest that this assumption is reasonable. First, people

cannot alter their age. Second, people have little ability or incentive to misreport their age in this

context we are studying. The Medicare program is administered by the federal government in

accordance with official records such as birth certificates, presenting steep obstacles to

misrepresenting one's age later in life. Additionally, our main data source for mortality is vital

statistics data, gathered from death certificates. The deceased have no ability, and surely no

incentive, to misreport their age at death in official records. Nonetheless, if coroners or family

members of the deceased misreported age at death by rounding the deceased's age to "round"

numbers ending in 5 or 0, this would result in excess deaths at age 65 and bias our results towards

the null.


In placebo tests, we did not find comparable changes in population-level cancer mortality at ages

other than 65. See Figure 4. This evidence supports the plausibility that changes at age 65,

concurrent with near-universal eligibility for Medicare, accounted for our findings. Our point

estimates were similar when we re-estimated our models on a narrower sample of patients aged 61

to 69, or a broader sample of patients aged 57 to 73; or when we used a linear or cubic polynomial

to model the aging process rather than a quadratic polynomial. When we used a less parametric

approach, the estimated cancer detection effects became smaller but still statistically significant,

and the cancer mortality results became statistically significant for all race and sex groups. See

Table A3 in the Appendix.

Improvements in insurance coverage, access to care, and cancer screening at age 65 could help to

explain our findings. Therefore, we also examined the changes in these intermediate outcomes at

                                                 19
age 65. See Figure 5 and Table 2. These data indicate that insurance coverage rates, affordability

of care, and colorectal cancer screening improved for both men and women. The data also show

that women showed statistically significant improvements at age 65 in having a personal doctor

and an annual check-up, whereas men did not. Breast cancer screening rates were only measured

among women, and also showed a statistically significant increase at age 65. Figure A4 in the

Appendix shows the raw data for all of these outcomes.


Our regression discontinuity design identified the marginal effects of Medicare at age 65, rather

than the full effect of Medicare among adults aged 65 and older. Thus, any cost and benefit

calculations stemming from our estimates should be restricted to assessing the cost per cancer

death averted at age 65. In a back of the envelope calculation, we estimated Medicare's expenditure

on relevant treatment per breast, colorectal, or lung cancer death averted by Medicare at age 65.

Our expenditure estimates included payments by Medicare for patients diagnosed at 65 as well as

patients diagnosed before 65 who subsequently survived to age 65. We used estimates from the

literature of the per-patient Medicare expenditures associated with ongoing or initial treatment

related to breast, colorectal, and lung cancer (Yabroff et al., 2008). Additional details of the

calculation are included in Appendix section A2. This back-of-the-envelope calculation suggested

that Medicare spent about $5 million on breast, colorectal, or lung cancer care for each related

cancer death averted by the Medicare program at age 65.


DISCUSSION


The goal of this study was to estimate the impact of Medicare health insurance coverage at age 65

on cancer detection and population-level cancer mortality over 2001-2015. We are not aware of

any previous study of the relationship between Medicare insurance coverage at age 65 and


                                                20
population-level cancer mortality. We studied all tumor sites for which screening is recommended

among older adults, yielding a sample of about 750,000 breast, colorectal, and lung cancer cases

diagnosed among patients aged 59-71.


Insurance coverage rose to 97% at age 65, the age of near-universal eligibility for Medicare. This

nearly universal Medicare coverage increased cancer detection by 50 per 100,000 population, a

10% increase compared to people aged 63-64; the majority of additional cancers detected were

early-stage cancer. These findings are important for population heath because prompt detection

improves health for the tumor sites we study here, according to systematic reviews by the United

States Preventive Services Task Force (Moyer & U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2014; Siu

& U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2016; US Preventive Services Task Force et al., 2016).

Supplemental analyses, including analysis of data from Canada in a placebo check, supported the

robustness of our findings.


In vital statistics data, we found that cancer mortality increased by less than expected among

women at age 65 by 9 per 100,000 population. The lack of significance among men is consistent

with the magnitudes and standard errors we estimated. The increases in cancer detection and early-

stage cancer detection at age 65 among men were both less than half the magnitude of the increases

at age 65 among women: total cancer detection increased by 33 per 100,000 population among

men compared to 72 per 100,000 population among women, and early-stage cancer detection

increased by 17 per 100,000 population among men compared to 47 per 100,000 population among

women. If cancer deaths changed proportionately to cancer detection, the implied change in deaths

for men (4.1 per 100,000 population) would not be statistically significant based on the calculated

standard error for men (4.8 per 100,000 population).



                                                21
Our findings by race and gender are also notable and contribute to the literature. Black women

experienced a particularly large increase in early-stage cancer detection at age 65, of 62 per

100,000 population or 15%, compared to an increase of 47 per 100,000 or 11% among non-Black

women. Black women also experienced a statistically significant decline in cancer mortality of 20

per 100,000 population, or 8%, at age 65. Unpacking the tumor sites responsible for these

improvements, we found possible improvements in breast cancer mortality and lung cancer

mortality that reached significance at the 10% level. The disproportionate effect of Medicare on

cancer detection and mortality among Black women may reflect the higher proportion of cancers

detected at a late stage among Black women prior to age 65 and the larger impact of Medicare on

health care utilization and access among racial minorities (Card et al., 2008; S. Decker & Rapaport,

2002; Virnig, Baxter, Habermann, Feldman, & Bradley, 2009). These findings are particularly

important given that Black patients with cancer have poorer health outcomes on average than other

racial groups (Eley et al., 1994; Howard et al., 1992). Despite these encouraging findings among

Black women, we found no significant change in cancer detection or mortality at age 65 among

Black men. Efforts to further address disparities in cancer outcomes for Black men should be

further explored.


To further clarify the novelty of our analyses and findings, a brief explanation of diagnosis bias

and how our analytic strategy addresses such bias may be helpful. Two diagnosis biases applicable

in cancer research are lead time bias and length bias, which can be summarized as follows. First,

patients whose cancer is diagnosed earlier will appear to live longer after diagnosis even if earlier

detection provides no clinical benefit. Second, as detection rates rise, the additional detected

cancers may be slow-progressing cancers that are less deadly. When diagnosis rates rise, these

biases may result in spurious improvements in rates of post-diagnosis survival -- simply because


                                                 22
the additional diagnosed patients had less severe disease (Barratt et al., 2018; Croswell et al., 2010;

Duffy et al., 2008; Manning & Zelen, 1969; Pinsky, 2015; Shwartz, 1980).


Our analysis advances beyond the prior literature on the effects of Medicare on cancer survival by

addressing diagnosis bias. To avoid the spurious results diagnosis bias could create, we analyze

population-level cancer mortality data from vital statistics records. Analyzing population-level

cancer mortality data is the recommended method to address diagnosis bias because the vital

statistics data include deaths by cancer not diagnosed during the patient's lifetime (i.e., cancer

diagnosed at autopsy) (Duffy et al., 2008; Morrison, 1982). This makes our approach substantively

different from prior analyses of changes in post-diagnosis survival among Medicare patients (S.

L. Decker, 2005; Huesch & Ong, 2016a, 2016b; Lissenden, 2019; Merrill et al., 1999; A. L.

Potosky et al., 1999; Arnold L. Potosky et al., 1997; R. G. Roetzheim et al., 2000; R G Roetzheim

et al., 2000). Additional strengths of our study included the use of recent data from an era of rapid

advances in cancer treatment, and a large sample size resulting in high statistical power.


Declines in lung cancer mortality accounted for the significant reductions in cancer mortality

among women at age 65; we also found declines in breast cancer mortality among Black women

that had statistical significance at the 10% level. These changes are important for population health

because lung and breast cancer are the two leading causes of cancer mortality among women, and

account for more than one-quarter of all productivity costs associated with cancer mortality in the

United States (Bradley et al., 2008; Cronin et al., 2018).


Improvements in cancer mortality within a year of gaining Medicare coverage are plausible.

During our sample period, fewer than half of people newly diagnosed with lung cancer at ages 63-

64 survived one year, and life-extending treatments exist but are costly. Randomized trials showed


                                                  23
that timely detection and treatment can reduce the risk of lung cancer mortality by 20% and breast

cancer mortality by 33% (Nelson et al., 2016; The National Lung Screening Trial Research Team,

2011). Treatment can be prohibitively expensive, with an initial year of treatment costing on

average $73,000 for lung cancer or $28,000 for breast cancer in 2010 U.S. dollars (Mariotto,

Yabroff, Shao, Feuer, & Brown, 2011). The elevated rates of bankruptcy among lung and breast

cancer patients aged 50-64 suggest that out-of-pocket expenditures associated with treatment may

be associated with substantial financial hardship for people lacking Medicare coverage (Ramsey

et al., 2013; Zheng et al., 2019).


Our analysis captures a local average treatment effect of the effect of access to Medicare at age

65, i.e., the effect of having access to Medicare compared to lacking access to Medicare at age 65.

Given that access to Medicare is nearly universal at age 65 but severely limited prior to age 65, a

research design such as ours which compares a "treated" group aged 65 and older to an "untreated"

group younger than 65 has been deemed appropriate in closely related studies (Barcellos &

Jacobson, 2015; S. L. Decker, 2005; Finkelstein & McKnight, 2008; McWilliams et al., 2009).

While access to Medicare may be particularly beneficial for the previously uninsured, the

previously insured also benefit. Within a few weeks of becoming eligible for Medicare, there is a

sharp increase in the proportion of people with multiple forms of coverage, and the proportion of

people with only managed care is reduced by half (Card et al., 2009). Thus, Medicare provides the

already-insured with access to more generous coverage and a broad network of providers.

Generosity of coverage and network breadth are particularly important for cancer patients, who

require costly specialty care (Lissenden, 2019; Mariotto et al., 2011; Yabroff et al., 2008).


The increases we find in cancer detection and routine cancer screening capture only some of the

possible mechanisms through which Medicare could reduce cancer mortality. Some patients whose

                                                 24
lives were extended by an avoided cancer death at age 65 may have been diagnosed prior to age

65. For these patients, Medicare could provide access to needed treatment for an already diagnosed

condition. Other patients who became diagnosed and treated upon gaining Medicare coverage may

have already had symptoms of cancer. These patients would have become diagnosed by

confirmatory testing, rather than by routine cancer screening.


Our findings are consistent with epidemiologic principles predicting the health effects of increased

cancer detection. In the cancer epidemiology literature, length bias, overdiagnosis, and

overtreatment describe the phenomenon wherein additional diagnosis and treatment of cancer

yields diminishing health returns within a population, because the marginal cancer cases are less

severe than the previous cases (Ahn et al., 2014; Barratt et al., 2018; Diederich, 2011; Duffy et al.,

2008; Morrison, 1982). These concepts map closely to our results by tumor site. For example, prior

to age 65, lung cancer was the tumor most likely to be diagnosed at a late stage, and had much

higher post-diagnosis mortality than other tumor sites examined, with fewer than half of lung

cancer patients surviving one year after diagnosis. Not surprisingly, therefore, the health returns

to increased lung cancer diagnosis and treatment at age 65 were higher for lung cancer than other

tumor sites. As detection and treatment increase further over time, these epidemiologic principles

suggest that health returns to detection and treatment will diminish (Ahn et al., 2014; Esserman,

Jr, & Reid, 2013).


Our findings also reflect principles from health economics about the role access to care plays in

determining diagnosis and treatment. Patients lacking access to affordable treatment are more

likely to delay treatment of diagnosed disease due to cost, or delay diagnosis of a symptomatic

condition because a formal diagnosis would provide no actionable next step (Baicker et al., 2013;

Brawley & Goldberg, 2012; Oster, Shoulson, & Dorsey, 2013; Wilson, 2016). Thus, patients

                                                 25
lacking access to care are more likely to be underdiagnosed and undertreated. The diminishing

returns to care documented in the epidemiological literature, in turn, suggest that this under-treated

group should experience larger health gains to health care access than other groups (Myerson,

Lakdawalla, Colantonio, Safford, & Meltzer, 2018). This prediction maps closely to our findings

by race. Prior to age 65, insurance coverage rates were lower and delays in detection and treatment

more frequent for Black than non-Black patients (Card et al., 2008; Virnig et al., 2009).

Subsequently, Black patients experienced larger mortality gains than non-Black patients upon

gaining access to Medicare coverage.


The magnitude of our estimated change in cancer mortality is consistent with previous studies of

changes in mortality after health insurance expansions. First, we did not detect any change in the

impact of Medicare on cancer mortality after the onset of Medicare Part D. This matches a prior

study that found no effect of the introduction of Medicare Part D on cancer mortality (Dunn &

Shapiro, 2017). As Dunn and Shapiro noted, Medicare already covered many cancer treatments

prior to the introduction of Part D through Medicare Part B and Medicare Advantage (Part C), so

the result is unsurprising. Second, we found a larger impact on cancer mortality among Black

women. This matches prior studies which found larger improvements in mortality after Medicaid

expansions among racial and ethnic minorities (Sommers et al., 2012). A study of patients

hospitalized for non-deferrable causes such as acute myocardial infarction and stroke found a

larger effect of Medicare on mortality than we found, as expected given the authors' focus on a

population with acute illness (Card et al., 2009). Card and colleagues found Medicare was

associated with a 1 percentage point decline in 7-day mortality (a 20% decline), compared to the

smaller effect we find of 9 cancer deaths averted per 100,000 population among women (a 4.5%

decline). Also as expected, our estimated effects of Medicare on cancer mortality are smaller than


                                                 26
the estimated effect of Medicaid expansions on all-cause mortality, which was identified by

Sommers and colleagues as 20 per 100,000 population (a 6% decline) (Sommers, 2017; Sommers

et al., 2012). Direct comparisons of the results for women and men are not possible given that

neither paper stratified the data by gender.


We found no decline in deaths due to breast cancer after aging into Medicare when all women

were analyzed together, which may appear to contradict the findings of a previous study found that

survival after breast cancer diagnosis improved after aging into Medicare (S. L. Decker, 2005).

However, Decker reported that the 11% improvement in breast cancer survival originally identified

became attenuated to 9% after adjusting for state at diagnosis. If diagnosis bias contributed to the

differences between the findings of this study and ours, then additional controls for tumor severity

might have further attenuated the findings. Differences in the data periods used might also account

for the differences between the findings. Decker used data from 1980-2001, whereas we used data

from 2001-2015. There was 39% decline in the breast cancer death rate over 1989 to 2015, and

detecting further improvements may become more challenging as mortality rates fall (Cronin et

al., 2018). In keeping with this possibility, the decline in breast cancer mortality was closer to

statistical significance among Black women, who had a higher baseline rate of breast cancer

mortality.Our findings inform ongoing policy discussions about Medicare and the benefits of

access to publicly provided insurance. Changes to the Medicare eligibility age have been

repeatedly proposed. Informing this policy proposal, our findings suggest that setting Medicare

eligibility age at 65 rather than 66 avoided about 1,800 deaths from cancer at age 65 during our

sample period (2001-2015). Our regression discontinuity design only captures marginal changes

at age 65. Given that deaths at age 65 account for only 4% of cancer deaths among adults age 65

and older in the United States, deaths averted at age 65 are likely a small fraction of the total cancer


                                                  27
deaths prevented by Medicare. Additionally, the increasing gap in cancer mortality rates between

the United States and Canada after age 65 suggests the possibility that effects of the Medicare

program could be larger at older ages. If the effect of Medicare on cancer mortality is larger at

older ages, our findings would under-estimate the total impact of Medicare on cancer mortality.

Regardless, policy-makers should take into account the full set of impacts of Medicare, including

impacts on financial strain, when making policy decisions (Barcellos & Jacobson, 2015;

Finkelstein & McKnight, 2008).


Our study had limitations. First, insurance coverage is not well-measured among cancer patients

in the SEER or vital statistics data. To address this limitation, we used an additional data source to

present contextual information about the increase in coverage at age 65, and how changes in

coverage translated to changes in access to care. Second, changes in rates are subject to population

dynamics. However, our population denominators were updated annually by single year of age,

state, gender, and racial group. Our analysis therefore accounts for any changes in migration or

mortality by age, including differential migration or mortality by race or gender. Finally, ours is

an observational study; while our analysis of data from Canada can assuage some concerns, we

cannot rule out the possibility that changes other than onset of Medicare in the United States at

age 65 account for our findings.


In conclusion, access to Medicare insurance was associated with a significant increase in detection

of cancers with recommended screening, as well a decline in mortality from these cancers among

women. Our estimates provide new evidence of Medicare's impact on health outcomes for people

in need of medical care.




                                                 28
Figure 1: Cancer detection per 100,000 population among patients just above and below age

65, in the United States over 2001-2015: SEER data


A. Total

                                                                   Female                                                                                        Male
                            800




                                                                                                                           500
  Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People




                                                                                                 Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People
                                 700




                                                                                                                                400
                  600




                                                                                                                 300
  500




                                                                                                 200
                            400




                                                                                                                           100




                                                    59   61   63      65    67   69   71                                                     59        61   63     65   67   69   71
                                                                     Age                                                                                          Age




B. Early stage

                                                                   Female                                                                                        Male
                           450




                                                                                                                    160
  Early Stage Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People




                                                                                           Early Stage Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People
                                                                                                                                   140
                                        400




                                                                                                                        120
                        350




                                                                                                            100
         300




                                                                                                  80                60
                           250




                                                    59   61   63     65     67   69   71                                                     59        61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                                    Age                                                                                          Age




                                                                                                                                                  29
C. Late stage

                                                                   Female                                                                                       Male




                                                                                                                    300
                            300




                                                                                           Late Stage Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People
   Late Stage Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People




                                                                                                                                250
                                   250




                                                                                                                200
              200




                                                                                                 150                100
                            150




                                                    59   61   63     65     67   69   71                                                    59        61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                                    Age                                                                                         Age




This graph shows trends in detection of cancers for our tumor sites of interest just above and below

age 65, the age of near-universal health insurance coverage via Medicare. The x-axis is age at

diagnosis; and the y-axis is cancers detected per 100,000 population. The figure includes quadratic

regression lines, estimated separately below vs. above age 65.




                                                                                                                                                 30
Figure 2: Population-based cancer mortality in the United States 2001-2015: Vital statistics

data


                                                        Female                                                                          Male
                      350




                                                                                                    400            350
                                   300




                                                                                 Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People
   Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People




                                                                                                        300
                     250




                                                                                          250
     200




                                                                                200
                      150




                                                                                                    150




                                         59   61   63     65     67   69   71                                            59   61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                         Age                                                                            Age




This graph shows trends in population-level cancer mortality from our tumor sites of interest just

above and below age 65, the age of near-universal health insurance coverage via Medicare. The x-

axis is age; and the y-axis is cancer mortality per 100,000 population. The figure includes quadratic

regression lines, estimated separately below vs. above age 65.




                                                                                                                         31
Table 1: Impact of near-universal access to Medicare on cancer detection and cancer

mortality in the United States 2001-2015: SEER and vital statistics data

A. Cancer detection per 100,000 population
                            All                         Women                         Men
                 Age 63-   RD at Age 65       Age 63-   RD at Age 65        Age 63-   RD at Age 65
                 64                           64                            64
Total            507.3     50.05***           683.7     71.58***            312.8     33.19***
                           (30.88 to 69.22)             (51.49 to 91.67)              (15.81 to 50.57)
By Stage
Early Stage      267       32.91***           417.4     47.45***            101.2     17.39***
                           (21.47 to 44.35)             (33.13 to 61.76)              (8.034 to 26.74)
Late Stage       226       19.36***           252.1     22.28***            197.4     17.90***
                           (9.422 to 29.30)             (10.88 to 33.68)              (4.763 to 31.03)
By Tumor Site
Breast                     N/A                459.2     50.05***                      N/A
                                                        (35.35 to 64.75)
Colorectal       82.5      16.34***           69.62     13.83***            96.61     18.79***
                           (10.37 to 22.31)             (6.398 to 21.25)              (9.470 to 28.11)
Lung             182.3     10.79**            154.9     7.465               212.5     15.09**
                           (1.545 to 20.04)             (-2.475 to 17.40)             (0.733 to 29.44)
By Race
Black            609.7     42.60**            725.1     77.28***            465.9     9.600
                           (6.554 to 78.65)             (28.21 to 126.3)              (-34.91 to 54.11)
Non-Black        495.9     52.18***           678.8     70.87***            297       34.15***
                           (33.00 to 71.36)             (49.77 to 91.98)              (18.14 to 50.16)
By Time
Prior to 2006    561.1     39.81**            561.1     40.77**             726.1     52.22***
                           (4.946 to 74.67)             (4.775 to 76.77)              (18.11 - 86.34)
2006 and later   488.4     53.72***           488.4     83.99***            290       25.72***
                           (31.78 to 75.65)             (61.21 - 106.8)               (6.312 to 45.12)




                                                32
B. Cancer mortality per 100,000 population
                            All                          Women                         Men
                 Age 63-   RD at Age 65        Age 63-   RD at Age 65        Age 63-   RD at Age 65
                 64                            64                            64
Total            208.3     -4.13               199.8     -8.93**             217.7     2.92
                           (-14.31 to 6.054)             (-17.39 to -0.46)             (-6.48 to 12.31)
By Tumor Site
Breast                     N/A                 59.96     0.16                          N/A
                                                         (-2.99 to 3.31)
Colorectal       37.1      0.48                29.25     -0.24               45.66     1.46
                           (-1.31 to 2.28)               (-2.37 to 1.89)               (-1.45 to 4.37)
Lung             139.5     -4.26               110.6     -6.64**             171.3     0.87
                           (-14.28 to 5.76)              (-12.72 to -0.57)             (-7.52 to 9.26)
By Race
Black            270       -8.34               238.4     -20.29***           309.6     9.59
                           (-21.15 to 4.48)              (-31.74 to -8.84)             (-6.65 to 25.83)
Non-Black        201.3     -1.59               195.1     -3.318              208       0.38
                           (-8.79 to 5.61)               (-11.14 to 4.51)              (-7.90 to 8.66)
By Time
Prior to 2006    208.3     -2.97               234.2     -8.23               266.7     7.13
                           (-20.59 to 14.66)             (-19.64 to 3.17)              (-9.27 to 23.53)
2006 and later   208.3     -2.62               187.5     -7.15               200.3     3.50
                           (-12.18 to 6.94)              (-16.22 to 1.93)              (-6.48 to 13.46)




The first two columns of each table include findings when all data from cancers with recommended

screening are pooled together. The subsequent columns include findings from stratified analyses

including only women or men, respectively. Estimated regression discontinuities at age 65

adjusted for background trends in aging and over time and patient race; cancer detection analyses

additionally adjusted for time-invariant confounders by state. 95% confidence intervals calculated

using robust standard errors are in parentheses. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                 33
Figure 3: Cancer detection and mortality just above and below age 65 in 2001-2015, in the

United States vs. Canada

A. Cancer detection


                                                 Cancers Detected per 100,000 Population
                              800 1000
  Cancers Detected per 100,000 Population
   0    200    400     600




                                            40        50            60               70    80
                                                                   Age

                                                                United States
                                                                Canada




B. Cancer mortality


                                                 Cancer Mortality per 100,000 Population
  Cancer Mortality per 100,000 Population
  0        500          1000       1500




                                            40        50            60               70    80
                                                                   Age

                                                                United States
                                                                Canada




                                                                                34
The x-axis is age at diagnosis; and the y-axis is cancer deaths or cancer detection per 100,000

population. The figure includes quadratic regression lines, estimated separately before and after

age 65. The Canadian mortality data are not available by tumor site, and the Canadian detection

and mortality data are not available by single year of age. We aggregated the United States data to

the same level of aggregation as the Canadian data.




                                                35
Figure 4: Findings from chi-square tests for discontinuity in population-level cancer

mortality, at age 65 and other ages



                                                       Female                                                                       Male
                        4




                                                                                                     4
   Chi-Squared Statistic for Discontinuity




                                                                                Chi-Squared Statistic for Discontinuity
                                   3




                                                                                                                3
                  2




                                                                                               2
    1




                                                                                 1
                        0




                                                                                                     0




                                             55   60     65      70   75                                                  55   60    65      70   75
                                                        Cutoff                                                                      Cutoff




This figure shows that the largest and most statistically significant discontinuity in cancer mortality

per 100,000 population, within the bandwidth we analyze, is at age 65 as expected. The chi-squared

statistics plotted tested the significance of the discontinuity in cancer mortality found when

different ages were used as the cutoff in our regression discontinuity analysis. The horizontal line

depicts the cutoff for statistical significance at the 0.05 level.




                                                                           36
Figure 5. Health insurance coverage and access to care just above and below age 65, in the

United States over 2001-2015: BRFSS data

A. Any health insurance coverage


                                                                  Female                                                                                                                 Male




                                                                                                                       98
                   98




                                                                                                                                    96
                                96
  Health Insurance Coverage (%)




                                                                                                      Health Insurance Coverage (%)
                                                                                                                        94
                    94




                                                                                                             92
        92




                                                                                                                       90
                   90
                   88




                                                                                                                       88




                                     59       61        63          65      67        69        71                                       59                               61        63     65     67   69   71
                                                                   Age                                                                                                                    Age




B. Skipped health care due to cost during the past year



                                                                    Female                                                                                                                      Male
                                                                                                                                                      14
                               14




                                                                                                                                                      12
                               12




                                                                                                                                         Skip Care Due to Cost (%)
             Skip Care Due to Cost (%)




                                                                                                                                                           10
                               10




                                                                                                                                               8
                   8




                                                                                                                                                      6
                               6




                                                                                                                                                      4
                               4




                                         59        61        63        65        67        69        71                                                              59        61        63      65    67   69   71
                                                                      Age                                                                                                                       Age




                                                                                                                                                                      37
C. Breast cancer screening during the past year


                                                                             Female
                 7500
  Breast Cancer Screening (%)
       7300      72007400




                                                 59     61        63           65      67        69                                         71
                                                                              Age




D. Colorectal cancer screening during the past year



                                                                  Female                                                                                   Male
                              34




                                                                                                                    34
                                            32




                                                                                                                                  32
            Colorectal Cancer Screening (%)




                                                                                                  Colorectal Cancer Screening (%)
                             30




                                                                                                                   30
              28




                                                                                                    28
                              26




                                                                                                                    26




                                                  59   61    63         65      67    69    71                                         59        61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                                       Age                                                                                 Age




This graph shows trends in population-level health insurance coverage, access to care, and cancer

screening just above and below age 65, the age of near-universal access to Medicare. The x-axis

is age and the y-axis is the percentage of people with the characteristic listed on the axis. The figure

includes quadratic regression lines, estimated separately below vs. above age 65.


                                                                                                                                            38
Table 2: Impact of near-universal access to Medicare at age 65 on insurance coverage, access

to care, and cancer screening in the United States 2001-2015: BRFSS data

                                           Women                               Men
                                Age 63-    RD at Age 65         Age 63-64      RD at Age 65
                                64
 Health Insurance Coverage      0.88       0.045***             0.89           0.043***
                                           (0.041 to 0.048)                    (0.038 to 0.047)
 Access to Care:
 Personal Doctor                0.92       0.009**              0.89           -0.002
                                           (0.001 to 0.016)                    (-0.014 to 0.010)
 Check-Up                       0.80       0.033***             0.78           0.011
                                           (0.022 to 0.043)                    (-0.003 to 0.026)
 Not Access Care Due to Cost    0.12       -0.020***            0.09           -0.010**
                                           (-0.028 to -0.011)                  (-0.020 to -0.0002)
 Screenings During Past Year:
 Breast Cancer                  0.74       0.024***             Not reported   Not reported
                                           (0.007 to 0.041)
 Colorectal Cancer              0.29       0.024**              0.30           0.033***
                                           (0.004 to 0.043)                    (0.008 to 0.057)
This table shows the results of regression discontinuity analyses at age 65 which assessed

discontinuities in insurance coverage, access to care, and breast and colorectal cancer screening

during the past year. (Lung cancer screening was not measured consistently during our time period

of interest, due to the recent onset of screening recommendations.) Estimated regression

discontinuities at age 65 adjusted for background trends in aging and over time, time-invariant

confounders by state, and patient race. Models incorporated sample weights to account for the

complex sampling design of the BRFSS data. 95% confidence intervals calculated using robust

standard errors are in parentheses.




                                               39
References

Ahn, H. S., Kim, H. J., & Welch, H. G. (2014). Korea's Thyroid-Cancer "Epidemic"--Screening and

        Overdiagnosis. New England Journal of Medicine, 371(19), 1765­1767.

        https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1409841

Almond, D., & Doyle, J. J. (2011). After Midnight: A Regression Discontinuity Design in Length of

        Postpartum Hospital Stays. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(3), 1­34.

        https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.3.3.1

Almond, D., Doyle, J. J., Kowalski, A. E., & Williams, H. (2010). Estimating marginal returns to Medical

        Care: Evidence from at-risk newborns. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 591­634.

American Cancer Society. (2018). History of ACS Recommendations for the Early Detection of Cancer in

        People Without Symptoms. Retrieved June 21, 2019, from https://www.cancer.org/health-care-

        professionals/american-cancer-society-prevention-early-detection-

        guidelines/overview/chronological-history-of-acs-recommendations.html

Baicker, K., Taubman, S. L., Allen, H. L., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J. H., Newhouse, J. P., ... Finkelstein, A. N.

        (2013). The Oregon Experiment--Effects of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes. New England Journal

        of Medicine, 368(18), 1713­1722. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1212321

Barcellos, S. H., & Jacobson, M. (2015). The Effects of Medicare on Medical Expenditure Risk and

        Financial Strain. American Economic Journal. Economic Policy, 7(4), 41­70.

        https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20140262

Barratt, A., Bell, K., & Jacklyn, G. (2018). Demonstration of Classic Screening Biases, Not Additional

        Benefit of Annual Over Biennial Screening. Journal of the American College of Radiology, 15(10),

        1360­1361.

Bertakis, K. (2000). Gender Differences in the Utilization of Health Care Services. The Journal of Family

        Practice, 49(2). Retrieved from

                                                       40
        https://www.mdedge.com/familymedicine/article/60747/womens-health/gender-differences-

        utilization-health-care-services

Black, B., Espín-Sánchez, J.-A., French, E., & Litvak, K. (2017). The Long-Term Effect of Health Insurance

        on Near-Elderly Health and Mortality. American Journal of Health Economics, 3(3), 281­311.

        https://doi.org/10.1162/ajhe_a_00076

Blau, F. D., & Kahn, L. M. (1992). The Gender Earnings Gap: Learning from International Comparisons.

        The American Economic Review, 82(2), 533­538.

Bradley, C. J., Yabroff, K. R., Dahman, B., Feuer, E. J., Mariotto, A., & Brown, M. L. (2008). Productivity

        costs of cancer mortality in the United States: 2000-2020. Journal of the National Cancer

        Institute, 100(24), 1763­1770. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djn384

Brawley, O. W., & Goldberg, P. (2012). How We Do Harm: A Doctor Breaks Ranks About Being Sick in

        America. St. Martin's Publishing Group.

Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., & Farrell, M. H. (2018). On the Effect of Bias Estimation on Coverage

        Accuracy in Nonparametric Inference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(522),

        767­779. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2017.1285776

Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M., Farrell, M., & Titiunik, R. (2017). rdrobust: Software for regression-

        discontinuity designs. Stata Journal, 17(2), 372­404.

Card, D., Dobkin, C., & Maestas, N. (2008). The impact of nearly universal insurance coverage on health

        care utilization and health: Evidence from Medicare. American Economic Review, 98(5), 2242­

        2258. https://doi.org/10.3386/w10365

Card, D., Dobkin, C., & Maestas, N. (2009). Does Medicare Save Lives? The Quarterly Journal of

        Economics, 124(2), 597­636. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2009.124.2.597




                                                      41
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018, December). Underlying Cause of Death 1999-2017 on

        CDC WONDER Online Database. Retrieved from Accessed at http://wonder.cdc.gov/ucd-

        icd10.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) National Death Index (NDI). (2019). 113 ICD-10 Cause

        of Death Recodes. Retrieved from https://www.resdac.org/cms-data/variables/113-icd-10-

        cause-death-recodes

Centers for Medicare. (2019). CMS Fast Facts: Statistical Summary on Annual CMS Program and Financial

        Data. Retrieved May 13, 2019, from https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-

        Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/CMS-Fast-Facts/index.html

Conlin, A., Allen, H. L., Tsui, J., Carlson, M. J., & Li, H. F. (2016). What Does Medicaid Expansion Mean for

        Cancer Screening & Prevention? Results from a Randomized Trial on the Impacts of Acquiring

        Medicaid Coverage. Cancer, 122(5), 791­797. https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.29802

Cronin, K. A., Lake, A. J., Scott, S., Sherman, R. L., Noone, A.-M., Howlader, N., ... Jemal, A. (2018). Annual

        Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer, part I: National cancer statistics. Cancer, 124(13),

        2785­2800. https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.31551

Croswell, J. M., Ransohoff, D. F., & Kramer, B. S. (2010). Principles of cancer screening: Lessons from

        history and study design issues. Seminars in Oncology, 37(3), 202­215.

        https://doi.org/10.1053/j.seminoncol.2010.05.006

De Pergola, G., & Silvestris, F. (2013). Obesity as a Major Risk Factor for Cancer. Journal of Obesity, 2013.

        https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/291546

Decker, S. L. (2005). Medicare and the Health of Women with Breast Cancer. The Journal of Human

        Resources, 40(4), 948­968. Retrieved from JSTOR.

Decker, S., & Rapaport, C. (2002). Medicare and Disparities in Women's Health (Working Paper No.

        8761). https://doi.org/10.3386/w8761


                                                      42
Diederich, S. (2011). Lung cancer screening: Rationale and background. Cancer Imaging, 11(1A), S75­

        S78. https://doi.org/10.1102/1470-7330.2011.9019

Duffy, S. W., Nagtegaal, I. D., Wallis, M., Cafferty, F. H., Houssami, N., Warwick, J., ... Lawrence, G.

        (2008). Correcting for Lead Time and Length Bias in Estimating the Effect of Screen Detection on

        Cancer Survival. American Journal of Epidemiology, 168(1), 98­104.

        https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwn120

Dunn, A., & Shapiro, A. H. (2017). Does Medicare Part D Save Lives? American Journal of Health

        Economics, 5(1), 126­164. https://doi.org/10.1162/ajhe_a_00107

Eley, J. W., Hill, H. A., Greenberg, R. S., Coates, R. J., Chen, V. W., Correa, P., ... Edwards, B. K. (1994).

        Racial Differences in Survival From Breast Cancer: Results of the National Cancer Institute

        Black/White Cancer Survival Study. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association,

        272(12), 947­954. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1994.03520120057031

Ellis, L., Canchola, A. J., Spiegel, D., Ladabaum, U., Haile, R., & Gomez, S. L. (2018). Trends in Cancer

        Survival by Health Insurance Status in California From 1997 to 2014. JAMA Oncology, 4(3), 317­

        323. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.3846

Esserman, L. J., Jr, I. T., & Reid, B. (2013). Overdiagnosis and overtreatment in cancer: An opportunity for

        improvement. JAMA, 310(8), 797­798. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2013.108415

Finkelstein, A., & McKnight, R. (2008). What did Medicare do? The initial impact of Medicare on

        mortality and out of pocket medical spending. Journal of Public Economics, 92(7), 1644­1668.

        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2007.10.005

Finkelstein, A., Taubman, S., Wright, B., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J., Newhouse, J. P., ... Baicker, K. (2012).

        THE OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE EXPERIMENT: EVIDENCE FROM THE FIRST YEAR. The

        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1057­1106.




                                                        43
Galdas, P. M., Cheater, F., & Marshall, P. (2005). Men and health help-seeking behaviour: Literature

        review. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 49(6), 616­623. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-

        2648.2004.03331.x

Garthwaite, C., Gross, T., & Notowidigdo, M. J. (2014). Public Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and

        Employment Lock. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 653­696.

        https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju005

Grubbs, S. S., Polite, B. N., Carney, J., Bowser, W., Rogers, J., Katurakes, N., ... Paskett, E. D. (2013).

        Eliminating Racial Disparities in Colorectal Cancer in the Real World: It Took a Village. Journal of

        Clinical Oncology, 31(16), 1928­1930. https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2012.47.8412

Halpern, M. T., Ward, E. M., Pavluck, A. L., Schrag, N. M., Bian, J., & Chen, A. Y. (2008). Association of

        insurance status and ethnicity with cancer stage at diagnosis for 12 cancer sites: A retrospective

        analysis. The Lancet Oncology, 9(3), 222­231. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(08)70032-9

Han, X., Zang Xiong, K., Kramer, M. R., & Jemal, A. (2016). The Affordable Care Act and Cancer Stage at

        Diagnosis Among Young Adults. JNCI: Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 108(9).

        https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djw058

Harding, M. C., Sloan, C. D., Merrill, R. M., Harding, T. M., Thacker, B. J., & Thacker, E. L. (2018).

        Transitions From Heart Disease to Cancer as the Leading Cause of Death in US States, 1999-

        2016. Preventing Chronic Disease, 15, E158. https://doi.org/10.5888/pcd15.180151

Howard, J., Hankey, B. F., Greenberg, R. S., Austin, D. F., Correa, P., Chen, V. W., & Durako, S. (1992). A

        collaborative study of differences in the survival rates of black patients and white patients with

        cancer. Cancer, 69(9), 2349­2360.

Huesch, M. D., & Ong, M. K. (2016a). Lung Cancer Care Before and After Medicare Eligibility. Inquiry: A

        Journal of Medical Care Organization, Provision and Financing, 53.

        https://doi.org/10.1177/0046958016647301


                                                       44
Huesch, M. D., & Ong, M. K. (2016b). Prostate Cancer Care Before and After Medicare Eligibility. Inquiry:

        A Journal of Medical Care Organization, Provision and Financing, 53.

        https://doi.org/10.1177/0046958016647298

Humphrey, L. L., Helfand, M., Chan, B. K. S., & Woolf, S. H. (2002). Breast cancer screening: A summary

        of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Annals of Internal Medicine, 137(5

        Part 1), 347­360.

Imbens, G. W., & Lemieux, T. (2008). Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice. Journal of

        Econometrics, 142(2), 615­635. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2007.05.001

Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Health Insurance Status and Its Consequences. (2009).

        America's Uninsured Crisis: Consequences for Health and Health Care. Retrieved from

        http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK214966/

Kochanek, K. D., Murphy, S. L., Xu, J., & Tejada-Vera, B. (2016). Deaths: Final Data for 2014. National

        Vital Statistics Reports: From the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for

        Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, 65(4), 1­122.

Kolesár, M., & Rothe, C. (2018). Inference in Regression Discontinuity Designs with a Discrete Running

        Variable. American Economic Review, 108(8), 2277­2304. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20160945

Kolstad, J. T., & Kowalski, A. E. (2012). The impact of health care reform on hospital and preventive care:

        Evidence from Massachusetts. Journal of Public Economics, 96(11­12), 909­929.

        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2012.07.003

Kronick, R. (2009). Health Insurance Coverage and Mortality Revisited. Health Services Research, 44(4),

        1211­1231.

Lakdawalla, D. N., Sun, E. C., Jena, A. B., Reyes, C. M., Goldman, D. P., & Philipson, T. J. (2010). An

        economic evaluation of the war on cancer. Journal of Health Economics, 29(3), 333­346.

        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2010.02.006


                                                      45
Lee, D. S., & Lemieux, T. (2010). Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics. Journal of Economic

        Literature, 48(2), 281­355.

Lee-Feldstein, A., Feldstein, P., & Buchmueller, T. (2002). Health Care Factors Related to Stage at

        Diagnosis and Survival Among Medicare Patients With Colorectal Cancer. Medical Care, 40, 362­

        374. https://doi.org/10.1097/00005650-200205000-00002

Lee-Feldstein, A., Feldstein, P. J., Buchmueller, T., & Katterhagen, G. (2001). Breast Cancer Outcomes

        Among Older Women. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 16(3), 189­199.

        https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1525-1497.2001.91112.x

Levy, H., & Meltzer, D. (2008). The impact of health insurance on health. Annual Review of Public Health,

        29, 399­409. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.28.021406.144042

Lissenden, B. (2019). The effect of cancer diagnosis on switching health insurance in medicare. Health

        Economics, 28(3), 339­349. https://doi.org/10.1002/hec.3843

Maciosek, M. V., Solberg, L. I., Coffield, A. B., Edwards, N. M., & Goodman, M. J. (2006). Colorectal

        cancer screening: Health impact and cost effectiveness. American Journal of Preventive

        Medicine, 31(1), 80­89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2006.03.009

Mandelblatt, J. S., Cronin, K. A., Bailey, S., Berry, D. A., de Koning, H. J., Draisma, G., ... Breast Cancer

        Working Group of the Cancer Intervention and Surveillance Modeling Network. (2009). Effects

        of mammography screening under different screening schedules: Model estimates of potential

        benefits and harms. Annals of Internal Medicine, 151(10), 738­747.

        https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-10-200911170-00010

Manning, F., & Zelen, M. (1969). Some Pitfalls in the Evaluation of Screening Programs. Archives of

        Environmental Health: An International Journal, 19(3), 412­415.

        https://doi.org/10.1080/00039896.1969.10666863




                                                       46
Mariotto, A. B., Yabroff, R. K., Shao, Y., Feuer, E. J., & Brown, M. L. (2011). Projections of the Cost of

        Cancer Care in the United States: 2010­2020. JNCI Journal of the National Cancer Institute,

        103(2), 117­128. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djq495

McWilliams, J. M., Meara, E., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Ayanian, J. Z. (2007). Use of Health Services by

        Previously Uninsured Medicare Beneficiaries. New England Journal of Medicine, 357(2), 143­

        153. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa067712

McWilliams, J. M., Meara, E., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Ayanian, J. Z. (2009). Differences in Control of

        Cardiovascular Disease and Diabetes by Race, Ethnicity, and Education: U.S. Trends From 1999

        to 2006 and Effects of Medicare Coverage. Annals of Internal Medicine, 505­516.

        https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-150-8-200904210-00005

McWilliams, J. M., Meara, E., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Ayanian, J. Z. (2010). Commentary: Assessing the Health

        Effects of Medicare Coverage for Previously Uninsured Adults: A Matter of Life and Death?

        Health Services Research, 45(5 Pt 1), 1407­1422. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-

        6773.2010.01085.x

McWilliams, J. M., Meara, E., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Ayanian, J. Z. (2013). Health of Previously Uninsured

        Adults After Acquiring Medicare Coverage. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical

        Association, 298(24).

McWilliams, J. M., Zaslavsky, A. M., Meara, E., & Ayanian, J. Z. (2003). Impact of Medicare Coverage on

        Basic Clinical Services for Previously Uninsured Adults. JAMA, 290(6), 757­764.

        https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.290.6.757

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. (2015). Chapter 2: The next generation of Medicare

        beneficiaries.

Merrill, R. M., Brown, M. L., Potosky, A. L., Riley, G., Taplin, S. H., Barlow, W., & Fireman, B. H. (1999).

        Survival and Treatment for Colorectal Cancer Medicare Patients in Two Group/Staff Health


                                                      47
        Maintenance Organizations and the Fee-for-Service Setting. Medical Care Research and Review,

        56(2), 177­196. https://doi.org/10.1177/107755879905600204

Morrison, A. S. (1982). The Effects of Early Treatment, Lead Time and Length Bias on the Mortality

        Experienced by Cases Detected by Screening. International Journal of Epidemiology, 11(3), 261­

        267. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/11.3.261

Moyer, V. A., & U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2012). Screening for cervical cancer: U.S. Preventive

        Services Task Force recommendation statement. Annals of Internal Medicine, 156(12), 880­891,

        W312. https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-156-12-201206190-00424

Moyer, V. A., & U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2014). Screening for lung cancer: U.S. Preventive

        Services Task Force recommendation statement. Annals of Internal Medicine, 160(5), 330­338.

        https://doi.org/10.7326/M13-2771

Myerson, R. M., Lakdawalla, D., Colantonio, L. D., Safford, M., & Meltzer, D. (2018). Effects of Expanding

        Health Screening on Treatment - What Should We Expect? What Can We Learn? (Working Paper

        No. 24347). https://doi.org/10.3386/w24347

National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program. (2019). Cancer stat facts:

        Cancer of any site. Retrieved June 20, 2019, from SEER website:

        https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/all.html

Nelson, H. D., Cantor, A., Humphrey, L., Fu, R., Pappas, M., Daeges, M., & Griffin, J. (2016). Screening for

        Breast Cancer: A Systematic Review to Update the 2009 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force

        Recommendation. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK343819/

Nelson, H. D., Tyne, K., Naik, A., Bougatsos, C., Chan, B. K., Humphrey, L., & U.S. Preventive Services Task

        Force. (2009). Screening for breast cancer: An update for the U.S. Preventive Services Task

        Force. Annals of Internal Medicine, 151(10), 727­737, W237-242. https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-

        4819-151-10-200911170-00009


                                                     48
Niu, X., Roche, L. M., Pawlish, K. S., & Henry, K. A. (2013). Cancer survival disparities by health insurance

        status. Cancer Medicine, 2(3), 403­411. https://doi.org/10.1002/cam4.84

Oster, E., Shoulson, I., & Dorsey, E. R. (2013). Optimal Expectations and Limited Medical Testing:

        Evidence from Huntington Disease. American Economic Review, 103(2), 804­830.

        https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.2.804

PiconRuiz, M., MorataTarifa, C., ValleGoffin, J. J., Friedman, E. R., & Slingerland, J. M. (2017). Obesity

        and adverse breast cancer risk and outcome: Mechanistic insights and strategies for

        intervention. CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians, 67(5), 378­397.

        https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21405

Pignone, M., Saha, S., Hoerger, T., & Mandelblatt, J. (2002). Cost-effectiveness analyses of colorectal

        cancer screening: A systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Annals of

        Internal Medicine, 137(2), 96­104.

Pinkhasov, R. M., Wong, J., Kashanian, J., Lee, M., Samadi, D. B., Pinkhasov, M. M., & Shabsigh, R. (2010).

        Are men shortchanged on health? Perspective on health care utilization and health risk behavior

        in men and women in the United States. International Journal of Clinical Practice, 64(4), 475­

        487. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-1241.2009.02290.x

Pinsky, P. F. (2015). Principles of Cancer Screening. The Surgical Clinics of North America, 95(5), 953­966.

        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.suc.2015.05.009

Polsky, D., Doshi, J. A., Escarce, J., Manning, W., Paddock, S. M., Cen, L., & Rogowski, J. (2009). The

        Health Effects of Medicare for the Near-Elderly Uninsured. Health Services Research, 44(3), 926­

        945. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-6773.2009.00964.x

Polsky, D., Doshi, J. A., Manning, W. G., Paddock, S., Cen, L., Rogowski, J., & Escarce, J. J. (2010).

        Response to McWilliams Commentary: "Assessing the Health Effects of Medicare Coverage for




                                                      49
        Previously Uninsured Adults: A Matter of Life and Death?" Health Services Research, 45(5p1),

        1423­1429. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-6773.2010.01154.x

Potosky, A. L., Merrill, R. M., Riley, G. F., Taplin, S. H., Barlow, W., Fireman, B. H., & Lubitz, J. D. (1999).

        Prostate cancer treatment and ten-year survival among group/staff HMO and fee-for-service

        Medicare patients. Health Services Research, 34(2), 525­546.

Potosky, Arnold L., Merrill, R. M., Ballard-Barbash, R., Riley, G. F., Taplin, S. H., Barlow, W., & Fireman, B.

        H. (1997). Breast Cancer Survival and Treatment in Health Maintenance Organization and Fee-

        for-Service Settings. JNCI: Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 89(22), 1683­1691.

        https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/89.22.1683

Ramsey, S., Blough, D., Kirchhoff, A., Kreizenbeck, K., Fedorenko, C., Snell, K., ... Overstreet, K. (2013).

        Washington State Cancer Patients Found To Be At Greater Risk For Bankruptcy Than People

        Without A Cancer Diagnosis. Health Affairs, 32(6), 1143­1152.

        https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2012.1263

Renehan, A. G., Tyson, M., Egger, M., Heller, R. F., & Zwahlen, M. (2008). Body-mass index and incidence

        of cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. The

        Lancet, 371(9612), 569­578. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60269-X

Robbins, A. S., Han, X., Ward, E. M., Simard, E. P., Zheng, Z., & Jemal, A. (2015). Association Between the

        Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage Expansion and Cervical Cancer Stage and Treatment in

        Young Women. JAMA, 314(20), 2189­2191. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2015.10546

Roetzheim, R. G., Gonzalez, E. C., Ferrante, J. M., Pal, N., Van Durme, D. J., & Krischer, J. P. (2000). Effects

        of health insurance and race on breast carcinoma treatments and outcomes. Cancer, 89(11),

        2202­2213.




                                                        50
Roetzheim, R G, Pal, N., Gonzalez, E. C., Ferrante, J. M., Van Durme, D. J., & Krischer, J. P. (2000). Effects

         of health insurance and race on colorectal cancer treatments and outcomes. American Journal

         of Public Health, 90(11), 1746­1754.

Roetzheim, Richard G., Chirikos, T. N., Wells, K. J., McCarthy, E. P., Ngo, L. H., Li, D., ... Iezzoni, L. I. (2008).

         Managed Care and Cancer Outcomes for Medicare Beneficiaries with Disabilities. The American

         Journal of Managed Care, 14(5), 287­296.

Ruel, E., & Hauser, R. M. (2013). Explaining the Gender Wealth Gap. Demography, 50(4), 1155­1176.

         https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-012-0182-0

Sabik, L. M., & Bradley, C. J. (2016). The Impact of Near-Universal Insurance Coverage on Breast and

         Cervical Cancer Screening: Evidence from Massachusetts: Impact of insurance coverage on

         cancer screening. Health Economics, 25(4), 391­407. https://doi.org/10.1002/hec.3159

SEER. (2017). Characteristics of the SEER Population Compared with the Total United States Population.

         Retrieved November 30, 2018, from SEER website:

         https://seer.cancer.gov/registries/characteristics.html

Shwartz, M. (1980). Estimates of lead time and length bias in a breast cancer screening program. Cancer,

         46(4), 844­851. https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0142(19800815)46:4<844::AID-

         CNCR2820460434>3.0.CO;2-5

Sierminska, E. M., Frick, J. R., & Grabka, M. M. (2010). Examining the gender wealth gap. Oxford

         Economic Papers, 62(4), 669­690. https://doi.org/10.1093/oep/gpq007

Siu, A. L., & U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2016). Screening for Breast Cancer: U.S. Preventive

         Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Annals of Internal Medicine, 164(4), 279­296.

         https://doi.org/10.7326/M15-2886

Smith, B. D., Smith, G. L., Hurria, A., Hortobagyi, G. N., & Buchholz, T. A. (2009). Future of cancer

         incidence in the United States: Burdens upon an aging, changing nation. Journal of Clinical


                                                         51
        Oncology: Official Journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, 27(17), 2758­2765.

        https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2008.20.8983

Sommers, B. D. (2017). State Medicaid Expansions and Mortality, Revisited: A Cost-Benefit Analysis.

        American Journal of Health Economics, 3(3), 392­421. https://doi.org/10.1162/ajhe_a_00080

Sommers, B. D., Baicker, K., & Epstein, A. M. (2012). Mortality and Access to Care among Adults after

        State Medicaid Expansions. New England Journal of Medicine, 367(11), 1025­1034.

        https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1202099

Soni, A., Simon, K., Cawley, J., & Sabik, L. (2017). Effect of Medicaid Expansions of 2014 on Overall and

        Early-Stage Cancer Diagnoses. American Journal of Public Health, 108(2), 216­218.

        https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2017.304166

Springer, K. W., & Mouzon, D. M. (2011). "Macho Men" and Preventive Health Care: Implications for

        Older Men in Different Social Classes. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 52(2), 212­227.

        https://doi.org/10.1177/0022146510393972

The National Lung Screening Trial Research Team. (2011). Reduced Lung-Cancer Mortality with Low-

        Dose Computed Tomographic Screening. New England Journal of Medicine, 365(5), 395­409.

        https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1102873

US Preventive Services Task Force. (2018). USPSTF A and B Recommendations. Retrieved November 30,

        2018, from https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/uspstf-a-and-b-

        recommendations/

US Preventive Services Task Force, Bibbins-Domingo, K., Grossman, D. C., Curry, S. J., Davidson, K. W.,

        Epling, J. W., ... Siu, A. L. (2016). Screening for Colorectal Cancer: US Preventive Services Task

        Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA, 315(23), 2564­2575.

        https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.5989




                                                     52
Vaidya, V., Partha, G., & Karmakar, M. (2012). Gender differences in utilization of preventive care

        services in the United States. Journal of Women's Health (2002), 21(2), 140­145.

        https://doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2011.2876

Virnig, B. A., Baxter, N. N., Habermann, E. B., Feldman, R. D., & Bradley, C. J. (2009). A matter of race:

        Early-versus late-stage cancer diagnosis. Health Affairs (Project Hope), 28(1), 160­168.

        https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.28.1.160

Ward, E. M., Fedewa, S. A., Cokkinides, V., & Virgo, K. (2010). The association of insurance and stage at

        diagnosis among patients aged 55 to 74 years in the national cancer database. Cancer Journal

        (Sudbury, Mass.), 16(6), 614­621. https://doi.org/10.1097/PPO.0b013e3181ff2aec

White, M. C., Holman, D. M., Boehm, J. E., Peipins, L. A., Grossman, M., & Henley, S. J. (2014). Age and

        Cancer Risk. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 46(3 0 1), S7-15.

        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2013.10.029

Wilson, N. (2016). Antiretroviral therapy and demand for HIV testing: Evidence from Zambia. Economics

        and Human Biology, 21, 221­240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ehb.2016.02.003

Woolhandler, S., & Himmelstein, D. (2017). The Relationship of Health Insurance and Mortality: Is Lack

        of Insurance Deadly? Annals of Internal Medicine, 167(6), 424­431.

        https://doi.org/10.7326/M17-1403

Yabroff, K. R., Lamont, E. B., Mariotto, A., Warren, J. L., Topor, M., Meekins, A., & Brown, M. L. (2008).

        Cost of Care for Elderly Cancer Patients in the United States. JNCI: Journal of the National Cancer

        Institute, 100(9), 630­641. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djn103

Zheng, Z., Jemal, A., Han, X., Guy, G. P., Li, C., Davidoff, A. J., ... Yabroff, K. R. (2019). Medical financial

        hardship among cancer survivors in the United States. Cancer, 125(10), 1737­1747.

        https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.31913




                                                        53
                                           Appendix

Section A1: Tables and Figures

Table A1: Changes in cancer detection and mortality at age 65 per 100,000 population by

race and gender

A. All tumor locations

                                      Black                                   Non-Black
                          Women                 Men                     Women            Men
                    Age     RD at          Age   RD at             Age    RD at    Age    RD at
                    63-64   Age 65         63-64 Age 65            63-64  Age 65   63-64  Age 65
 Cancer Detection
 Total              725.1     77.28***     465.9      9.600        678.8   70.87***    297      34.15***

                              (28.21 to               (-34.91              (49.77 to            (18.14 to
                              126.3)                  to 54.11)            91.98)               50.16)
 Early-Stage        398.6     61.74***     142.8      5.054        419.6   46.80***    96.86    17.85***

                              (25.49 to               (-22.09              (31.06 to            (8.82 to
                              97.99)                  to 32.20)            62.53)               26.90)
 Late-Stage         310.7     13.58        299.4      15.34        245.1   22.65***    186.8    16.27***

                              (-16.66 to              (-18.00              (11.29 to            (4.13 to
                              43.81)                  to 48.68)             34.01)              28.41)


 Cancer Mortality   238.4     -20.29***    309.6      9.59         195.1   -3.32       208      0.38
                              (-31.74 to              (-6.65 to            (-11.14              (-7.90 to
                              -8.842)                 25.83)               to 4.51)             8.66)


B. By tumor site
                                      Black                                      Non-Black
                            Women                     Men               Women                  Men
                    Age       RD at Age       Age      RD at       Age    RD at        Age      RD at
                    63-64     65              63-64    Age 65      63-64 Age 65        63-64    Age 65
 Cancer Detection
 Total              725.1     77.28***        465.9    9.600       678.8   70.87***    297      34.15***

                              (28.21 to                (-34.91             (49.77 to            (18.14 to
                              126.3)                   to 54.11)           91.98)               50.16)
 Breast Cancer      450.6     49.22***                 N/A         460.2   51.21***             N/A



                                                 54
                               (12.55 to                                  (35.36 to
                               85.89)                                     67.06)
 Colorectal Cancer    110.9    16.18          149.8   4.662       64.73   11.47***    91.12    18.00***

                               (-3.239 to             (-22.05             (4.64 to             (9.62 to
                               35.60)                 to 31.38)           18.29)               26.39)
 Lung Cancer          163.6    12.05          309     4.601       153.9   6.927       202.6    15.97**

                               (-13.38 to             (-30.08             (-3.774              (2.37 to
                               37.47)                 to 39.28)           to 17.63)            29.57)


 Cancer Mortality
 Total                238.4    -20.29***      309.6   9.59        195.1   -3.32       208      0.38

                               (-31.74 to -           (-6.65 to           (-11.14              (-7.90 to
                               8.84)                  25.83)              to 4.51)             8.66)
 Breast Cancer        80.97    -6.77*                 N/A         57.39   1.63                 N/A
                               (-14.26 to                                 (-1.05 to
                               0.71)                                      4.30)
 Colorectal Cancer    46.01    -3.90          71.42   3.61        27.20   0.35        42.95    0.82
                               (-8.64 to              (-2.75 to           (-1.41 to             (-1.73 to
                               0.84)                  9.97)               2.11)                   3.37)
 Lung Cancer          111.5    -9.41*         237.1   4.67        110.5   -5.40       164.4    -0.50
                               (-18.88 to             (-10.04             (-12.14               (-8.06 to
                               0.0677)                to 19.37)           to 1.34)                7.06)


This table shows changes in cancer detection and mortality at age 65. The rows include findings

from models that only use participants in the gender and race group in the column title. Estimated

regression discontinuities at age 65 adjust for background trends in aging and over time, and

models of cancer detection additional adjust for time-invariant state-level characteristics. *p<0.1,

**p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                 55
Figure A1: Cancer detection per 100,000 population among patients just above and below

age 65, in the United States over 2001-2015: SEER data


A. Breast cancer

                                                                                  Female
                                   420
 Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People
   340    360      380
                     320    400




                                                       59        61        63        65         67             69                                             71
                                                                                    Age



B. Colorectal cancer

                                                                           Female                                                                                        Male
                                  140




                                                                                                                               140
                                                 120




                                                                                                                                              120
               Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People




                                                                                                            Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People
                                     100




                                                                                                                                  100
                         80




                                                                                                                      80
             60




                                                                                                          60
                                  40




                                                                                                                               40




                                                       59   61        63     65     67     69        71                                             59         61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                                            Age                                                                                          Age




                                                                                                                                                         56
C. Lung cancer

                                                        Female                                                                            Male
                      300




                                                                                                   300
   Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People




                                                                                Cancer Detection Per 100,000 People
                                250




                                                                                                             250
                   200




                                                                                                200
     150




                                                                                  150
                      100




                                                                                                   100

                                         59   61   63     65     67   69   71                                         59        61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                         Age                                                                              Age




This graph shows trends in detection of cancers for our tumor sites of interest just above and below

age 65, the age of near-universal health insurance coverage via Medicare. The x-axis is age at

diagnosis; and the y-axis is cancers detected per 100,000 population. The figure includes quadratic

regression lines, estimated separately below vs. above age 65.




                                                                                                                           57
Figure A2: Population-based cancer mortality in the United States 2001-2015: Vital

statistics data

A. Breast Cancer


                                                                          Female
                                            80
        Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People
                 60             70
                                50




                                                 59        61        63      65        67        69        71
                                                                            Age




B. Colorectal Cancer

                                                                      Female                                                                                         Male
                      80




                                                                                                                                   80
   Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People




                                                                                                                Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People
                              60




                                                                                                                                           60
        40




                                                                                                                     40
                      20




                                                                                                                                   20




                                           59         61        63         65     67        69        71                                              59   61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                                          Age                                                                                        Age




                                                                                                                                                      58
C. Lung Cancer

                                                        Female                                                                            Male




                                                                                                     350
                      200




                                                                                                                     300
   Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People




                                                                                  Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People
                            150




                                                                                          200            250
      100




                                                                                150                  100
                      50




                                         59   61   63     65     67   69   71                                              59   61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                         Age                                                                              Age




This graph shows trends in population-level cancer mortality from our tumor sites of interest just

above and below age 65, the age of near-universal health insurance coverage via Medicare. The x-

axis is age; and the y-axis is cancer mortality per 100,000 population. The figure includes quadratic

regression lines, estimated separately below vs. above age 65.




                                                                                                                           59
Figure A3: Cancer detection per 100,000 population among patients just above and below

age 65, in the United States over 2001-2015: SEER data


A. Total




B. Early stage




                                           60
C. Late stage




This graph shows trends in detection of cancers for our tumor sites of interest just above and

below age 65, the age of near-universal health insurance coverage via Medicare, by sex and

race. The x-axis is age at diagnosis; and the y-axis is cancers detected per 100,000 population.

The figure includes quadratic regression lines, estimated separately below vs. above age 65.




                                                61
Figure A4: Population-based cancer mortality in the United States 2001-2015: Vital

statistics data
  Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People




                                                                               Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People
                                                    Black Women                                                                     Black Men
      150 200 250 300 350




                                                                                   200    300     400    500
                                        59   61    63    65   67    69   71                                          59   61   63       65      67   69   71
                                                        Age                                                                            Age
  Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People




                                                                               Cancer Mortality Per 100,000 People
                                                  Non-Black Women                                                              Non-Black Men
       150 200 250 300 350




                                                                                   100    200      300    400




                                        59   61    63    65   67    69   71                                          59   61   63       65      67   69   71
                                                        Age                                                                            Age




This graph shows trends in population-level cancer mortality from our tumor sites of interest just

above and below age 65, the age of near-universal health insurance coverage via Medicare, by sex

and race. The x-axis is age; and the y-axis is cancer mortality per 100,000 population. The figure

includes quadratic regression lines, estimated separately below vs. above age 65.




                                                                          62
Figure A3: Participant characteristics just above and below age 65, in the United States over

2001-2015: BRFSS data



                                   Currently Working (%)                                  Retired (%)




                                                                        80
    10 20 30 40 50 60
      Currently Working (%)




                                                                           60
                                                                  Retired (%)
                                                                   40   20
                              59   61   63    65   67   69   71                 59   61   63    65   67   69   71
                                             Age                                               Age


                                   College Education (%)                25                Veteran (%)
    52 54 56 58 60
    College Education (%)




                                                                  Veteran (%)
                                                                   15   1020




                              59   61   63    65   67   69   71                 59   61   63    65   67   69   71
                                             Age                                               Age



This graph shows trends in key economic and demographic variables just above and below age 65,

the age of near-universal health insurance coverage via Medicare. The x-axis is age; and the y-axis

is percentage of people with each characteristic of interest. The figure includes quadratic

regression lines, estimated separately below vs. above age 65. Analyses used sample weights to

reflect the complex sampling design of the BRFSS data.




                                                                                63
Table A2: Balance tests for social and economic characteristics at age 65, in the United States

2001-2015: BRFSS data


                                   Age 63-64    RD at Age 65

 Fraction retired                  0.43         0.012**
                                                (0.0003 to 0.025)
 Fraction currently working        0.38         0.004
                                                (-0.007 to 0.014)
 Fraction who are veterans         0.19         -.010
                                                (-.0223 to .003)
 Fraction with college education   0.58         0.004
                                                (-0.008 to 0.016)
This table shows the results of regression discontinuity analyses of economic background factors

at age 65 using the BRFSS data. Estimated regression discontinuities at age 65 adjusted for

background trends in aging and over time, time-invariant confounders by state, and patient gender

and race. Models incorporated sample weights to account for the complex sampling design of the

BRFSS data. 95% confidence intervals calculated using robust standard errors are in parentheses.

*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                               64
Table A3: Additional sensitivity analyses

A. Cancer detection and mortality data

                        Cancer detection per 100,000            Cancer mortality
                           population per year                    per 100,000
                         Total            Early-stage          population per year
 Main               50.05***            32.91***               -4.13
 Specification      (30.88 to 69.22)    (21.47 to 44.35)       (-14.31 to 6.05)

 Change Bandwidth
 Larger         45.88***                29.19***               -2.76
 Bandwidth (8) (30.05 to 61.70)         (19.75 to 38.63)       (-11.59 to 6.06)
 Smaller            48.85***            25.01***               -1.90
 Bandwidth (4)      (21.02 to 76.67)    (10.44 to 39.58)       (-16.22 to 12.42)

 Change Order of Polynomial
 Higher Order    47.32**                27.74**                -4.20
 (3)             (10.99 to 83.64)       (6.289 to 49.19)       (-23.64 to 15.24)
 Lower Order        35.62***            24.61***               -0.40
 (1)                (24.53 to 46.71)    (18.01 to 31.21)       (-6.50 to 5.69)

 Use Less-          18.31**             12.87**                -5.36**
 Parametric         (7.81 to 28.81)     (5.48 to 20.26)        (-2.67 to -8.04)
 Method


B. Cancer mortality data by race and sex

                                            Black                              Non-Black
                                 Women                   Men              Women          Men
 Main Specification         -20.29***           9.59                 -3.32               0.38
                            (-31.74 to -8.84)   (-6.647 to 25.83)    (-11.14 to 4.51)    (-7.90 to 8.66)

 Larger Bandwidth (8)       -14.60***           6.86                 -3.79               3.06
                            (-24.54 to -4.65)   (-7.15 to 20.87)     (-11.09 to 3.51)    (-4.58 to 10.69)
 Smaller Bandwidth (4)      -22.12***           13.22                -3.59               7.16
                            (-37.02 to -7.21)   (-9.47 to 35.90)     (-14.22 to 7.03)    (-3.22 to 17.53)
 Higher Order (3)           -28.10**            10.80                -4.63               7.41
                            (-49.86 to -6.34)   (-21.51 to 43.10)    (-19.89 to 10.62)   (-7.61 to 22.43)
 Lower Order (1)            -4.59               2.70                 -1.46               1.97
                            (-12.17 to 2.98)    (-8.29 to 13.68)     (-5.92 to 3.00)     (-3.01 to 6.95)
 Use Less-Parametric        -2.94**             -4.72**              -4.82**             -8.94**
 Method

                                                    65
                          (-5.56 to -0.37)   (-8.73 to -0.72)   (-6.08 to -3.57)   (-10.61 to -7.27)


This table shows changes in cancer detection and mortality at age 65 under various model

specifications, in the pooled data as well as by race and sex. The first row includes findings from

the main specification, which used bandwidth of 6 and adjusts for trends in age using a quadratic

polynomial. In the subsequent rows, we change the bandwidth to 4 and 8 or adjust for aging effects

using a more-restrictive linear polynomial or less-restrictive cubic polynomial. In the final row,

we use a less-parametric modeling approach, implementing a quadratic local polynomial estimator

with robust bias-corrected confidence intervals under second-order Holder smoothness class using

the LPPHonest function from the RDHonest package in R. This model used a triangular kernel to

place a higher weight on observations closer to age 65. Exact p-values are not available in the

RDHonest package, and we therefore use stars to denote significance at the 0.05 level only. In

addition to the aging trends noted above, the models adjusted for year and patient gender and race,

and the cancer detection models adjusted for state fixed effects. 95% confidence intervals are in

parentheses. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                66
Figure A4. Health insurance coverage and access to care just below and above age 65, in the

United States over 2001-2015: BRFSS data


A. Any health insurance coverage



                                                    Female                                                                      Male




                                                                                             98
                   98




                                                                                                          96
                                96
  Health Insurance Coverage (%)




                                                                            Health Insurance Coverage (%)
                                                                                              94
                    94




                                                                                   92
        92




                                                                                             90
                   90
                   88




                                                                                             88




                                     59   61   63     65     67   69   71                                      59   61    63     65    67    69    71
                                                     Age                                                                        Age




B. Reported having a personal doctor



                                                    Female                                                                      Male
                    96




                                                                                                    96
                    94




                                                                                                    94
  Has a Personal Doctor (%)




                                                                                  Has a Personal Doctor (%)
                   92




                                                                                                   92
       90




                                                                                       90
                    88




                                                                                                    88
                    86




                                                                                                    86




                                     59   61   63      65    67   69   71                                      59    61    63     65    67    69    71
                                                      Age                                                                        Age




                                                                                                                    67
C. Had a routine check-up during the past year


                                                  Female                                                               Male




                                                                                      90
              90




                                                                                             85
                     85




                                                                          Had a Check-Up (%)
  Had a Check-Up (%)




                                                                          80
  80




                                                                                      75
              75




                                   59   61   63     65     67   69   71                                59    61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                   Age                                                                 Age




D. Skipped health care due to cost during the past year



                                                  Female                                                               Male
                                                                                        14
                    14




                                                                                        12
                    12




                                                                           Skip Care Due to Cost (%)
       Skip Care Due to Cost (%)




                                                                                             10
                         10




                                                                                 8
             8




                                                                                        6
                    6




                                                                                        4
                    4




                                   59   61   63      65    67   69   71                                59    61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                    Age                                                                Age




                                                                                                        68
E. Breast cancer screening during the past year


                                                                           Female
                  7500
  Breast Cancer Screening (%)
       7300          7400
                  7200




                                                59        61        63        65         67            69                                     71
                                                                             Age




F. Colorectal cancer screening during the past year



                                                                    Female                                                                               Male
                             34




                                                                                                                     34
                                           32




                                                                                                                                   32
           Colorectal Cancer Screening (%)




                                                                                                   Colorectal Cancer Screening (%)
                            30




                                                                                                                    30
             28




                                                                                                     28
                             26




                                                                                                                     26




                                                59   61        63     65     67     69        71                                        59     61   63    65    67   69   71
                                                                     Age                                                                                 Age




This graph shows trends in population-level health insurance coverage, access to care, and cancer

screening just above and below age 65, the age of near-universal access to Medicare. The x-axis




                                                                                                                                         69
is age and the y-axis is the percentage of people with the characteristic listed on the axis. The figure

includes quadratic regression lines, estimated separately below vs. above age 65.




                                                  70
Section A2. Calculation of cost and benefit of cancer treatment paid by Medicare at age 65

for our tumor sites of interest


We calculated expenditure per cancer death averted by dividing the total Medicare expenditures

associated with a breast, colorectal, and lung cancer diagnosis for 65-year-old patients by the

number of breast, colorectal, and lung cancer deaths averted among 65-year-old patients. More

precisely, we compared benefits incurred at age 65 (i.e., 9 cancer deaths avoided per 100,000

women at age 65, and no change among men) with related Medicare expenditures incurred at age

65 (i.e., Medicare expenditures associated with a cancer diagnosis for men and women with breast,

colorectal, or lung cancer at age 65). We assumed that people diagnosed with breast, colorectal,

and lung cancer at ages 60-64 who subsequently survived to age 65 would have their ongoing

treatment costs at age 65 paid by Medicare.


To calculate the total costs to Medicare of covering cancer patients for care related to our tumor

sites of interest, we used the following procedure. First, we calculated the number of people

nationwide who become diagnosed with breast, colorectal, or lung cancer for each single year of

age through age 65, by gender, by multiplying the detection rates in SEER by the total population

nationwide for that age and gender. Second, we calculated the proportion of patients with each

type of cancer, age, and gender who survive to age 65 and therefore become treated by Medicare

at age 65. Third, we extracted the expected expenditures for Medicare associated with treating a

patient with each type of cancer for 12 months, net of the expenditures for otherwise similar

Medicare patients without that type of cancer, using estimates from the literature (Yabroff et al.,

2008). We assumed that patients diagnosed at age 64 or 65 had incurred the expected expenditures

Yabroff et al estimated for cancer patients in their first 12 months of treatment, whereas patients

diagnosed at age 60 through 63 incurred the annual expected expenditures Yabroff et al estimated

                                                71
for cancer patients after their first year of treatment. We assumed that patients whose cancer was

diagnosed prior to age 60 and who survived through age 60 were in remission and therefore

incurred no additional expenditures beyond those expenditures that would be incurred by patients

without cancer; this assumption does not substantially change our findings.


To obtain the total expenditures related to cancer care to Medicare for our tumor sites of interest,

we multiplied these three quantities together. In other words, we multiplied the number of patients

diagnosed at each age, gender and tumor site, by the probability that a patient diagnosed with

cancer of that tumor site at that age and gender will survive until age 65, by the Medicare

expenditures associated with treating their tumor at age 65 if they survive. Naturally, for patients

diagnosed with cancer at age 65, the proportion surviving to age 65 was 1.


We observed a decline in cancer mortality of 9 per 100,000 women at age 65, implying 1,887

cancer deaths at age 65 avoided over our time period of interest for our tumor sites of interest given

the size of the population of women at age 65 nationwide during 2001-2015. We estimated that

Medicare spent $9.5 billion treating cancer for our conditions of interest, given the size of the

population of women and men aged 60-65 nationwide during 2001-2015 and the cancer diagnosis

and survival rates at each of those ages. Dividing $9.5 billion spent by 1,887 cancer deaths averted

yields an estimated expenditure of $5 million per cancer death averted at age 65.




                                                 72
