                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           ON HER OWN ACCOUNT:
               HOW STRENGTHENING WOMEN'S FINANCIAL CONTROL
                  AFFECTS LABOR SUPPLY AND GENDER NORMS

                                        Erica M. Field
                                        Rohini Pande
                                        Natalia Rigol
                                      Simone G. Schaner
                                     Charity Troyer Moore

                                      Working Paper 26294
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26294


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




This research was supported by IZA's Growth and Labour Markets in Low Income Countries
Programme, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, DFID, Harvard's Center for Population and
Development Studies, the JPAL Governance Initiative, and Innovations for Poverty Action's
Financial Services for the Poor Initiative. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Erica M. Field, Rohini Pande, Natalia Rigol, Simone G. Schaner, and Charity Troyer
Moore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On Her Own Account: How Strengthening Women's Financial Control Affects Labor Supply
and Gender Norms
Erica M. Field, Rohini Pande, Natalia Rigol, Simone G. Schaner, and Charity Troyer Moore
NBER Working Paper No. 26294
September 2019
JEL No. J16,J22,O1

                                           ABSTRACT
Can greater control over earned income incentivize women to work and influence gender norms?
In collaboration with Indian government partners, we provided rural women with individual bank
accounts and randomly varied whether their wages from a public workfare program were directly
deposited into these accounts or into the male household head's account (the status quo). Women
in a random subset of villages were also trained on account use. In the short run, relative to
women just offered bank accounts, those who also received direct deposit and training increased
their labor supply in the public and private sectors. In the long run, gender norms liberalized:
women who received direct deposit and training became more accepting of female work, and
their husbands perceived fewer social costs to having a wife who works. These effects were
concentrated in households with otherwise lower levels of, and stronger norms against, female
work. Women in these households also worked more in the long run and became more
empowered. These patterns are consistent with models of household decision-making in which
increases in bargaining power from greater control over income interact with, and influence,
gender norms.

Erica M. Field                                    Simone G. Schaner
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics and
Duke University                                   Center for Economic and Social Research
Social Sciences Building                          University of Southern California
Box 90097                                         635 Downey Way
Durham, NC 27708                                  Los Angeles, CA 90089
and CEPR                                          and NBER
and also NBER                                     schaner@usc.edu
emf23@duke.edu
                                                  Charity Troyer Moore
Rohini Pande                                      Director for South Asia Economics Research
Department of Economics                           MacMillan Center
Yale University                                   Yale University
27 Hillhouse Avenue                               34 Hillhouse Ave
New Haven, CT 06520                               New Haven, CT 06520
and CEPR                                          charity.moore@yale.edu
and also NBER
rohini.pande@yale.edu

Natalia Rigol
Harvard Business School
Rock Center for Entrepreneurship, 215
60 N Harvard street
Boston, MA 02168
nrigol@hbs.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/115
1       Introduction
Female labor force participation remains low and stagnant in many emerging economies,
with India a particularly stark example. Despite robust economic growth, the female labor
force participation (FLFP) rate has declined from 37 percent in 1990 to 28 percent in 2015,
making Indian women some of the least employed in the world (ILO, 2015). Yet, nearly
one third of Indian housewives express an interest in working (Fletcher et al., 2017). Simply
bringing these women into the labor force would increase Indian FLFP by nearly 80 percent.1
What stops so many women who want to work from joining the labor force?
    One possibility is gender norms around work roles ­ in particular, the idea that a wife
who works outside the home is a source of social stigma or shame for her husband, who is
expected to earn enough to support his family (Boudet et al., 2012; Bernhardt et al., 2018).
When internalized by women, such norms can directly lower their utility of working (see e.g.
Akerlof and Kranton (2000)). And, when internalized by men, norms may reduce women's
work through intra-household channels (Bertrand et al., 2015). In this paper we ask whether
policies that strengthen women's control over their earnings increase their ability to overcome
these norms and work outside the home, and, in turn, shift norms around women's work.
    To this end, we leverage a large-scale randomized controlled trial in 197 village clusters,
known as gram panchayats (GPs), in the Northern part of Madhya Pradesh (MP)­an area
with restrictive gender norms.2 Our study was conducted in partnership with state and bank
authorities and focused on India's federal workfare program, the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), which provided rural households with
a given amount of work per annum at a fixed wage.
    The program status quo was for workers' wages to be deposited into a bank account
owned by the male household head. In a random subset of GPs in our study area, banks
made a push to open individual accounts for women. In half of these GPs, we enabled
direct deposit of MGNREGS wages in these accounts. Finally, we cross-randomized a short
training program that gave women basic instructions for using last-mile banking providers.3
Overall, our interventions disrupted the status quo by randomly varying whether women's

    1
      Drawing women into the labor force may address other gender inequities. Female employment has been
shown to delay marriage, increase female work aspirations, improve child health, and reduce the male:female
sex ratio (Qian, 2008; Atkin, 2009; Jensen, 2012; Heath and Mobarak, 2015). In the United States, rapid
growth in female labor force participation preceded important changes in norms regarding gender roles in
both the economy and the household (Goldin, 2006).
    2
      MP is the sixth largest and eighth poorest of India's 29 states, with adult male and female rural labor
force participation rates of 84 percent and 29 percent (close to the national averages) (RBI, 2016). GPs are
the lowest level of government in India, and typically comprise of 2-5 villages in MP.
    3
      "Last-mile" banking is defined as access to a bank kiosk (termed customer service point, or CSP) within
5 kilometers of home.

                                                     1
wages were directly deposited into their own bank accounts, giving them greater control over
earnings, or deposited in their husbands' accounts as usual.
    To isolate the effect of increasing women's control of own income while holding finan-
cial inclusion constant, we compare outcomes for women who only received bank accounts
("accounts only") to those who additionally received direct deposit of MGNREGS wages and
bank account training ("direct deposit and training").4 Using a combination of administrative
data and household surveys, we obtain three sets of results.
    First, adding direct deposit and training to bank account provision led to sizeable short-
and long-run gains in female financial inclusion. Three years after the intervention we observe
0.13 and 0.19 standard deviation unit increases in an index of account use and an index of
banking autonomy, respectively. The former focuses on a woman's account activity while the
latter captures whether a woman goes to the bank on her own and is comfortable transacting
independently. The gains in autonomy are particularly notable, given the limits on women's
mobility and agency in our setting.
    Second, direct deposit and training increased women's labor supply and led to associated
empowerment gains among a subset of women. One year after implementing the interven-
tions, treated women scored 0.16 standard deviation units higher on an index of labor market
engagement. This reflects higher rates of MGNREGS and private sector work. Treatment
effects are larger (at 0.21 standard deviation units) among women who were least attached
to the labor market, proxied by never having worked for MGNREGS, at baseline. We refer
to these women as "socially constrained" to reflect that they are less likely to work, less
empowered, and their husbands are more likely to subscribe to norms against female work.
Three years later, socially constrained women continued to show a 0.19 standard deviation
units increase in the labor supply index. Alongside, they reported short- and long-run gains
in socioeconomic empowerment, which included increased economic agency over purchases
and, in the long run, greater mobility. After three years, their empowerment score was in-
creased by 0.14 standard deviation units, effectively closing the empowerment gap between
constrained and unconstrained women.
    Finally, gender norms became more progressive in the longer run, though with differences
across genders in terms of which norms liberalize. Using a series of attitudinal and vignette-
based measures, we separately measured actual and perceived norms. Actual gender norms
capture average personal beliefs about women and work. Perceived norms reflect individual
perceptions of community members' beliefs about women and work. Three years after the
intervention, the stated beliefs (actual norms) of direct deposit and training women were more

   4
    Supplementary analysis suggests that both treatment components­training and direct deposit facilities­
mattered, but we are underpowered to separately identify contributions of the two components.

                                                    2
progressive than women in accounts-only areas, with an actual norms index 0.11 standard
deviation units higher than other women. Women's perceived norms showed some positive
change: on average, they reported that the community is more accepting of working women.
In contrast, while their husbands' actual norms remained unchanged, men's perceived norms
significantly liberalized, with greater perceived acceptance of working women's husbands,
suggesting that women may in part be held back from working by men's misperceptions of
the stigma they would suffer. Consistent with our other results, norms shifts are concentrated
among socially constrained women.
    The labor impacts of our intervention are inconsistent with the predictions of a neoclas-
sical model of labor supply with unitary decision making. Since direct deposit and training
had no impact on market wages or account ownership, this model predicts that household
labor supply should have been unaffected.5 If we instead consider the framework of collective
household bargaining, our intervention can be described as increasing a woman's bargaining
power within the household. Greater bargaining power should, however, lower rather than
raise a woman's labor supply via the associated income effect. The income effect associated
with greater bargaining power for women is, for instance, cited as an explanation for the
reduction in women's work associated with sex ratio changes (Angrist, 2002), improved al-
imony rights (Rangel, 2006) and divorce laws friendlier to women (Chiappori et al., 2002;
Stevenson, 2008).
    Instead, our findings are consistent with collective models in which bargaining power gains
from improving a woman's ability to control her labor income interact with, and influence,
gender norms within the household. We build on Akerlof and Kranton (2000), who propose
a model in which individuals' sense of "identity" dictates utility changes based on whether
actions align or clash with identity norms. In our context, female work may violate identity
norms of both women, who are expected to be housewives, and men, who are expected to be
breadwinners (Bertrand et al., 2015). Increasing the bargaining power of a woman who does
not desire work because it violates her own identity norms will not encourage her to enter the
labor market. However, if normative costs internalized by men are binding, increasing female
bargaining power may draw some women into the labor market who previously stayed at
home to respect their husbands' wishes. Direct deposit and training may have also increased
women's utility from work, either by improving their ability to control their own income
(see, e.g., the non-cooperative model in Heath and Tan (2015)). Importantly, our framework
predicts that if normative barriers are binding, labor supply impacts should be largest on
the extensive margin ­ that is, among women least attached to the labor market at baseline
­ , which is what we find in practice.
   5
       We find no evidence that the direct deposit and training treatment eased savings constraints.

                                                      3
    Our study sheds light on the link between economic policy, female labor force participa-
tion, and norms. To date, much of the work on FLFP norms in economics has focused on
describing norms, their transmission, and their consequences.6 A smaller literature studies
the impact of interventions that explicitly attempt to change actual or perceived norms.7
Here, perceived norms are typically thought to be easier to change than actual norms, which
are often tied to deep-seated cultural beliefs (Tankard and Paluck, 2016). We demonstrate
that large-scale policies that alter behavioral incentives, but do not explicitly target norms,
can precipitate normative shifts over a relatively short time horizon.
    Our study also speaks to a body of work that evaluates design modifications for social
protection programs. Existing research largely focuses on the efficiency of program delivery
(e.g. Muralidharan et al. (2016); Aker et al. (2016); Banerjee et al. (2016); Bachas et al.
(2016) examines impacts on financial inclusion). Our contribution is to demonstrate how
gender targeting can impact both program outcomes (e.g. work days provided through
MGNREGS) and also have indirect effects on broader economic outcomes that have the
potential to outlive the program (e.g. private-sector work, empowerment, and gender norms).
    A final link is to a body of literature showing how conditional cash transfer programs
that target women can increase female bargaining power (Almås et al., 2018; Bobonis, 2009,
2011; Attanasio and Lechene, 2014). To the best of our knowledge, none find increases in
female labor force participation, possibly because the income transfers are sizable enough to
reduce labor supply (Skoufias et al., 2013; Hasan, 2010). In contrast, other work finds that
productive asset transfers (coupled with additional support) can increase the labor supply
of women in very poor households across a range of country contexts (Bandiera et al., 2017;
Banerjee et al., 2015; Bedoya et al., 2019). None of these studies ask whether the programs
alter norms limiting women's work, however.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes gender norms, work oppor-
tunities, and MGNREGS in our study context, followed by a description of our experimental
design. Section 3 lays out a conceptual framework for evaluating treatment effects and our
empirical strategy. In Section 4 we discuss treatment impacts on financial agency, women's
work and empowerment. In Section 5 we evaluate the longer-run impacts on gender norms
and Section 6 concludes.




   6
    See, e.g. Fernandez et al. 2004; Fernandez and Fogli 2009; Alesina et al. 2013; Bertrand et al. 2015.
   7
    See Bursztyn et al. (2018) on FLFP norms, Dhar et al. (2018) on gender norms, and Green et al. (2019)
on norms related to gender-based violence.

                                                   4
2       Experimental Context and Design

2.1     Rural Work Opportunities in India
Broadly, rural less-educated Indians have two work options: private-sector work (both self-
employment and wage labor) and MGNREGS work. In our setting, self-employment consists
of individuals working on their land or engaging in animal husbandry.8 The most common
off-farm private-sector employment for both genders is seasonal casual wage labor for a fixed
daily or weekly wage, paid in cash. This work typically occurs on others' land or construction
sites and almost always pays more per day than MGNREGS work.
    The public workfare program, MGNREGS, entitles rural households to up to 100 days of
work per year. On paper, the program is "demand-based", in that individuals are supposed to
place work requests with their local leader, who is obligated to arrange work opportunities.
On the ground, the system is typically supply-driven: local leaders schedule work projects
with some notion of worker demand (e.g. more projects occur in lean seasons), but not
all households receive the opportunity to work (Dutta et al., 2012), and the 100 day cap is
rarely binding.9 Nevertheless, MGNREGS is one of the largest household-level redistribution
programs in India and, indeed, the world (Subbarao et al., 2012).
    MGNREGS mandates gender wage parity and provides work inside rural communities, an
attractive proposition for mobility-constrained women. Despite this, its payment architecture
runs the risk of discouraging female workers. In 2008, the Government of India directed states
to transition from cash to electronic payment of MGNREGS wages into beneficiary-owned
bank accounts. The initial status quo was to deposit wages for all working members of a
household into a single account, almost always owned by the male head of household.
    In late 2012, the Minister of Rural Development announced that a woman's MGNREGS
wages should be deposited into her individual bank account (Chatterji, 2016; UNWOMEN,
2012). Appendix Figure B3 graphs the annual share of female MGNREGS workers whose
wages are directly deposited into their individual account. For reference, we graph the
national average, MP as a whole, and our study districts. It is clear that MP, and our study
areas in particular, have been slow adopters of the policy, though the rate of individual
payment has picked up since FY 2015-16.



    8
      Small businesses are rare: just four percent of women and seven percent of men reported any business
activity in the year before our long-run survey.
    9
      The fraction of households working less than 100 days in MGNREGS administrative data (conditional
on working at all) in our study area ranges from 80 percent to 96 percent between 2013 and 2017. We also
observe households working more than 100 days, with limited bunching at 100 days.

                                                    5
2.2     Gender Norms Regarding Work and Mobility
Aside from payment architecture, a key constraint on Indian women's agency remains gender
norms, especially when it comes to engaging with actors external to the household. The
nationally representative 2011-2012 India Human Development Survey (IHDS) found that
52 percent of adult women stated that their husband has the most say as to whether the
woman works. During our study we tracked women in a randomly selected set of villages
where we undertook no interventions (henceforth the control group). Data from our long-run
survey suggests that our study sample is even more conservative: 70 percent of control group
women stated their husband was the primary decision-maker in their work, and just half of
women had gone to the local market alone in the past year.
    That said, there is substantial heterogeneity in actual and perceived gender norms. Figure
1, which graphs the distribution of actual and perceived gender norms across communities
(e.g. GPs) for the control group, demonstrates this. Panel A plots actual norms, specifically
the GP-wise distribution of the share of men (gray bars) and women (white bars) who agree
with the statement "women cannot go out to work". In the average GP, 23 percent of women
and 34 percent of men agree with this statement, though there is substantial variation in
average responses across communities. As norms are often maintained within caste and
subcaste groups (Srinivas, 1995; Eswaran et al., 2013), this variation likely reflects­at least
in part­variation in the caste mix across GPs.
    Panel B plots perceived norms. We asked women what fraction of people in their com-
munity would speak badly about a woman who works; we asked men what fraction of people
would think a husband is a bad provider if his wife worked.10 Average perceived costs are
non-trivial and higher for men: while women anticipated social sanctions from 39 percent of
their neighbors, men anticipated social sanctions from 56 percent of their neighbors. Given
the substantial role that men play in deciding whether their wives work, perceived norms
among men are likely to be important in this setting.


2.3      Experimental Design
At the outset of our study, MP was in the midst of a state-wide push to ensure that all
citizens had access to a "last-mile" bank customer service point (CSP). In our study areas,
bank accounts could only be accessed at a CSP with an authenticated fingerprint.
    While the banking drive coupled with the national directive to transition MGNREGS to

  10
     To simplify the question for respondents, the survey asked them to report a number out of 10. We then
convert this number to a fraction. Throughout, we limit attention to control group communities with at
least 20 male and female surveys.

                                                    6
individual direct deposits theoretically enabled women to have MGNREGS wages directly
deposited into private, easy-to-access, secure accounts, officials were slow to target women.
Thus, when we started the study in November 2013, we had wide scope to experimentally
vary women's access to individual bank accounts and whether those accounts were set up to
receive direct deposits of MGNREGS wages. In our setting, enabling direct deposit facilities
meant replacing the previous account number attached to a worker's name in the MGNREGS
system with a new account number.

A. Sample

We purposely chose a cluster of four northern MP districts marked by severe gender in-
equities: sex ratios in these districts range from 0.84 to 0.90 females to every male (India
Census, 2011) and, according to the 2015-2016 Indian DHS survey, just 36 percent of women
report being able to travel outside the village alone (compared to a national average of 48
percent).11 Appendix Figure B1 provides a timeline of experimental activities. First, we
identified all GPs with functional CSPs in the study districts. We randomly assigned these
199 GPs to one of three groups: 66 GPs formed the control group, 68 GPs were to receive
bank accounts for eligible women, and 65 GPs were to receive bank accounts and direct
deposit of MGNREGS wage into their new accounts.12
    Between November 2013 and January 2014, we conducted a baseline census of 14,088
households listed as having worked for MGNREGS in the past year. A married couple was
eligible if at least one household member reported having ever worked for MGNREGS and
the wife did not have an individual bank account.13 We identified 5,851 eligible couples and
two GPs without any eligible couples. These two GPs (both assigned to the control group)
were dropped from our sample, leaving us with 197 GPs.

B. Treatments

Bank Accounts. We individually informed eligible women in treatment GPs that they
could open a bank account at their local CSP, free of charge, during an upcoming account
opening drive. On the day of the drive, our team returned to the household to inform the
  11
       In drawing the sample frame, we first ranked districts by their sex ratio and literacy gender gap, and
then chose the poorly performing districts of Gwalior, Morena, Sheopur, and Shivpuri.
    12
       GP randomization was stratified by whether, at baseline, the GP had: below/above median number of
households with joint bank accounts linked to MGNREGS direct deposit, below/above median percentage
of individual MGNREGS accounts, and whether the GP was located in Sheopur district. All randomization
was done by computer, in Stata.
    13
       More specifically, since our baseline census sample was drawn from MGNREGS administrative records,
eligibility required positive MGNREGS work history both according to programmatic administrative data
and the household's census report.

                                                     7
woman that she could visit the CSP with her documents (proof of address and a passport-
sized photo) to open an account. The study team subsequently facilitated the account
opening process at the CSP.

Direct Deposit. In the 65 GPs selected to receive the direct deposit treatment, our team
submitted a request to enter each woman's newly-opened individual bank account into the
MGNREGS administrative system­meaning her wages would be directed into her new ac-
count rather than a household account. Women provided consent to initiate this process and
were informed of its implications.14

Accounts Training. Reserve Bank of India regulatory guidelines required banks to con-
duct new customer information sessions designed to build trust in formal banking services
and explain how to utilize CSP services, including depositing and withdrawing money and
receiving government benefits (RBI, 2016). However, these sessions were rarely conducted,
and our early qualitative work found that many women had a poor understanding of how
to use their new accounts. We therefore supplemented our design with a customer training
session inspired by the Reserve Bank of India curriculum.
    In GPs selected for training, following the bank account opening camps, eligible women
were invited to participate in a group-based information session about the local CSP and their
bank account. The meetings typically lasted two hours. During the sessions, a facilitator
used colored flashcards to tell the story of a fictional woman and her family and how she came
to use a CSP account. The aim was to orient women to their local kiosk and provide basic
information such as what an account could be used for (including saving and receiving benefit
transfers) and why money was safe when kept at the CSP. The sessions also emphasized the
time and cost savings of transacting at the CSP.
    The training was randomized as a third, cross-cutting treatment in half the GPs selected
for bank accounts or bank accounts and direct deposit. This created four treatment arms:
accounts only, accounts and direct deposit, accounts and training, and accounts, direct
deposit, and training.
    By the end of 2014, all account openings and training sessions had been completed,
but most women had not received account numbers and banking cards, and a number of
accounts were awaiting direct deposit authorization.15 We therefore conducted a second
  14
      Although women could, in theory, sign up for direct deposit on their own, in practice this was difficult
because it required a trip to the block office (the administrative unit below the district) and filing a formal
request. GP-level government officials also had the power to connect accounts to direct deposit on villagers'
behalf, but limited incentives to do so.
   15
      These issues reflected multiple factors, including overloaded and slow bank servers, poor connectivity
in study areas that delayed uploading of applicant details to bank servers, and the complexity of the setup

                                                      8
round of account opening and direct deposit drives between November 2014 and April 2015.
During these drives we brought eligible women to the CSP kiosk, gave them their account
numbers and bank cards, and conducted a practical demonstration of how to deposit and
withdraw money from their account.16 Women with direct deposit were again informed that
any future MGNREGS wages would be paid into their CSP account.

C. Intervention Catch-Up

Our study period overlapped with national changes to financial inclusion policies. First, in
August 2014, after our treatments had been implemented, the federal government announced
a financial inclusion campaign, known as Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY). By
December 2017 over 300 million bank accounts (27 million in Madhya Pradesh) had been
opened.17 By the time of our 2017 follow-up survey, 63 percent of women in the control group
­ all of whom were unbanked in 2013 ­ had a bank account. Since PMJDY targeted the
unbanked, this complicates any comparison across control and treatment groups: treatment
women were more likely to have an account, but were less likely to have PMJDY accounts.
Hence, we drop the control group from our main analysis, and focus on the effects of direct
deposit and training relative to accounts only. That is, we estimate the effect of increasing
women's financial control while holding (initial) ownership of financial instruments constant.
    Second, while the levels remain low, the share of women with an individual account and
direct deposit facilities increased steadily over our study period (recall Appendix Figure B3).
Thus, there is a risk that direct deposit treatment effects are attenuated over time due to
changes in the first stage.

D. Data and Randomization Balance Check

We use five data sources to evaluate the impact of our interventions on women's economic
activity. The first is our baseline census, which collected information on bank account
ownership and MGNREGS participation. The need to rapidly screen a large number of
households meant that the census did not collect detailed demographic or labor force data.
    The next two sources of data are the short-run and long-run follow-up surveys. The short-
run survey was conducted between August and December 2015­roughly one year after the

process, which required coordination by actors at multiple administrative layers.
   16
      Each woman was given INR 50 to attend the camp. She was given the opportunity to deposit and
withdraw some amount of this money to gain hands-on experience with banking at the CSP kiosk.
   17
      https://data.gov.in/resources/stateut-wise-number-pmjdy-accounts-20122017-ministry-finance.       Ac-
cessed May 28, 2019. Under PMJDY, banks were required to offer low-cost accounts with standardized
benefits, including access to a debit card, accident and life insurance, and an overdraft facility. Overall,
these PMJDY accounts featured more benefits than the no-frills accounts opened in our intervention.

                                                     9
first wave of account openings was completed. We randomly selected 4,500 eligible women
and their husbands who could still be matched to the MGNREGS system to be surveyed,
stratifying by GP. The surveys included modules on bank account ownership and banking
activities, participation in MGNREGS, and private-sector labor force participation. The
female survey collected additional data on proxies of female empowerment such as decision-
making and mobility, and data on mental health and violence against women.
    We conducted a long-run survey between April and October 2017, three years after the
first wave of account opening. The short- and long-run surveys covered similar topics, though
we shortened the banking modules in the latter to undertake new data collection on norms
governing female work. Attrition for both survey waves was low: we interviewed 93 percent
of sampled women during the first follow-up and 92 percent of sampled women during the
second follow-up. There is no differential attrition by treatment arm (Appendix Table B1).
    Our final two sources of data are administrative. Banking data for accounts opened under
the auspices of the experiment are only available from one of our two banking partners, but
this banking partner serves 81 percent of our sample.18 The data run from the date of
account opening up until April 30, 2018 and include a record of every transaction posted to
1,603 female-owned accounts. Administrative data on MGNREGS work activities from the
program management information system (MIS) are available through November 17, 2017.
These data include information on when an individual worked, how much s/he was paid,
and what account the wages were deposited into. We assume a woman was paid into an
individually-owned account if no one else in the household shares that account number.19
    Appendix Table B2 presents averages of predetermined individual, household, and GP-
level characteristics and tests whether averages vary by treatment status. The "accounts
only" group is the primary reference group in column 1. On average, eligible women (Panel
A) were 40 years old at the first follow up and just 11 percent report that they can read and
write. Fifty-six percent of the husbands of eligible women (Panel B) reported that they can
read and write.20
    During the census 64 percent of women reported that they had worked for MGNREGS
at least once before, with 16 percent of women reporting that they worked for the program
in the past year. The administrative data suggest higher participation rates (for instance,
52 percent of women were listed as having worked in MGNREGS administrative data in the
  18
      Ninety-nine percent of women interviewed consented to our use of their administrative data.
  19
      These data were scraped in 2016 and 2017 from the public MGNREGS website. The data structure
capturing account numbers changed between the 2016 and 2017 scrapes. The Online Appendix ­ available
here ­ provides additional detail on how we infer individual account ownership from available account
number data in the two scrapes.
   20
      Literacy rates in our sample are lower than GP-wide averages recorded in the 2011 Indian Census (Panel
D); this gap is especially striking for women.

                                                    10
year before the census). This difference likely reflects, in part, over-reporting of work on the
part of local leaders, an important form of program leakage (Niehaus and Sukhtankar, 2013).
    As a balance check, columns (2)-(4) report coefficients on dummy variables for each
treatment package laid on top of bank accounts: "direct deposit", "training" and "direct
deposit and training". Predetermined characteristics serve as outcome variables and all
regressions control for strata and district fixed effects. Column (5) presents the p-value from
an F-test of whether the treatment group coefficients are jointly equal to zero. Overall, the
randomization is well-balanced, with just two out of 28 p-values from the joint test significant
at the 10 percent level or less. Balance is also good for the direct deposit and training versus
accounts only comparison we focus on; here just one comparison is significant at the 10
percent level or less.


3    Framework
Direct deposit and training worked to increase a woman's control over her earned income:
direct deposit ensured MGNREGS wages were sent to her own account instead of her hus-
band's, while training gave her the skills needed to operate that account. From an intra-
household perspective, this would boost female decision making power. Specifically, both
direct deposit and training could increase a woman's outside option by making her more
financially self-sufficient: given the rarity of divorce in our context, the relevant outside op-
tion would be resorting to a non-cooperative equilibrium where spouses maintain "separate
spheres" and do not share resources (Lundberg and Pollak, 1993). For example, consider a
case where a woman wants to spend additional money on school supplies for the children. If
her husband knows there is no way she can make the purchase on her own, he may deny her
request. If he knows she will make the purchase anyway if they disagree, he may consent.
    With this in mind, we use a simple model of female labor supply to highlight how the
intrahousehold effects of direct deposit and training might impact two sets of outcomes.
First, how does increasing a woman's control over earned income impact her labor supply
and economic empowerment? And second, how might higher female labor supply, which
challenges traditional norms, interact with and influence gender norms in the community?
We discuss how alternative channels could impact these outcomes in Section 6.


A. Model Setup
The Outside Option: We assume the woman's outside option is a function of the vector
z . z could include a range of factors, such as non-labor income shares, relative wages, and


                                               11
the strength of the woman's social network in the village. We assume direct deposit and
training increase elements of z by increasing financial control.
Preferences: The household consists of a husband and wife. Each spouse i  F, M re-
ceives utility from private consumption (ci ) and leisure (li ) according to the utility function
ui (ci , li ).21
Norms: Both spouses incur two types of norms-based utility costs if the wife works. First,
costs associated with actual gender identity norms: these injunctive norms reflect personal
beliefs about what women should do.22 For instance, if a woman works this could violate
gender identity norms that "the wife takes care of the household" and "the husband is the
breadwinner" (Akerlof and Kranton, 2000). A working woman and her husband incur an
actual norms cost i  0.
    Second, when a woman works both spouses face norms costs imposed by those community
members who disapprove of women working. Following Tankard and Paluck (2016), we
assume that these norms costs are uncertain and may be misperceived. Let the vector 
denote actual norms in the community. Spouse i may put different weights on the beliefs
of different community members (e.g. by closeness in the community network, gender, or
economic influence). Hence, we assume i's perceived norms cost is given by i Ei [], where
i is a vector of importance weights. When norms are misperceived, i Ei [] = i .
    The total norms cost borne by spouse i is therefore  i = i + i Ei []. If individuals
correctly perceive the actual norms of all community members, then  i = i + i . However,
as Figure 1 shows, in our setting community norm costs are mispercieved and, in line with the
data, we focus on the case where individuals overestimate community opposition to working
women such that  i > i + i .
    A woman will fully internalize her own norms costs, and may also internalize some of the
costs borne by her husband (through a household decision-making channel).
Labor Endowment and Wages: A woman divides her time endowment of 1 between
leisure, private sector work hF                          F
                                P , and MGNREGS hN . The official MGNREGS wage is
                                                        F
wN , while the official wage in the private sector is wP  . To capture the seasonal nature of
MGNREGS and private sector work, we assume a woman can provide no more than N s
units of labor in sector s. Putting this all together, we assume that the woman solves the




  21
      We assume ui ci , li is twice continuously differentiable, strictly increasing, and concave in both its
arguments. The price of the consumption good is normalized to 1.
   22
      In the psychology literature, a norm refers to "attributes of groups that generate expectations for the
behavior of group members" Prentice (2007). Injunctive norms refer to beliefs about what people should do,
while descriptive norms describe what people actually do.

                                                     12
following problem in deciding whether to work:

                                          1 - µ(z ) M
       max uF 1 - hF    F
                   N - hP , c
                             F
                               - F +                     1 hF     F
                                                             P + hN > 0 subject to        (1)
       hF
        s ,c
             F                              µ(z )
                 cF  (1 - N (z )) wN hF                 F F     F
                                      N + (1 - P (z )) wP hP +  (z )

                                        hF
                                         s  0

        and                            hF
                                        s  Ns


where 1 (·) is the indicator function, µ(z )  [0, 1] represents the relative weight a woman
places on her own norms costs versus her husband's, s (z )  [0, 1] is the share of the woman's
earnings in sector s that is appropriated by her husband, and F (z ) is a net transfer from
the husband to the wife, which could be positive or negative. These parameters may depend
on a woman's outside option, with a higher outside option corresponding to higher µ, lower
s , and higher F . We use this setup as a reduced form to nest two alternative household
decision-making regimes:

   · Efficient Collective Bargaining. Assuming the household is efficient, the husband will
     not tax his wife's earnings and utility will be transferred between husband and wife
     through F (z ). Appendix A shows how the outcome of a collective bargaining model,
     modified to include norms costs, can be represented by the solution to the above
     problem with N = P = 0.

   · Inefficient Wage Taxation. If, however, the household is inefficient, then the husband
     may "tax" away some of his wife's earnings. We follow (Heath and Tan, 2015) and
     assume that as a woman's outside option increases, the tax rates on her earnings may
     decline. To isolate this channel, we assume that under this regime a woman's outside
     option has no impact on F and µ = 1 (absent cooperation, the woman does not
     account for her husband's norms costs).

In deciding whether to work, a woman will compare her utility when she pays the norms
costs and chooses the optimal amount of labor in each sector to her utility when she does not
work and avoids all norms costs. She will always first choose to work in the higher-paying
sector and only work in the other sector if the hours constraint in the higher-paying sector
is binding.
    Our framework highlights two key channels through which direct deposit and training
might alter labor supply. We reference bargaining power when discussing outside option
shifts under the (efficient) collective regime, and autonomy when discussing outside option
shifts under the wage taxation regime:

                                             13
Channel 1­Greater Bargaining Power: In the collective model, an increase in a woman's
outside option raises the weight placed on her (relative to her husband's) preferences, i.e.
increases µ. Increasing her bargaining power also increases the share of non-labor income
she receives (F ).
Channel 2­Lower Wage Taxation: In non-cooperative households, the intervention could
reduce wage taxation. Here there are two possibilities. The first is that only the tax rate on
MGNREGS wages (N ) declines (e.g. if the household uses rules of thumb like "I control all
money that is deposited into my bank account"). A second possibility is that both P and
N decline (e.g. if an increase in autonomy leads to reduced wage taxation regardless of how
a woman is paid).
    Note that our intervention focused on financial inclusion and did not provide women
information about either prevalent or appropriate norms around women's work. That said,
being a government program it had some potential moral weight and may have implicitly
promoted the notion that it is appropriate for women to work for MGNREGS and make
banking transactions. However, given the intervention's focus and its light-touch nature, we
believe direct effects of the intervention itself on  i were unlikely.


B. How Will Women's Labor Supply Change?
First, consider channel 1, an increase in bargaining power (and, therefore, µ). This would
reduce the weight that women place on norms costs borne by their husbands, which would
draw some non-working women into the labor market­specifically women who were not
working due to the preferences of their husbands. At the same time, greater bargaining
power will increase the transfer from husband to wife F . This would have an income
effect, and work to reduce female labor supply.
    Next consider channel 2, a reduction in wage taxation. A higher effective female wage
creates both an income and a substitution effect, hence impacts on labor supply are ambigu-
ous. However, if the reduction in wage taxation were specific to MGNREGS wages, then
work for MGNREGS would likely increase, while work for the private sector would decrease.
    It follows that predicted impacts for women who were already working are ambiguous.
We can, however, formulate a clear prediction for women who were not working prior to
intervention, and therefore will only be moved by channels that make work more attractive:

Labor Supply Prediction (1) Direct deposit and training can draw non-working women
    into the labor force through either an increase in bargaining power or a reduction in
    wage taxation.



                                             14
   The framework offers guidance for distinguishing between channels: if the intervention
broadly shifted female outside options (higher bargaining power/an increase in autonomy
that reduces N and P ), we would expect to see positive downstream impacts on women's
empowerment and agency, as well as an increase in both public and private sector work
among non-working women. If the intervention only increased the returns to MGNREGS,
work for the program should increase at the expense of private sector work.


C. How Will Norms Change?
Over time, extensive margin impacts on labor supply could be amplified if norms costs
fall. Understanding the longer-run normative impacts of direct deposit and training, and
how impacts vary by gender, is also important for building our understanding of how social
policies can shape norms and for assessing welfare. If, for example, the interventions only
operated through a bargaining power channel then this would imply a transfer of utility
from men to women. If, instead, norms and their associated social costs are malleable, then
our interventions could create a long-lasting Pareto improvement within the household­
particularly if norms costs borne by both genders are reduced.
     Multiple experiences ­ including that of working, having one's spouse work, or seeing
more women working in one's community ­ could shift actual and/or perceived norms. First,
consider actual norms, or i in our model. For a woman, the act of working can alter the
gender identity norms she internalizes. For example, she may begin to take pride in bringing
in earned income or realize that her children do not suffer when she works. More broadly, she
may endogenously update her personal values to align with her new behavior or "identity".
Since men do not necessarily need to adopt new behaviors when their wives start working,
we anticipate larger declines in the actual norm cost of i for women than men. Further,
while new attitudes could spill over onto non-complier women through social learning (Fogli
and Veldkamp, 2011; Fernandez, 2013), we anticipate these changes to be largest for women
who alter their labor supply behavior in response to the intervention. We summarize this
as:

Norms Hypothesis (1) Direct deposit and training can engender a shift to more progres-
    sive actual norms about women's work, particularly among women drawn into the labor
    force.

    Next, consider perceived norms, with the associated social cost of i Ei []. Changes in
perceived norms could occur if individuals update their beliefs about others' actual norms
either directly (by communicating with others) or indirectly (by observing women working


                                             15
and the type of community sanctions incurred). Perceived norms may be particularly prone
to change if they are misaligned with actual norms. Here we anticipate larger changes among
individuals who believe norms are more conservative than they actually are (Bursztyn et al.,
2018). Figure 1 Panel B shows that a significant fraction of the male and female popula-
tions misperceive the actual social cost of women working, with misalignment particularly
pronounced for men. Our final hypothesis is therefore:

Norms Hypothesis (2) If there is social learning, direct deposit and training can cause
    perceived norms to liberalize. Changes should be larger among groups who, as a baseline,
    misperceive actual norms as more restrictive than they are.

    Comparing gender-specific changes in actual and perceived norms can provide suggestive
evidence on channels of influence. For instance, if women, but not men, change actual norms
then it is likely that the act of working is an important channel for updating gender norms
related to women's work. Shifts in perceived norms provide evidence of social learning; if
these shifts are larger among groups with larger misperceptions (e.g. men), it suggests scope
for misperceptions to correct when there is a shift in equilibrium female labor supply.


D. Summary
Our discussion identified several points of guidance for the empirical analysis. First, labor
supply impacts are most likely to be observed among women least attached to the labor
market. Second, examining impacts on private versus public sector work, and on women's
empowerment, can help differentiate between channels. Third, norms costs­and direct de-
posit and training's effects on these costs­may differ by gender. Separately studying effects
on actual norms, perceived norms, and gender-specific variation effects can provide suggestive
evidence on the factors that influence norms evolution.


3.1    Empirical Strategy
Our main analysis uses the following regression specification:

        yig = 0 + 1 traing + 2 depositg + 3 deposit × traing + µs + d + xig  + ig               (2)

Where yig is the outcome of interest for individual i in GP g , depositg indicates that GP g
was randomly selected to receive direct deposit, and traing indicates selection for training.
All regressions include controls for strata fixed effects (µs ) and district fixed effects (d ). The
vector xig contains controls selected using Double LASSO from all variables listed in Table

                                                16
B2 (Belloni et al., 2014). In the Online Data Appendix, we present the full list of controls
and indicate the subset selected by Double LASSO for each regression in the main tables.
The error term (ig ) is clustered at the GP level.
    We focus on the impact of direct deposit and training, given by  = 1 + 2 + 3 . Appendix
Tables B3-B6 report the coefficients on 1 , 2 , and 3 for the main outcome variables. The
results suggest that both interventions mattered; however, we are under-powered to identify
the separate effects of direct deposit, training, and the complementarity between the two.
    Guided by our framework, we report average intent to treat effects and also effects by
baseline labor market status. Here, we split the sample based on our best-available base-
line measure of a woman's work history: her report of whether she ever worked for MGN-
REGS.23 In Table 1 we present data from the long-run survey for the control group to show
that this variable captures important differences in broader female labor force participation
and­consistent with our conceptual framework­men's attitudes towards female work. We
therefore refer to women with no baseline MGNREGS experience as "socially constrained"
because we conjecture that they face higher normative barriers to work.
    Baseline non-workers (the socially constrained) were 10 percentage points less likely to
have worked for pay in the past year and earned 22 percent less in the past month as
compared to unconstrained women. Consistent with this, the constrained scored 0.20 and
0.08 standard deviation units lower on indices of private sector and MGNREGS work, which
measure activity along both the intensive and extensive margin. Constrained women also
scored 0.09 standard deviations lower on our empowerment index, which captures economic
activity, self-reported decision making power, and mobility. While we observe no significant
cross-group differences in women's actual and perceived norms, husbands of constrained
women reported significantly more conservative perceived norms: they believed that their
communities were less accepting of both working women and working women's husbands.
Interestingly, there was no significant difference in actual norms between the two groups:
this suggests that misperceptions may be greater among husbands of socially constrained
women.
    Next, we use 2016 Indian Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) data to create a broad
measure of caste-based gender norms and test whether socially constrained women belong
to castes with more restrictive gender norms. Since the DHS does not directly ask about
injunctive FLFP norms, we focus on descriptive norms (how much women in different caste
groups work). Using measures of women's labor force participation we construct a stan-
dardized "DHS work norms" index, which varies at the subcaste level.24 As with other work

  23
       Appendix Tables B7 and B8 verify balance among the two subsamples.
  24
       We limit the DHS women's sample to the Northern "Hindi Belt" states of Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,

                                                     17
indices, higher values indicate higher FLFP. Table 1 shows that socially constrained women
belonged to subcastes with lower FLFP. This finding holds even after an adjustment for
differences in female education and household wealth.
    Of course, constrained and unconstrained women also differ on other dimensions: the
constrained are younger, better educated, and less likely to have a bank account. Consistent
with the fact that constrained women are less likely to work, their households have lower
incomes even though there is no difference in their husbands' earnings.


4     Impacts on Women's Economic and Social Lives

4.1     Women's Control of MGNREGS Wages
Our treatments had high levels of take-up. In non-control GPs we opened accounts for
74 percent of all eligible women; in training GPs 75 percent of eligible women attended
the training; and in direct deposit GPs, we successfully enrolled 82 percent of new account
holders in direct deposit. We find no significant differences in account opening rates across
treatment arms, which is to be expected given that women were not informed about direct
deposit or training until after the account opening decision was made.
    Bank administrative data confirm that the provision of direct deposit facilities altered
MGNREGS wage payment patterns. Panel A of Figure 2 graphs the share of women ever
receiving an MGNREGS deposit in an individual account opened during the enrollment
camp. This reflects a combination of receiving direct deposit and working for the program.
Panel B reports the cumulative value of MGNREGS deposits sent to project accounts.25
    While direct deposit clearly increased the likelihood of women receiving MGNREGS
wages, the effect is much larger when combined with training. These impacts are persistent,
large, and meaningful. By the time of the three-year follow-up survey, the average woman in
direct deposit and training had received roughly INR 3,000 in MGNREGS wage payments
in her individual account. Conditional on receiving at least one deposit, the average total
wage payment was just over INR 7,000 ($108 at the 2017 exchange rate of INR 65 per $US).
This amounts to 152 percent of total annual wage earnings for the same group, measured
Bihar, Gujarat, Rajasthan, and Jharkhand. For this sample, we standardize a series of FLFP indicators and
then calculate means by subcaste, adjusting the caste-specific means to account for variation in sample size
by calculating empirical Bayes' estimates. We also construct a version of the index where FLFP indicators
are first regressed on dummies for female educational attainment, husband's educational attainment, and the
DHS wealth index. We standardize residuals from these regressions and then calculate adjusted means in an
effort to purge the FLFP index of variation driven by socioeconomic status. We merge this subcaste-based
measure onto our own survey data.
   25
      We cannot directly identify MGNREGS deposits in the administrative data­instead we define a deposit
to be an MGNREGS deposit if it is a multiple of the MGNREGS daily wage.

                                                    18
at the year three follow up. Given the magnitude of these payments, it is plausible that the
intervention could have shifted women's bargaining position in the household.
    Appendix Table B10 shows treatment effects on the outcomes in Figure 2 in a regression
framework. The direct effects­particularly when combined with training­are substantial
and significant. The bank data have two limitations, however: first, they may not detect
all individual payments for women with multiple accounts. Second, they do not cover the
19 percent of the sample served by our second banking partner. We, therefore, also use
MGNREGS MIS administrative data to calculate individual wage payments up through
November 30, 2017. A comparison of these results to those that leverage the bank account
data through the same time period are very similar, though point estimates on total wage
payments are smaller in the MIS data.
    Given evidence that our treatments altered women's control over their earnings, we now
examine impacts on broader measures of financial inclusion, labor supply, empowerment,
and norms. To alleviate concerns about multiple testing, we follow Kling et al. (2007) and
divide outcomes into families and then aggregate within family into a standardized index.
Appendix Tables C1-C9 present impacts on index components.


4.2    Women's Financial Inclusion
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 2 present impacts on a female bank account use index, which
aggregates survey-based measures of individual account ownership, account use in the past
six months, and balances. Direct deposit and training led to a 0.13 standard deviation units
increase in this index in both the short- and long-run (Panel A). A time series of bank
administrative data shows that average daily balances grew over time, with a persistent gap
between accounts only and direct deposit and training (Appendix Figure B2).
    Do these impacts also reflect meaningful changes in agency? Table 2, column 3, reports
results for a banking autonomy index, which aggregates survey data on whether the respon-
dent visits the bank alone or without male supervision and is comfortable doing so. It also
includes a measure of whether the respondent thinks women can visit the CSP without a
male relative's supervision. Overall, direct deposit and training significantly increased female
banking autonomy by 0.19 standard deviation units. In column (4) we find a positive, but
not significant, overall increase in the CSP knowledge index, which measures whether women
have ever heard of the CSP and what types of transactions they know about. Panels B and
C show results for the subset of socially constrained women (those who had not worked for
MGNREGS at baseline) and unconstrained women (those who had worked). All impacts are
significant and larger for constrained women. We formally reject equality of treatment effects


                                              19
for the constrained and unconstrained for all outcomes except short-run account use. These
larger effect sizes are notable, as constrained women's outcomes lag those of unconstrained
women in accounts only. In fact, direct deposit and training completely closes these gaps in
account use, banking autonomy, and CSP knowledge.
    Against this background, we now examine how the treatments impacted women's partic-
ipation in the labor market.


4.3     Women's Labor Market Engagement
Columns (1) and (2) in Table 3 consider an overall standardized index of labor supply in the
short-run and long-run, respectively. This index is the average of subindices for MGNREGS,
the private sector, and general labor supply that is not differentiated by sector of work.26
    Column (1), Panel A shows that in the full sample direct deposit and training significantly
increased labor supply by 0.16 standard deviation units in the short run. The results for
MGNREGS and private labor supply sub-indices in columns (3) and (5) show that the
aggregate effect is driven by both more work for MGNREGS (a 0.19 standard deviation unit
increase) and in the private sector (a 0.17 standard deviation unit increase). Columns (2),
(4) and (6) show that these aggregate impacts attenuate in the long run and are no longer
statistically significant.
    In Panel B, we consider the sub-sample of socially constrained women. The intervention
increased labor supply for constrained women by 0.21 standard deviation units in the short
run (column 1) and this increase persisted in the longer run (column 2). Strikingly, the
long-run effects for constrained women are entirely driven by the private sector.27 We reject
equality of treatment effects for constrained and unconstrained women in the long run for
both overall labor supply and the private sector subindex.
    In contrast, the intervention boosted unconstrained women's labor supply in the short
run, but not the long run (Panel C). Why do effects persist only for constrained women?
  26
       The MGNREGS sub-index includes (i) MIS-based short-term (past month) and longer-term (past 12
months) work indicators as well as wages earned over those periods and (ii) work indicators for the same
time periods based on self-reported survey data. The private sector sub-index includes an indicator for work,
total earnings in the past year and a dummy for whether the woman's occupation/main status is a worker.
The general labor supply sub-index includes an indicator for work in the past month, earnings in the past
month, and total months worked over the past year. It includes survey questions which did not differentiate
whether work was for MGNREGS or the private sector We include earnings as a proxy of intensive margin
labor supply, since we find no significant impacts on market wages (see Appendix Table B17).
    27
       To evaluate the concern that some women mistakenly identified MGNREGS work as private-sector
work, we examine women's report of payment method for each type of work. At both follow ups, less than
1.5 percent of women reported receiving non-MGNREGS payments into a bank account, and our results are
robust to recoding private-sector work to zero if it is paid into a bank account. Moreover, our qualitative
field work found that villagers clearly distinguish MGNREGS work from other types of casual work, as the
recruitment and payment systems are very different.

                                                     20
A first potential explanation is that ongoing (independent) government efforts to transition
women to MGNREGS direct deposit enabled unconstrained women in accounts only to catch
up to their peers in direct deposit and training. Figure 4 graphs the share of MGNREGS
wages paid into individual accounts by quarter according to the MIS data.28 Very few women
in accounts only gained access to direct deposit until 2017, when the MP government began
to conduct direct deposit enrollment camps. These camps increased rates of direct deposit
receipt­especially among unconstrained women­shortly before our long-run survey. This
suggests that any long-run impacts we find on labor supply and norms may underestimate
the benefits of direct deposit and training, especially for unconstrained women.
    A second (alternative) explanation is that, in the longer run, greater bargaining power led
to an income effect among unconstrained women and this, in turn, discouraged work. This
is plausible: the fact that direct deposit and training increased private-sector labor supply
suggests a broad improvement in women's outside options, as opposed to a more narrow
increase in the effective MGNREGS wage.
    One way to distinguish between these alternative explanations is to examine impacts on
women's empowerment: if catch up is driven solely by an income effect, then unconstrained
women in direct deposit and training should be more empowered than their peers in accounts
only.29 To that end, we now consider impacts on downstream outcomes, starting with proxies
of female empowerment, to further explore these hypotheses.


4.4     Women's Empowerment
In many settings, economic and social empowerment reinforce each other (Kabeer, 1999).
An empowerment feedback loop is a critical mechanism through which increased financial
control for women can translate into sustained long-term engagement with the market econ-
omy. There is, of course, no guarantee that such a feedback loop exists across all domains of
empowerment: for example in Bangladesh, Bandiera et al. (2017) find that an asset trans-
fer coupled with skills training targeted to very poor women significantly increased female
labor supply, financial inclusion, and mental health, but had no significant impact on deci-
sion agency. Although this could, in part, reflect the inherently difficult task of quantifying
household decision-making dynamics, it also underscores the importance of measuring em-
powerment across multiple dimensions of women's lives.
  28
       As we can only infer direct deposit status when women work, we cannot directly measure the share of
all sample women who are signed up for direct deposit in a given quarter.
    29
       Another test would be to examine time trends in labor force participation: policy catch up would
suggest an overall upward trend in FLFP, while an income effect would suggest a downward trend. However,
there were other changes in the economic environment between the short- and long-run surveys­including
the 2016 banknote demonitization­which makes examining time trends difficult.

                                                   21
    Table 4 presents impacts on economic and social empowerment. To quantify impacts
on empowerment, we create three sub-indices. The "purchase subindex" proxies women's
economic autonomy by aggregating a series of questions about whether she made different
types of purchases, either at all or (in a separate set of dummy variables) with her own money
in the past year.30 The mobility subindex aggregates a series of dummy variables indicating
a woman visited a series of locations in the past year and in the past 30 days.31 Finally,
the self-reported decision-making sub-index aggregates two dummy variables indicating the
woman reported having a say in whether she works and how her own income and benefits
payments are spent. The aggregate empowerment index (see columns 1 and 2 of Table 4) is
a simple average of the three sub-indices.
    Panel A of Table 4 shows impacts for the whole sample. We cannot reject the null of
no overall impact on empowerment, despite a marginally significant short-run impact on the
purchases index. Panel B shows impacts for constrained women. Here, we find significant
impacts on overall empowerment that grow in magnitude at the three-year follow up, where
direct deposit and training increased the index by 0.14 standard deviation units relative to
accounts only. Columns 3-8 show that results are driven by the purchases sub-index in the
short run, and purchases and mobility in the long run.
    In contrast, we find no significant impact on any empowerment measures for uncon-
strained women, who start with higher baseline levels of empowerment. We formally reject
equal effects for constrained and unconstrained women for the purchases sub-index in the
short and long run, as well as the aggregate empowerment index and mobility sub-index in
the long run. Although the long-run null effect for unconstrained women is consistent with
catch up (i.e., through the government's efforts to initiate individual direct deposit payments
across the state), the null effect in the short run (when unconstrained women in direct de-
posit and training were working more) is not. This could be due to power­the confidence
interval on the short-run effect for the unconstrained is [-0.05, 0.11]­or that unconstrained
women were induced to enter the labor force for another reason, such as a shift in wage
taxation that was not driven by a change in outside options.
    To summarize, direct deposit and training drew women into the labor market, and cat-
alyzed greater economic agency among constrained women. Appendix Table B11 shows that
the intervention had no major implications­positive or negative­for gender-based violence
and mental health.32 Returning to our conceptual framework, the private sector labor sup-

  30
      Purchase categories include groceries, eating out, clothing, child health, home improvement, and festi-
vals. See the Online Appendix for additional detail.
   31
      The locations are the village market, the district market, her natal home, the local child care center,
and the public health center.
   32
      In the longer run, we observe a modest 0.081 standard deviation unit decline in the mental health

                                                     22
ply and empowerment effects suggest that the intervention increased constrained women's
outside options, helping them overcome their husbands' preferences that they not work.


5     Impacts on Gender Norms
In our conceptual framework, we posit that if the act of working changes the gender norms
that women (or possibly their husbands) adhere to, then actual norm costs can fall (norms
hypothesis 1). We anticipate the largest reductions in these costs among women who were
drawn into the labor force by the intervention. If these women overestimate norms against
female work in the broader community, perceived norms costs should also fall (norms hypoth-
esis 2). Social learning could also lower these costs (e.g. among unconstrained households).
As Figure 1 shows that in our setting men misperceive community norms by more, we an-
ticipate larger declines for this group. In this section we describe the data we collected on
norms and then evaluate these hypotheses empirically.


5.1     Data Collection and Measurement
We conducted extensive qualitative work to inform our norms-related survey modules. Mo-
tivated by the conceptual framework, one of our key goals was to structure questions to
capture not just beliefs about whether women should work, but also gender-specific norms
costs. To do this, we designed three modules. The first covered personal preferences and was
not gender disaggregated. Here, we asked individuals whether they believed women should
be able to work outside the home. Then, we asked whether they wanted their sons to marry
women who wish to work and their daughters to marry men who permitted them to work.
    Second, we developed a vignettes module, which was designed to elicit attitudes towards
working women and their husbands, holding other household characteristics constant. The
vignette featured two hypothetical households, composed of a husband, wife, two children,
and paternal grandparents. Respondents were told that both families belonged to the re-
spondent's caste and lived in the respondent's village. The only difference between the two
families was that one wife worked for pay, while the other stayed at home. We used pictures
to make the families salient to the respondents. Then we asked respondents to compare the
husbands and wives in the two households. Here, we asked which woman was the better
wife, mother, and caretaker. To capture perceived norms we asked which woman got more
respect in the community. Then we asked which man was the better husband, provider, and
index. However, Appendix Table B12 shows that this result is sensitive to index construction: when we code
a "poor" mental health outcome as feeling a certain way "some of the time" or more (column 2) or "a little"
or more, the treatment effect disappears.

                                                    23
who got more community respect. The Online Appendix provides an English translation of
the vignette module.
   The final module was designed to measure the intensity of perceived norms costs by
gender. Here, we asked respondents what fraction of individuals in the community would
speak badly of a woman who worked outside the home, and what fraction of respondents
would think a man was a bad provider if his wife worked for pay.


5.2    Actual Norms
To measure actual norms, defined as average beliefs about what people "should" do (Prentice,
2007), we first combine the three variables from the personal preferences module into a
standardized "personal preferences" index. Next we calculate two indices to measure the
extent to which individuals negatively judge working women and their husbands.
    The "acceptance of working women" index aggregates vignette judgments of whether
the working woman is the better wife, the better mother, and the better caretaker. The
"acceptance of working women's husbands" index aggregates vignette responses to which
man is the better provider and the better husband. The "actual norms index" averages the
personal preferences and acceptance indices to create a single measure of actual norms in
our sample. In all cases, higher values correspond to greater acceptance of female work. To
facilitate cross-gender comparison, we standardize all index components relative to women
in the accounts only group.
    Table 5 presents results. Women's responses are in columns (1)-(4), while men's responses
are in columns (5)-(8). Among women, actual norms liberalize by 0.11 standard deviation
units, significant at the 1 percent level. We interpret this as a reduction, on average, in a
woman's actual norm costs F . A comparison of Panels B and C shows that this effect is
driven by socially constrained women, who began with lower labor supply and more norma-
tive barriers to work. In accounts only, for example, there is a 0.14 standard deviation units
gap between constrained and unconstrained women. Direct deposit and training completely
closes this gap, with actual norms liberalizing by 0.22 standard deviation units among con-
strained women. Columns (2)-(4) show that point estimates on the personal preferences and
acceptance indices are very similar. Thus, the liberalization of actual norms (or, equivalently,
the reduction in norm costs) are concentrated in the group that exhibited sustained growth
in labor force attachment subsequent to the intervention. This is consistent with the idea
that the act of working reoriented constrained women's gender identity norms.
    In contrast, columns (5)-(8) show that point estimates for men are much smaller in
magnitude and never statistically significant. This could occur if men personally saw limited


                                              24
gains from their wives working, or if personal behavior change (rather than spousal change)
is needed to shift gender identity norms. Since men report slightly more progressive personal
preferences, this works to close the actual norms gap between men and women.33


5.3    Perceived Norms
Here we focus on perceived norms costs by gender. First we form gender-specific "perceived
acceptance" indices, which standardize and aggregate the vignette question on community
respect and the "fraction of the community who judges" question. Then we average the male
and female indices to create an overall "perceived norms" index. Again, all index components
are standardized relative to women in accounts only and constructed so that higher values
correspond to fewer costs to female work.
    Table 6 presents results for perceived norms. In terms of our framework, we interpret
more liberal perceived norms as a reduction in i Ei []. By comparing treatment effects
on perceived norms to those on actual norms (Table 5), we can get a sense of whether the
misperception gap (i Ei [] - i ) goes up, down, or remains unchanged.34 For women,
we find no significant differences on the overall perceived norms index, though perceived
acceptance of working women is higher by 0.08 standard deviation units (significant at the
5 percent level). This is similar in magnitude to the impacts on actual norms in Table 5.
Overall, these results are consistent with either women learning about shifts in others' views
and/or generalizing from their own changing views regarding women's work.
    Columns (4)-(6) show that, unlike actual norms, perceived norms liberalize among men,
largely due to a greater acceptance of working women's husbands. These results are meaning-
ful in magnitude, with 0.12 and 0.17 standard deviation units higher perceived acceptance
among husbands of unconstrained and constrained women respectively.
    These impacts for men are especially notable given that men report substantially more
restrictive perceived norms: in accounts only the perceived acceptance of husbands index
is 0.33 standard deviation units lower among men, while the perceived acceptance of wives
index is 0.14 standard deviation units lower. Our data also imply that men's perceived norms
are conservative relative to actual norms: in accounts only, men report that 57 percent of the
community will negatively judge the husband of a working woman; yet only 33 percent of men
report that women cannot work and in the vignettes just 48 percent of men report that the
non-working woman's spouse is the better husband.35 Taken together, these observations

  33
      While accounts only women were more likely than men to state that "women can work", they were
substantially less likely to prefer a daughter-in-law who works, or a son-in-law who lets his wife work.
   34
      When norms are perfectly perceived this is zero.
   35
      An important caveat here is that we cannot measure the beliefs of community members outside our

                                                  25
suggest that direct deposit and linking reduced the extent of norm misperception among
men, which would in turn enhance the welfare of the household.
    Why might men update their perceived norms? First, a husband may directly learn
that he had overestimated the social sanctions associated with a woman working when his
wife starts to work. Second, seeing higher levels of FLFP in his community could help him
indirectly learn that the social costs of work are lower than expected. Finally, men may learn
about women's changing attitudes (F ) through other channels. Note that perceived norms
liberalize among husbands of unconstrained women, whose labor supply was unaffected in
the long run. This suggests that social learning may have contributed to the persistent shift
in men's perceived norms.


5.4    Impacts Using a Community-level Social Constraints Measure
Our main analysis uses a self-reported measure of social constraints­whether the woman had
ever worked for MGNREGS at baseline. Table 1 shows that this measure correlates with
caste-based measure of working in the Indian DHS survey, as well as men's attitudes towards
female work in our Control Group. One concern with this measure is that it varies at the
individual, rather than the group level. However, as Figure 1 shows, there is substantial
cross-GP variation in norms. As an additional check, we therefore examine whether our
main results are robust to using GP-level FLFP as recorded in the 2011 Indian Census as a
proxy of social constraints.
    Appendix Table B9 reports demographic differences between women in GPs with above
versus below-median FLFP.36 More control group women in low-FLFP GPs are socially
constrained, and low-FLFP GPs have lower average DHS work indices­both these patterns
are consistent with the hypothesis that low-FLFP villages have stronger norms against female
work. Surveyed women in low-FLFP villages also have more conservative norms. Men in
low-FLFP villages, on the other hand, report more progressive actual norms than their peers
in high-FLFP villages.
    Figure 5 graphs treatment effects on the labor supply index, the empowerment index,
the actual norms index (among women), and the perceived norms index (among men). We
graph results separately for "constrained GPs" (those with below-median levels of FLFP
according to the 2011 Census) and "unconstrained GPs" (above median FLFP). Appendix
Tables B15 and B16 report results for the full set of outcomes. Overall, we find remarkably
similar patterns using this alternative constraint measure: in constrained GPs we observe
sizable and significant long-run treatment effects on labor supply and norms, while short-run
sample, e.g. village elites whose households do not work for MGNREGS.
  36
     Appendix Tables B13 and B14 show balance by this cut.

                                                 26
impacts on labor supply fade out in unconstrained GPs. While the two constraint measures
are correlated (as expected), this result is not mechanical: only 49 percent of women in
constrained GPs had never worked for MGNREGS at baseline, while 26 percent of women
in unconstrained GPs had no experience with the program.


6     Discussion and Conclusion
Direct deposit facilities for women's MGNREGS wage payments, coupled with basic bank
account training, had substantial impacts on women's work. Impacts for constrained women
are persistent, while impacts for unconstrained women dissipate in the longer run. We find
suggestive evidence that the dissipation of effects for the latter group is related to the Indian
government's independent efforts to scale up financial inclusion for women in the period
between our short-run and long-run survey.
   Further, long-run labor supply effects are concentrated in the private sector, which sug-
gests that the intervention did not simply make work for MGNREGS more attractive.
Rather, the results suggest that the intervention worked by increasing women's outside
options, thereby boosting women's bargaining power and/or autonomy within the house-
hold. The intervention also had broader implications for women's lives: first, it significantly
empowered constrained women. Second, treated women state more progressive attitudes
about women in the labor force, while their husbands report lower perceived social costs
from having a wife who works.
   While our findings are in line with the framework laid out in Section 3, we now briefly
consider alternative explanations for our findings.


6.1    Alternative Explanations
To rationalize an increase in both MGNREGS and private-sector work, an alternative mech-
anism would need to impact the return to both forms of work. A natural possibility would
be if women's increased participation in MGNREGS changed private sector wages. However,
we find no impact on wages, apart from a modest decline in non-farm casual wages for men
in the long run (Appendix Table B17).
    Another possibility is that direct deposit and training impacted labor supply by easing
savings constraints, as in Callen et al. (forthcoming). However, accounts only women also
received bank accounts, and our experiment did not generate immediate variation in access to
financial instruments (Appendix Table C1, rows 1 and 4). The basic bank training and direct
deposit treatments may have helped women learn about the benefits of bank accounts, which


                                               27
could in turn stimulate a broader labor supply response. This hypothesis is not supported by
the data, however: Appendix Figure B5, Panel A shows that the number of non-MGNREGS
deposits in accounts only are very similar to those in direct deposit and training.
    A final possibility is that women faced some fixed cost to working that was independent
of social norms. In this case, if direct deposit and training improved the return to working
for MGNREGS, it could induce women to pay the fixed cost and enter the labor market
more broadly. One of the most common non-norms costs women might face when entering
the labor market is finding child care. If this were the binding constraint, then we would
expect women with young (especially pre-school age) children to be most impacted by our
interventions. Appendix Figure B4 estimates effects by whether or not a household has a
child under the age of 8. Treatment effects are apparent for both subgroups, which suggests
that our results are not driven by women who face the largest child care burdens at home.
    Another potential fixed cost relates to learning about work opportunities in the private
sector. In the private sector, landlords or labor recruiters visit households and offer them
short-term work opportunities. However, recruiters target both men and women, and since
virtually all men work, it is unlikely that women's MGNREGS participation increased access
to recruiters. Given these results, and the fact that one-off fixed costs may be less relevant as
MGNREGS and market work tend to take place in different seasons, we find no compelling
evidence that non-norms fixed costs are driving our results.


6.2    Policy Implications
In recent decades, economic progress in India has translated into better-paying jobs and
more attractive work opportunities, with wage growth in rural areas outstripping that in
urban areas (Jacoby and Dasgupta, 2015). Yet this growth has failed to draw Indian women
into the labor market. We argue that social norms around appropriate gender roles play an
important role in keeping Indian women out of the labor force, but that these norms can be
overcome by interventions that increase women's bargaining/autonomy.
    Specifically, we show that strengthening women's control over MGNREGS wages through
direct deposit and training increased women's work both for the program and in the private
sector labor market. These changes run counter to the prediction of a basic model of efficient
household decision-making, where an increase in bargaining power (precipitated by greater
female control over workfare wages) would reduce female labor supply. Importantly, a norms
channel rationalizes both our main treatment effects and key heterogeneity­treatment effects
are largest among the subset of socially constrained women­those who, based on a lack of
MGNREGS work experience at baseline, are least attached to the labor market and have


                                               28
husbands who are most opposed to female work.
    In addition to shedding light on the determinants of female labor supply in contexts
with restrictive gender norms, our results have multiple policy implications. First, gender
targeting can impact women's engagement with workfare programs and the labor market at
large. This insight is especially important for programs like MGNREGS, which explicitly aim
to include and empower women. Second, impacts can extend beyond economic fundamentals,
reshaping the norms that govern female work. This creates scope for interventions like ours
to create further welfare gains by altering the nature of preferences themselves. Third, our
long-run results can help inform intervention scale-up discussions. Between the two waves of
our follow up survey, the Indian government began scaling up MGNREGS direct deposit to
female-owned accounts across our study area. Different from our intervention, this scale-up
did not involve either targeted outreach to eligible women or any additional training. It
appears that these program features were likely relevant for the most marginalized women,
and an important reason for why we find persistent effects on constrained women's labor
supply in the long run.
    Finally, our results contribute to a growing literature on the importance of gender norms
in mediating women's interactions with the labor market. Most existing work focuses on
richer countries, where gender norms are more equitable but, similar to our setting, men
are typically more conservative than women. Against this backdrop, we see our paper as
making two important contributions. First, policy makers interested in changing norms do
not always need to invest in costly norms-change campaigns; in some settings, targeting
economic incentives is enough. Importantly, policies that target incentives are often easier
to implement as norms are often difficult to measure and hard to move directly. Further,
policies that cause women to increase engagement with actors external to the household are
likely important for norm-updating in the community. This finding is similar to the role
model effect associated with women village leaders in India (Beaman et al., 2009). Second,
strengthening women's economic agency can potentially unleash broader social change, es-
pecially as more conservative men update their beliefs about the social costs of adopting
progressive behaviors.
    Our paper also highlights some important open research questions relating to how norms
are updated and perceived by community members. For example, while our results make
it clear that norms shift with behavior, we cannot say whose behavior (or beliefs) are most
influential for changing the beliefs of others. Bringing tools from the networks literature to
bear on these questions is a promising avenue for future work.




                                             29
References
Aker, J. C., R. Boumnijel, A. McClelland, and N. Tierney (2016). Payment Mechanisms
  and Antipoverty Programs: Evidence from a Mobile Money Cash Transfer Experiment in
  Niger. Economic Development and Cultural Change 65 (1), 1­37.

Akerlof, G. A. and R. E. Kranton (2000). Economics and Identity. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 115 (3), 715­753.

Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013). On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and
  the Plough. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2), 469­530.

Almås, I., A. Armand, O. Attanasio, and P. Carneiro (2018). Measuring and Changing Con-
  trol: Women's Empowerment and Targeted Transfers. The Economic Journal 128 (612),
  F609­F639.

Angrist, J. (2002). How do Sex Ratios Affect Marriage and Labor Markets? Evidence from
 America's Second Generation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (3), 997­1038.

Atkin, D. (2009). Working for the Future: Female Factory Work and Child Health in Mexico.
  Unpublished Manuscript, Yale University .

Attanasio, O. P. and V. Lechene (2014). Efficient Responses to Targeted Cash Transfers.
  Journal of Political Economy 122 (1), pp. 178­222.

Bachas, P., P. Gertler, S. Higgins, and E. Seira (2016). Banking on Trust: How Debit Cards
  Help the Poor to Save More.

Bandiera, O., R. Burgess, N. Das, S. Gulesci, I. Rasul, and M. Sulaiman (2017). Labor
  Markets and Poverty in Village Economies. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2), 811­
  870.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, N. Goldberg, D. Karlan, R. Osei, W. Parienté, J. Shapiro, B. Thuys-
  baert, and C. Udry (2015). A Multifaceted Program Causes Lasting Progress for the Very
  Poor: Evidence from Six Countries. Science 348 (6236), 1260799.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, C. Imbert, S. Mathew, and R. Pande (2016). E-governance, Ac-
  countability, and Leakage in Public Programs: Experimental Evidence from a Financial
  Management Reform in India.

Beaman, L., R. Chattopadhyay, E. Duflo, R. Pande, and P. Topalova (2009). Powerful
  Women: Does Exposure Reduce Bias? The Quarterly journal of economics 124 (4), 1497­
  1540.

Bedoya, G., A. Coville, J. Haushofer, M. Isaqzadeh, and J. P. Shapiro (2019). No Household
  Left Behind: Afghanistan Targeting the Ultra Poor Impact Evaluation. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                            30
Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, and C. Hansen (2014, May). High-Dimensional Methods and
  Inference on Structural and Treatment Effects. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (2),
  29­50.
Bernhardt, A., E. Field, R. Pande, N. Rigol, S. Schaner, and C. Troyer-Moore (2018). Male
  Social Status and Women's Work. AEA Papers and Proceedings 108, 363­67.
Bertrand, M., E. Kamenica, and J. Pan (2015). Gender Identity and Relative Income Within
  Households. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (2), 571­614.
Blundell, R., P.-A. Chiappori, and C. Meghir (2005). Collective Labor Supply with Children.
  Journal of Political Economy 113 (6), pp. 1277­1306.
Bobonis, G. J. (2009). Is the Allocation of Resources within the Household Efficient? New
  Evidence from a Randomized Experiment. Journal of Political Economy 117 (3), 453­503.
Bobonis, G. J. (2011). The Impact of Conditional Cash Transfers on Marriage and Divorce.
  Economic Development and Cultural Change 59 (2), 281­312.
Boudet, A. M. M., P. Petesch, and C. Turk (2012). On norms and agency: Conversations
  about gender equality with women and men in 20 countries. Technical report, The World
  Bank.
Bursztyn, L., A. L. González, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2018). Misperceived Social Norms:
  Female Labor Force Participation in Saudi Arabia. NBER Working Paper No. 24736.
Callen, M., S. De Mel, C. McIntosh, and C. Woodruff (forthcoming). What are the Headwa-
  ters of Formal Savings? Experimental Evidence from Sri Lanka. The Review of Economic
  Studies .
Chatterji, S. (2016, December). Ramesh Writes to States for More Women in NREGA
  Scheme.
Chiappori, P.-A. (1992). Collective Labor Supply and Welfare. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 100 (3), pp. 437­467.
Chiappori, P.-A., B. Fortin, and G. Lacroix (2002). Marriage Market, Divorce Legislation,
  and Household Labor Supply. The Journal of Political Economy 110 (1), 37­72.
Dhar, D., T. Jain, and S. Jayachandran (2018). Reshaping Adolescents' Gender Attitudes:
 Evidence from a School-Based Experiment in India. Technical report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.
Dutta, P., R. Murgai, M. Ravallion, and D. P. Van de Walle (2012). Does India's Employ-
 ment Guarantee Scheme Guarantee Employment? World Bank Policy Research Working
 Paper (6003).
Eswaran, M., B. Ramaswami, and W. Wadhwa (2013). Status, Caste, and the Time Al-
  location of Women in Rural India. Economic Development and Cultural Change 61 (2),
  311­333.

                                            31
Fernandez, R. (2013, February). Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of Female
  Labor Force Participation over a Century. American Economic Review 103 (1), 472­500.

Fernandez, R. and A. Fogli (2009). Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work,
  and Fertility. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1), 146­177.

Fernandez, R., A. Fogli, and C. Olivetti (2004). Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and
  Female Labor Force Dynamics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4), 1249­1299.

Fletcher, E. K., R. Pande, and C. T. Moore (2017). Women and Work in India: Diagnostics
  and a Review of Potential Policies.

Fogli, A. and L. Veldkamp (2011). Nature or Nurture? Learning and the Geography of
  Female Labor Force Participation. Econometrica 79 (4), 1103­1138.

Goldin, C. (2006, May). The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women's Employment,
 Education, and Family. American Economic Review 96 (2), 1­21.

Green, D. P., A. Wilke, and J. Cooper (2019). Countering Violence Against Women at Scale:
  A Mass Media Experiment in Rural Uganda.

Hasan, A. (2010). Time Allocation in Rural Households: The Indirect Effects of Conditional
  Cash Transfer Programs. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper (5256).

Heath, R. and A. M. Mobarak (2015). Manufacturing Growth and the Lives of Bangladeshi
  Women. Journal of Development Economics 115, 1­15.

Heath, R. and X. Tan (2015). Intrahousehold Bargaining, Female Autonomy, and Labor
  Supply: Theory and Evidence from India.

ILO (2015). Key Indicators of the Labour Market 2015 (KILM) Database. Online. LFEP
  Database, 7th edition (January 2016 of the 2015 revision).

India Census (2011). Sex Ratio in India.

Jacoby, H. G. and B. Dasgupta (2015). Changing Wage Structure in India in the Post-Reform
  Era: 1993-2011. Policy Research Working Paper 7426, World Bank Group.

Jensen, R. (2012). Do Labor Market Opportunities Affect Young Women's Work and
  Family Decisions? Experimental Evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 127 (2), 753­792.

Kabeer, N. (1999). Resources, Agency, Achievements: Reflections on the Measurement of
 Women's Empowerment. Development and Change 30 (3), 435­464.

Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
  Effects. Econometrica 75 (1), pp. 83­119.

Lundberg, S. and R. A. Pollak (1993). Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage Market.
  The Journal of Political Economy 101 (6), 988­1010.

                                            32
Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar (2016). Building State Capacity: Evidence
 from Biometric Smartcards in India. American Economic Review 106 (10), 2895­2929.

Niehaus, P. and S. Sukhtankar (2013, November). Corruption Dynamics: The Golden Goose
  Effect. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (4), 230­69.

Prentice, D. A. (2007). Norms, Prescriptive and Descriptive. Encyclopedia of Social Psy-
  chology , 630­631.

Qian, N. (2008). Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-Specific
  Earnings on Sex Imbalance. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3), 1251­1285.

Rangel, M. A. (2006). Alimony Rights and Intrahousehold Allocation of Resources: Evidence
  from Brazil. Economic Journal 116 (513), 627 ­ 658.

RBI (2016). Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) - Revised Guidelines.

RBI (2016). Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy 2015-16. Technical report, Reserve
 Bank of India.

Skoufias, E., M. Unar, and T. G. de Cossio (2013). The Poverty Impacts of Cash and
  In-Kind Transfers: Experimental Evidence from Rural Mexico. Journal of Development
  Effectiveness 5 (4), 401­429.

Srinivas, M. N. (1995). Social Change in Modern India. Orient Blackswan.

Stevenson, B. (2008). Divorce Law and Women's Labor Supply. Journal of Empirical Legal
  Studies 5 (4), 853­873.

Subbarao, K., C. Del Ninno, C. Andrews, and C. Rodríguez-Alas (2012). Public Works as a
  Safety Net: Design, Evidence, and Implementation. World Bank Publications.

Tankard, M. E. and E. L. Paluck (2016). Norm Perception as a Vehicle for Social Change.
  Social Issues and Policy Review 10 (1), 181­211.

UNWOMEN (2012, December). Minister of Rural Development Jairam Ramesh commits to
 making MGNREGA more women-friendly. UNWomen News .




                                           33
                                        Table 1: Predictors of Being Constrained

                                                                            (1)               (2)             (3)       (4)
                                                                        Unconstrained     Constrained     Difference
                                                                                                                         N
                                                                           Mean             Mean            C-U
 Panel A: Characteristics of Women
  Age+                                                                      40.459           37.830       -2.629       1699
                                                                                                            (0.641)
  Years Education+                                                           0.471           1.113         0.643       1646
                                                                                                            (0.153)
  Age Had First Child (Among Women With Kids at Baseline)+                  19.031           19.254          0.223     1594
                                                                                                            (0.178)
  Has Individual Bank Account                                                0.585           0.500        -0.085       1620
                                                                                                            (0.026)
  If Worked for Pay in Last Year                                             0.837            0.740       -0.097       1620
                                                                                                            (0.020)
  Earnings Last Month                                                       871.999         680.206      -191.793      1596
                                                                                                           (63.220)
  Private Labor Index                                                        0.070           -0.128       -0.197       1620
                                                                                                            (0.049)
  MGNREGS Labor Index                                                       -0.073           -0.148         -0.075     1620
                                                                                                            (0.038)
  Empowerment Index                                                          0.071           -0.022       -0.093       1610
                                                                                                            (0.027)
  Actual Norms Index                                                        -0.074           -0.089          -0.016    1620
                                                                                                            (0.032)
  Perceived Norms Index: Acceptance Working Women                           -0.026           -0.087          -0.062    1618
                                                                                                            (0.044)
  Perceived Norms Index: Acceptance Husbands                                -0.039           -0.086          -0.047    1618
                                                                                                            (0.039)
 Panel B: Characteristics of Husbands
  Age+                                                                      44.962           42.813       -2.149       1655
                                                                                                           (0.792)
  Years Education+                                                           3.266           4.996         1.730       1649
                                                                                                           (0.260)
  Has Individual Bank Account                                                0.837           0.820          -0.017     1490
                                                                                                           (0.021)
  If Worked for Pay in Last Year                                             0.990            0.994          0.004     1490
                                                                                                           (0.004)
  Earnings Last Month                                                      1438.257         1508.418        70.160     1472
                                                                                                          (138.827)
  Private Labor Index                                                        0.612           0.680         0.067       1490
                                                                                                           (0.031)
  MGNREGS Labor Index                                                        0.177           0.054         -0.123      1490
                                                                                                           (0.063)
  Actual Norms Index                                                         0.030           -0.000         -0.031     1490
                                                                                                           (0.032)
  Perceived Norms Index: Acceptance Working Women                           -0.085           -0.209       -0.123       1490
                                                                                                           (0.042)
  Perceived Norms Index: Acceptance Husbands                                -0.283           -0.423       -0.141       1490
                                                                                                           (0.046)
 Panel C: Household Characteristics
  Other Backwards Caste+                                                     0.496           0.507            0.012    1575
                                                                                                            (0.053)
  Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe+                                           0.458           0.403           -0.054    1575
                                                                                                            (0.054)
  Household Income Last Month (Male Report)                                5345.488         4637.625      -707.863     1487
                                                                                                          (342.178)
  DHS Work Index (Residualized)                                              0.026           -0.018         -0.044     1489
                                                                                                            (0.019)
  DHS Work Index (Unresidualized)                                            0.045           -0.016        -0.061      1489
                                                                                                            (0.022)
 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. Sample limited to control group. The mean of the constrained
indicator for this sample is 0.336. + Outcomes are from short run survey; otherwise, outcomes are from long run survey. Data
from short run survey, such as age, are left as their original values.  Index constructed using the Indian Demographic and
Health Survey V (2005-2006) and merged onto our sample at the subcaste level. The residualized index residualizes out female
education, husband education, and the DHS wealth index within the DHS data. See Online Data Appendix for more details.
Variables measured in INR topcoded at the 99th percentile. The exchange rate was approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015
and INR 65 per USD in 2017. The first two columns show the means among unconstrained and constrained women. The third
column shows the regression coefficient on an indicator variable for being constrained. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10.




                                                             34
                  Table 2: Impact of Treatments on Bank Account Use

                                                                      Banking    CSP
                                                 Account
                                                                     Autonomy Knowledge
                                                Use Index
                                                                       Index    Index
                                         Short-Run      Long-Run      Long-Run      Long-Run
                                            (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
 Panel A: Full sample
  : Direct Deposit and Training            0.131         0.130         0.190           0.145
                                           (0.071)       (0.054)       (0.073)        (0.105)
  Accts Only Mean                           -0.000        -0.000        -0.000         0.000
  N                                          2504          2464          2464          2464

 Panel B: Constrained Women
  : Direct Deposit and Training            0.207         0.265         0.266          0.307
                                           (0.101)       (0.083)       (0.086)        (0.139)
  Accts Only Mean                           -0.060        -0.097        -0.109         -0.068
  N                                          922           903           903            903

 Panel C: Unconstrained Women
  : Direct Deposit and Training             0.102         0.047         0.092          0.041
                                           (0.080)       (0.058)       (0.078)        (0.098)
  Accts Only Mean                           0.027         0.053         0.062          0.047
  N                                         1519          1501          1501           1501


  P-value: Panel B  = Panel C               0.307        0.017         0.042          0.026
 Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include
strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post lasso. The
set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See
Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, ***
p 0.10. The account use index includes: if the respondent visited the bank in the past 6
months, the respondent's individual account balance, and if the respondent owns an individual
account. The banking autonomy index includes if the respondent visits the bank alone, if
they visit the bank without the supervision of a male, if they feel comfortable conducting
transactions at the CSP, if they feel comfortable visiting the CSP alone, and if they believe
women can visit a CSP without male supervision. The CSP knowledge index includes: if the
respondent has heard of a CSP before and the number of transactions ever conducted at a CSP.
All monetary values are denominated in Indian Rupees and top-coded at the 99th percentile
(by gender). The exchange rate was approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015 and INR 65 per
USD in 2017. All index components are standardized with respect to the Accounts Only group;
see Online Data Appendix for details on how these indices are constructed.



                                               35
                            Table 3: Impact of Treatments on Women's Labour Supply

                                               Aggregate                   MGNREGS                      Private
                                              Labor Supply                Labor Supply                Labor Supply
                                                 Index                     Sub-Index                   Sub-Index
                                         Short-Run     Long-Run      Short-Run     Long-Run      Short-Run     Long-Run
                                            (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
 Panel A: Full sample
  : Direct Deposit and Training           0.165           0.045       0.186           0.021       0.166           0.048
                                          (0.042)        (0.048)      (0.071)        (0.080)      (0.050)        (0.062)
  Accts Only Mean                           0.000        -0.000        -0.000         0.000         0.000        -0.000
  N                                         2504          2464          2504          2464          2504          2464

 Panel B: Constrained Women
  : Direct Deposit and Training           0.213         0.193          0.263          0.069       0.226         0.279
                                          (0.051)       (0.060)        (0.111)       (0.073)      (0.059)       (0.097)
  Accts Only Mean                          -0.122        -0.186        -0.049        -0.102        -0.163        -0.275
  N                                         922           903           922           903           922           903

 Panel C: Unconstrained Women
  : Direct Deposit and Training           0.150           -0.036       0.168          -0.008       0.153          -0.094
                                          (0.052)        (0.057)       (0.071)       (0.102)       (0.071)       (0.059)
  Accts Only Mean                           0.061         0.108         0.033         0.067         0.080         0.156
  N                                         1519          1501          1519          1501          1519          1501


  P-value: Panel B  = Panel C               0.276       0.001           0.343         0.398         0.352       0.000
 Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district
fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual
and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential controls. *
p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The labor supply index is an average of the MGNREGS, private, and general labor
sub-indices. All sub-index components are standardized with respect to the Accounts Only group. The MGNREGS
labor supply index includes if the respondent worked in the past month and if the respondent worked in the past year
(self-reports). It also includes variables from the administrative MIS data: if the respondent worked for MGNREGS in
the past month, if worked for MGNREGS in past year, MGNREGS wages in past month, and MGNREGS wages in past
year. The private labor supply index includes: if the respondent's primary occupation was a worker in the past year,
if the respondent worked for pay in the past year, and total earnings from private work in the past year. The general
labor supply index includes variables that could reflect either public or private work: if respondent worked for pay in the
past month, total earnings in the past month, and total months worked in the past year. See Online Data Appendix for
further details on variable construction. All monetary values are denominated in Indian Rupees and top-coded at the
99th percentile (by gender). The public/private labor supply index is included in the aggregate labor supply index but
not included in this table.




                                                            36
                                                     Table 4: Impact of Treatments on Empowerment

                                                  Aggregate                                                  Mobility in               Self-Reported
                                                                              Purchase Index
                                               Empowerment Index                                             Past Year                Decision Making
                                              Short-Run Long-Run          Short-Run     Long-Run      Short-Run      Long-Run      Short-Run     Long-Run
                                                 (1)       (2)               (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)
      Panel A: Full sample
       : Direct Deposit and Training             0.041         0.032        0.096          0.039         0.037         0.053          -0.021        0.019
                                                (0.032)       (0.034)       (0.053)       (0.063)       (0.036)       (0.035)        (0.053)       (0.045)
       Accts Only Mean                           0.000         0.002         0.000         0.000         -0.000        0.000          0.000        -0.000
       N                                         2504          2453          2504          2453           2504         2464           2504          2464

      Panel B: Constrained Women
       : Direct Deposit and Training           0.100         0.144          0.239         0.238          0.023        0.115           0.041         0.062
                                               (0.037)       (0.049)        (0.067)       (0.080)       (0.052)       (0.056)        (0.064)       (0.078)
       Accts Only Mean                          -0.028         -0.111        -0.089        -0.218        0.054         -0.042        -0.050        -0.084
       N                                         922            897           922           897           922           903           922           903

      Panel C: Unconstrained Women
       : Direct Deposit and Training             0.026         -0.022        0.042         -0.059        0.060         -0.001         -0.030        -0.005
37




                                                (0.041)       (0.036)       (0.065)       (0.069)       (0.044)       (0.040)        (0.071)       (0.056)
       Accts Only Mean                           0.010         0.055         0.037         0.102         -0.031        0.027          0.025         0.035
       N                                         1519          1496          1519          1496           1519         1501           1519          1501


       P-value: Panel B  = Panel C               0.145       0.002          0.029         0.002          0.538         0.061          0.430         0.487
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates
     are selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online
     Data Appendix for the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The aggregate empowerment index is the average
     of the purchase, mobility in past year, and self-reported decision making sub-indices (columns 3-8). All sub-index components are standardized
     with respect to the Accounts Basic group. The purchase index includes indicators for if the respondent ever makes purchases for certain activities
     and if the respondent sometimes or always uses own funds for certain activities. Activities include spending on daily food, spending on clothing
     for yourself, children's health, spending on home improvement, spending on festivals, and food and drink outside the home. The mobility index
     includes indicators for if the respondent visited the market in the panchayat, market in the district headquarters, natal home, anganwadi, and
     primary health center in the past year and in the past 30 days. The self-reported decision making index includes indicators for if the respondent
     helps decide or decides how to spend their her earnings and whether or not to take employment. See Online Data Appendix for further details on
     variable construction.
                                                                   Table 5: Impact of Treatments on Actual Norms

                                                                      Female Reports                                                         Male Reports
                                             Actual Norms       Personal       Acceptance:         Acceptance: Actual Norms           Personal       Acceptance:         Acceptance:
                                                Index          Preferences    Working Women         Husbands      Index              Preferences    Working Women         Husbands
                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)          (5)                  (6)              (7)                (8)
      Panel A: Full sample
       : Direct Deposit and Training             0.110           0.098               0.091             0.087            -0.011          -0.059            0.015              -0.024
                                                 (0.040)         (0.044)            (0.061)           (0.060)          (0.043)         (0.070)           (0.051)            (0.057)
       Accts Only Mean                            -0.000          0.000             0.000             -0.000            0.077           0.180             0.001              0.049
       N                                           2464           2464              2464               2464             2293            2293              2293               2293

      Panel B: Constrained Women
       : Direct Deposit and Training             0.215           0.160             0.243             0.210              -0.036          0.012             -0.020             -0.099
                                                 (0.051)         (0.069)           (0.073)           (0.077)           (0.082)         (0.109)           (0.083)            (0.103)
       Accts Only Mean                            -0.095          -0.068            -0.099            -0.117            0.066           0.091             0.045              0.062
       N                                           903             903               903               903               837             837               837                837
38




      Panel C: Unconstrained Women
       : Direct Deposit and Training              0.050           0.059              0.007             0.019            -0.001          -0.083            0.040              -0.007
                                                 (0.054)         (0.059)            (0.079)           (0.073)          (0.043)         (0.079)           (0.063)            (0.057)
       Accts Only Mean                            0.048           0.043             0.048              0.054            0.080           0.218             -0.024             0.046
       N                                          1501            1501              1501               1501             1403            1403               1403              1403


       P-value: Panel B  = Panel C               0.024            0.269             0.017             0.040             0.688           0.427             0.564              0.409
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using double
     post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential controls.
     * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. These questions were only asked in the long run survey. The actual norms index is the average of the personal preference, acceptance of
     working women, and acceptance of husbands sub-indices (columns 2-4). All sub-index components are standardized with respect to the Accounts Only group. The personal
     preferences index includes if the respondent believes that women can work, if prefers to have a daughter-in-law who wants to work for pay, and if prefers to have a son-in-law
     who allows daughter to work for pay. The acceptance indices are derived from a series of vignette questions featuring a housewife and working woman. The acceptance of
     working women sub-index includes if the respondent believes the working woman is the better wife, if believes the working woman is the better mother, and if believes the
     working woman is the better caretaker. The acceptance of husbands index includes if the respondent believes the working woman's husband is a better provider and if believes
     the working woman's husband is a better husband. See Online Data Appendix for further details on variable construction.
                                                    Table 6: Impact of Treatments on Perceived Norms

                                                                Female Reports                                            Male Reports
                                             Perceived    Perceived Norms:      Perceived Norms:      Perceived Perceived Norms:         Perceived Norms:
                                              Norms          Acceptance            Acceptance          Norms       Acceptance               Acceptance
                                              Index       Working Women            Husbands            Index    Working Women               Husbands
                                                (1)              (2)                   (3)               (4)           (5)                      (6)
      Panel A: Full sample
       : Direct Deposit and Training            0.062           0.079                  0.050           0.087              0.062                0.113
                                               (0.039)          (0.040)               (0.046)          (0.044)           (0.053)               (0.052)
       Accts Only Mean                         -0.000            -0.000                0.000            -0.236           -0.138                -0.334
       N                                        2464              2464                 2464              2292             2292                  2292

      Panel B: Constrained Women
       : Direct Deposit and Training           0.116             0.096                0.152             0.102             0.030                0.174
                                               (0.069)          (0.071)               (0.080)          (0.078)           (0.095)               (0.084)
       Accts Only Mean                         -0.079            -0.064               -0.094            -0.310           -0.188                -0.432
39




       N                                        903               903                  903               836              836                   836

      Panel C: Unconstrained Women
       : Direct Deposit and Training            0.007            0.052                 -0.037          0.115              0.090                0.121
                                               (0.043)          (0.048)               (0.051)          (0.046)           (0.063)               (0.052)
       Accts Only Mean                          0.047            0.041                 0.053            -0.200           -0.117                -0.284
       N                                        1501             1501                  1501              1403             1403                  1403


       P-value: Panel B  = Panel C              0.168            0.606                0.041             0.882             0.597                 0.520
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates
     are selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data
     Appendix for the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. These questions were only asked in the long run survey.
     The perceived norms index is the average of the perceived acceptance of working women and the perceived acceptance of working women's husbands
     sub-indices. The perceived acceptance of working women sub-index includes the respondent's perception of the fraction of community members who
     will not think poorly of working women and if the respondent perceives that the working woman (from the vignettes) is viewed with more respect.
     The perceived acceptance of husbands sub-index includes the respondent's perception of the fraction of the community who will not think a working
     woman's husband is a bad provider and if the respondent perceives that the working woman's husband is viewed with more respect. See Online Data
     Appendix for further details on variable construction.
                  Figure 1: Distribution of Village-Level Attitudes and Perceived Social Sanctions towards Female Work

                               A. Actual Norms (Belives Women Cannot Work)                      B. Perceived Norms (Share Community Judging Working Woman/Husband)
              7




                                                                                            7
              6




                                                                                            6
              5




                                                                                            5
              4




                                                                                            4
        Density




                                                                                      Density
              3




                                                                                            3
40




              2




                                                                                            2
              1




                                                                                            1
              0




                                                                                            0
                  0       .1              .2          .3          .4          .5                  .3            .4              .5            .6           .7
                                  Share Reporting Women Can Not Work                                             Perceived Share Community Judging


                                                                        Male Report              Female Report

     Notes: Both panels limit the sample to 32 Control group GPs that have 20 or more non-missing observations for both male and female
     reports. Panel A plots the GP-level distribution of the share of respondents who agree with the statement "women can not go out and
     work" over "women can go out for work". Panel B plots the average female report of the share of households who would speak badly about
     a woman if she were to go out and work (female report) and the share of households who would think a man is a bad provider if his wife
     were to go out and work. The dashed lines report the GP-level average of each variable of interest.
                                     Figure 2: Administrative Data - NREGA deposits in Project Accounts Over Time


                                  A. Received any MGNREGS deposit in project account                               B. Cumulative MGNREGS Deposits
                    .5




                                                                                               4000
                    .4




                                                                                               3000
                    .3




                                                                                          Amount (Rp)
         Fraction




                                                                                            2000
                    .2
41




                                                                                               1000
                    .1
                    0




                                                                                               0
                         2014m1        2015m1        2016m1        2017m1        2018m1                 2014m1   2015m1      2016m1      2017m1     2018m1
                                                        Date                                                                    Date



                                                     Accounts Only                                  Accounts + Direct Deposit
                                                     Accounts + Training                            Accounts + Direct Deposit + Training


     Notes: Administrative bank account data. All non-account openers are coded as having zero values for all measures. All outcomes are
     top-coded at the 99th percentile by month and gender. Dashed lines demarcate the beginning and end of the short-run and long-run
     surveys. The exchange rate was approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015 and INR 65 per USD in 2017.
                                              Figure 3: Treatment Effects on Labor Supply Sub-Indices

                        MGNREGS Labor Supply Index                          Private Labor Supply Index                                     Public/Priv. LS Index
             .6




                                                             .6




                                                                                                                              .4
                                                             .4
             .4




                                                                                                                              .2
        Effect Size




                                                        Effect Size




                                                                                                                    Effect Size
                                                             .2
            .2
42




                                                                                                                              0
                                                             0
             0




                                                             -.2
             -.2




                                                                                                                              -.2
                      Short-Run            Long-Run                    Short-Run                 Long-Run                           Short-Run                Long-Run



                                                                      Constrained                   Unconstrained


     Notes: Bars display effect of Accounts + Direct Deposit + Training. Whiskers show 90 and 95 percent confidence intervals, based on
     robust standard errors clustered at the GP level. See Online Data Appendix for details on index components.
                                      Figure 4: Share of MGNREGS Wages Paid Individually Over Time


                                     .6
   Share Workspells Paid Individually
  0         .2          .4




                                 2014q1            2015q1              2016q1               2017q1       2018q1
                                                                       Quarter

                                                            Accounts Only, Constrained
                                                            Accounts Only, Unconstrained
                                                            Direct Deposit and Training, Constrained
                                                            Direct Deposit and Training, Unconstrained


Notes: This graphs the share of MGNREGS payments made to sampled women in individual
accounts according to MGNREGS MIS data. A small number of payments cannot be classified as
individual or joint; these are dropped from all estimates. Shaded bars indicate follow-up survey
periods.




                                                                         43
          Figure 5: Treatment Effects by Above/Below Median GP-Level FLFP


                            Labor Supply Index                                   Empowerment Index




                                                                    .2
          .3
          .2




                                                                    .1
               .1
     Effect Size




                                                          Effect Size
      0




                                                                    0
          -.1
          -.2




                    Short-Run               Long-Run                -.1   Short-Run               Long-Run



                                            Constrained                     Unconstrained



                    Actual Norms Index (Female Report)                    Perceived Norms Index (Male Report)
          .3




                                                                    .3
          .2




                                                                    .2
     Effect Size




                                                          Effect Size
         .1




                                                             .1
          0




                                                                    0
          -.1




                                                                    -.1




                                Long-Run                                              Long-Run



                                            Constrained                     Unconstrained



Notes: In this figure, an individual is considered "constrained" if they reside in a GP with a
female labor force participation rate below the median rate (among the sample GPs) according to
the 2011 Indian Census. See Tables B15 and B16 for the full set of regressions. Whiskers give 90
and 95 percent confidence intervals on point estimates. Robust standard errors are clustered at
the GP level. All regressions include controls for strata, district, and additional controls selected
via double lasso.




                                                          44
A      Theoretical Appendix
In this section we show how a collective model of household bargaining with fixed norms
costs can be represented by the reduced form presented in the main paper.
    We assume a household consists of two members (i  {M, F }). Individual utility func-
tions, norms costs, wages, and hours constraints are the same as those described in the main
text. Further, each household receives non-labor income y . Finally, we assume that the wife's
Pareto weight is given by µ. This weight may be a function of wages, non-labor income, and
"distribution factors" (z ), which affect the bargaining weight µ, but do not otherwise enter
the household utility maximization problem (Blundell et al., 2005).
    The household's allocation problem is given by:

         max
          i i
                   µ(z ) uF 1 - hF    F
                                 N - hP , c
                                           F
                                             -  F 1 hF    F
                                                     P + hN > 0             +                        (3)
         hs ,c

                 (1 - µ(z )) uM 1 - hM    M M
                                     N - hP , c -  M 1 hF    F
                                                        P + hN > 0                  subject to
                            cM + cF         i=M,F    s=N,P
                                                              i i
                                                             ws hs + y
                                             hi
                                              s  0
                                                     i
                                            hi
                                             N  Ns


Where 1 (·) is the indicator function.
    Now, assume no social constraints to female work:  F =  M = 0. In this case, the
household problem can be represented in two stages. In the first stage, the household im-
plements a sharing rule in which the wife receives a share of non-labor income given by
F wP   F    F
         , wN , wP M    M
                     , wN , y, z , while the husband receives share M = y - F .37 In the second
stage, each spouse maximizes his or her own individual utility subject to the budget con-
straint ci  wN   i i
                    hN + wP   hP + i and the hours constraints. Proposition 1 in Chiappori (1992)
                            i i

provides a formal proof of the equivalence between these two problems ­ the key here is that
preferences over consumption and leisure are separable, in that each spouse only cares about
his/her own consumption and leisure. The first order conditions give the familiar result that
if an individual works in sector j (and in the case of MGNREGS the hours constraint is not
binding), his or her marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure is equal
                            i
to the wage: ui   l/ui
                     c = wj .

    If  F > 0 but  M = 0, the two-stage setup still delivers the same solution as program
3. However, in some cases a woman may be socially constrained, in that she does not work
                           i
even though ui   l/uic < wj .


  37
     An individual's income share can be negative or positive ­ the purpose of i is to fix which point on
the Pareto frontier the household ends up choosing.

                                                    45
    Things look different when  M > 0, since women's preferences over consumption and
leisure are no longer separable from men's. However, we can rewrite program 3 to satisfy
separability. Specifically, let the wife's modified utility be: uF (lF , cF ) -  F - 1-
                                                                                      µ
                                                                                        µ M
                                                                                          . The
husband's modified utility is uM (lM , cM ). The bargaining power weighted objective function
matches that of program 3, but the utility functions are separable.
    This in turn implies that in the two stage problem, we can think of the wife behaving
as if she maximizes uF (lF , cF ) -  F - 1-  µ
                                               µ M
                                                 : she internalizes the norms costs borne to
her husband, with more weight placed on this cost the lower her relative bargaining power.
Further, this modified two-stage formulation corresponds to the reduced-form problem laid
out in the main text.


B     Appendix Tables and Figures




                                              46
                                              Table B1: Balance on Attrition

                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                                               (4)         (5)                       (6)
                                                                             Accounts
                                               Accounts Accounts
                                                                  Accounts   + Direct   P-Value:
                                                Only    + Direct                                                      N
                                                                 + Training  Deposit   Joint Test
                                                Mean    Deposit
                                                                            + Training
      Panel A: Full Sample
        Woman Interviewed at Midline             0.931        0.002         0.003          0.018         0.469      2666
        Husband Interviewed at Midline           0.869        0.022         0.011          0.030         0.507      2666
        Woman Interviewed at Endline             0.911        0.014         0.007          0.023         0.579      2666
        Husband Interviewed at Endline           0.844        0.033         0.002          0.019         0.514      2666
      Panel B: Constrained Women
        Woman Interviewed at Midline             0.916       0.016         -0.011          0.021        0.511        993
        Husband Interviewed at Midline           0.877       0.026         -0.032          0.012        0.248        993
        Woman Interviewed at Endline             0.877       0.057          0.003          0.025        0.132        993
        Husband Interviewed at Endline           0.824       0.052         -0.026         -0.024        0.058        993
47




      Panel C: Unconstrained Women
        Woman Interviewed at Midline             0.940        -0.012        0.009          0.014         0.488      1608
        Husband Interviewed at Midline           0.869         0.015       0.023           0.034         0.538      1608
        Woman Interviewed at Endline             0.930        -0.014       0.010           0.021         0.390      1608
        Husband Interviewed at Endline           0.862         0.012       -0.001          0.033         0.642      1608
      Notes: Each row is a separate regression. All regressions include district and strata fixed effects. The first column
     gives the mean among the Accounts Only group, columns 2-4 give regression coefficients. Robust standard errors
     clustered at the GP level are omitted from the table for legibility. Column 5 gives the p-value from a test that
     all treatment coefficients are jointly equal to zero. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.01. Sample is the union of
     individuals in midline and endline. Husbands were only interviewed at midline if their wives were interviewed.
                                           Table B2: Balance on Predetermined Demographic Characteristics

                                                                                   (1)          (2)           (3)      (4)         (5)               (6)
                                                                                                                     Accounts
                                                                                Accounts     Accounts
                                                                                                          Accounts   + Direct   P-Value:
                                                                                 Only        + Direct                                                 N
                                                                                                         + Training  Deposit   Joint Test
                                                                                 Mean        Deposit
                                                                                                                    + Training
      Panel A: Individual Characteristics of Eligible Women
        Age                                                                      40.067       -0.517        0.099          -0.926        0.540      2407
        Years Education                                                           0.808       -0.042        -0.186          0.086        0.221      2332
        Can Read or Write                                                         0.106        0.003        -0.018          0.009        0.418      2391
        Had No Children At Time of Baseline                                       0.021       -0.003        -0.004         -0.006        0.875      2388
        Age Had First Child (Among Women With Kids at Baseline)                  19.074        0.048        0.183          -0.258        0.187      2339
        Ever Worked for MGNREGS Before Baseline (Unconstrained)                   0.641       -0.015         0.005          0.009        0.923      2407
        Worked for MGNREGS in Past Year at Baseline                               0.161        0.020         0.022          0.046        0.598      2138
        In MGNREGS MIS in Past Year+                                              0.518       -0.079         0.049          0.022        0.251      2308
      Panel B: Individual Characteristics of Husbands
        Age                                                                      44.597        0.130        -0.046        -1.106         0.462      2359
        Years Education                                                           4.272        -0.306       -0.411         0.107         0.333      2338
        Can Read or Write                                                         0.564        -0.062       -0.055        -0.033         0.400      2289
        Ever Worked for MGNREGS Before Baseline                                   0.930        -0.018       -0.004        0.026         0.006       2407
        Worked for MGNREGS in Past Year at Baseline                               0.317         0.020       -0.026         0.015         0.795      2070
48




        In MGNREGS MIS in Past Year+                                              0.652       -0.100        -0.029        -0.079         0.247      2149
      Panel C: Household/Couple Characteristics
        Male-Female Age Gap                                                       4.707       0.498         -0.151         -0.306        0.055      2359
        Male-Female Education Gap                                                 3.508       -0.338        -0.200         -0.024        0.593      2269
        Hindu                                                                     0.959       0.013         -0.013         0.023         0.130      2391
        Scheduled Caste or Tribe                                                  0.360       0.009         0.087          0.032         0.687      2276
        Other Backward Caste                                                      0.556       -0.015        -0.057         -0.020        0.893      2276
        Number Household Members on Job Card                                      3.947       -0.185         0.144         -0.022        0.651      2407
      Panel D: GP Characteristics
        Number Eligible Women in GP                                              25.324        7.047         4.917          2.338        0.441       133
        Total GP Population                                                     2837.059    1228.640       866.262        255.411        0.169       133
        Fraction GP Population Female                                            0.461         0.002        -0.000          0.005        0.492       133
        Fraction GP Population SC/ST                                             0.274        -0.010         0.027          0.064        0.242       133
        Fraction Female GP Population Literate                                   0.411        -0.006        -0.006         -0.008        0.974       133
        Fraction Male GP Population Literate                                     0.651        -0.017        -0.005         -0.014        0.742       133
        Female Workers / Female GP Population                                    0.277         0.004         0.019          0.040        0.571       133
        Male Workers / Male GP Population                                         0.511        0.004         0.013          0.007        0.474       133
      Notes: Each row is a separate regression. All regressions include district and strata fixed effects. Regressions in Panel D are at the GP level with
     robust standard errors; otherwise, regressions are at the individual level with standard errors clustered at the GP level. Standard errors are omitted
     from the table for legibility. The first column gives the mean among the Accounts Only group, columns 2-4 give regression coefficients. Column 5
     gives the p-value from a test that all treatment coefficients are jointly equal to zero. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.01. Variables marked by  are
     from the baseline census, and variables marked by + are from the MIS data. All data in Panel D are from the Indian Census. Otherwise, data are
     from the short run survey. Data from the short run survey, such as age, are left as their original values.
                                 Table B3: Impact of Treatments on Main Outcomes: Full Specification (Part 1)

                                                                     Short Run                                          Long Run
                                                    1          2         3                     N       1          2          3                   N
                                                    (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)      (10)
      Table 2: Women's Bank Use
      Account Use Index                           0.127       -0.029    0.034     0.131      2504     0.045       0.012     0.073 0.130         2464
                                                  (0.064)    (0.074)   (0.098)                       (0.048)    (0.054)   (0.078)
                                  Constrained     0.214       -0.017    0.011     0.207      922       0.098      0.067     0.100 0.265          903
                                                  (0.110)    (0.119)   (0.152)                       (0.086)    (0.086)   (0.123)
                               Unconstrained       0.094      -0.022    0.030      0.102     1519     0.032      -0.012    0.027   0.047        1501
                                                  (0.062)    (0.059)   (0.097)                       (0.049)    (0.057)   (0.079)
      Banking Autonomy Index                                                                           0.134      0.012     0.044 0.190         2464
                                                                                                     (0.085)    (0.071)   (0.115)
                                  Constrained                                                         0.124      -0.029     0.170 0.266          903
                                                                                                     (0.091)    (0.084)   (0.128)
                               Unconstrained                                                           0.099     -0.025     0.017   0.092       1501
                                                                                                     (0.099)    (0.081)   (0.129)
      CSP Knowledge Index                                                                             -0.046     -0.057   0.249    0.145        2464
                                                                                                     (0.083)    (0.094)   (0.135)
                                  Constrained                                                         0.103      -0.075     0.280 0.307          903
                                                                                                     (0.116)    (0.122)   (0.176)
                               Unconstrained                                                          -0.119     -0.039     0.199  0.041        1501
49




                                                                                                     (0.080)    (0.095)   (0.135)
      Table 3: Women's Labor Supply                0.043      0.033     0.089 0.165          2504     0.039      -0.036     0.041  0.045        2464
      Aggregate Labor Supply Index                (0.044)    (0.040)   (0.059)                       (0.056)    (0.049)   (0.074)
                                                   0.046     0.087       0.080 0.213         922     0.166        0.033    -0.006 0.193          903
                                  Constrained     (0.052)    (0.047)   (0.072)                       (0.072)    (0.065)   (0.094)
                                                   0.068      -0.001     0.084 0.150         1519     -0.024     -0.084     0.071  -0.036       1501
                               Unconstrained      (0.056)    (0.056)   (0.075)                       (0.068)    (0.056)   (0.086)
                                                   0.027      -0.072   0.231 0.186           2504     -0.013     -0.077     0.111  0.021        2464
      MGNREGS Labor Supply Sub-Index              (0.068)    (0.059)   (0.094)                       (0.125)    (0.078)   (0.134)
                                                   0.061      -0.032   0.234 0.263           922       0.017     -0.033     0.085  0.069         903
                                  Constrained     (0.106)    (0.095)   (0.139)                       (0.093)    (0.070)   (0.113)
                                                   0.037     -0.103    0.233 0.168           1519     -0.038     -0.108     0.138  -0.008       1501
                               Unconstrained      (0.073)    (0.061)   (0.098)                       (0.157)    (0.098)   (0.162)
                                                   0.048     0.101       0.016 0.166         2504     0.090      -0.012    -0.030  0.048        2464
      Private Labor Supply Sub-Index              (0.049)    (0.048)   (0.070)                       (0.057)    (0.065)   (0.089)
                                                   0.042     0.120       0.063 0.226         922     0.322        0.103    -0.146 0.279          903
                                  Constrained     (0.062)    (0.064)   (0.092)                       (0.097)    (0.101)   (0.136)
                                                   0.081      0.106     -0.034 0.153         1519     -0.011     -0.089     0.006  -0.094       1501
                               Unconstrained      (0.066)    (0.071)   (0.093)                       (0.060)    (0.063)   (0.092)
      This table reports the main regression results. Each row lists results both in the short run (columns 1-5, when applicable) and long run
     (columns 6-10) for each main outcome variable in the full sample. Sub-rows represent results for the same outcome variable for the constrained
     and unconstrained sub-samples. 1 represents the effect of training (columns 1 and 6), 2 the effect of direct deposit (columns 2 and 7), and
     3 the effect of both training and direct deposit (columns 3 and 8).  is the total treatment effect of direct deposit and training (columns
     4 and 9). Columns 5 and 10 report the sample size. All regressions cluster robust standard errors at the GP level and include strata and
     district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level
     characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10.
                             Table B4: Impact of Treatments on Main Outcomes: Full Specification (Part 2)

                                                             Short Run                                          Long Run
                                             1         2         3                    N       1         2          3                    N
                                             (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)      (10)
      Table 4: Empowerment
      Aggregate Empowerment Index            0.003     0.011    0.027    0.041      2504    0.081       0.011      -0.060    0.032    2453
                                           (0.036)   (0.040)   (0.051)                     (0.042)    (0.030)    (0.052)
                           Constrained     0.069       0.033    -0.003 0.100        922    0.162        0.042      -0.060   0.144      897
                                           (0.042)   (0.040)   (0.057)                     (0.052)    (0.041)    (0.067)
                        Unconstrained       -0.013     0.011     0.029   0.026      1519    0.056      0.004       -0.082   -0.022    1496
                                           (0.047)   (0.050)   (0.069)                     (0.049)    (0.035)    (0.060)
      Purchase Index                        -0.027     0.027     0.095  0.096       2504    0.134      -0.028      -0.068    0.039    2453
                                           (0.049)   (0.062)   (0.075)                     (0.084)    (0.059)    (0.101)
                           Constrained       0.013     0.096    0.129 0.239         922    0.220        0.071      -0.053   0.238      897
                                           (0.060)   (0.072)   (0.089)                     (0.086)    (0.072)    (0.110)
                        Unconstrained       -0.064    -0.037     0.143   0.042      1519    0.108      -0.075      -0.092   -0.059    1496
                                           (0.057)   (0.069)   (0.091)                     (0.097)    (0.067)    (0.117)
      Mobility in Past Year                  0.046     0.014    -0.023   0.037      2504    0.047      -0.018       0.023    0.053    2464
50




                                           (0.034)   (0.037)   (0.047)                     (0.043)    (0.043)    (0.054)
                           Constrained       0.061    -0.001    -0.038   0.023      922     0.051      -0.021       0.086   0.115      903
                                           (0.047)   (0.047)   (0.070)                     (0.055)    (0.056)    (0.075)
                        Unconstrained        0.046     0.024    -0.011   0.060      1519    0.041      -0.015      -0.027   -0.001    1501
                                           (0.041)   (0.041)   (0.055)                     (0.049)    (0.049)    (0.064)
      Self-Reported Decision Making         -0.012    -0.005    -0.004  -0.021      2504    0.086     0.087      -0.153      0.019    2464
                                           (0.061)   (0.057)   (0.081)                     (0.048)    (0.044)    (0.069)
                           Constrained       0.107     0.010    -0.076   0.041      922    0.187        0.076     -0.200     0.062     903
                                           (0.075)   (0.056)   (0.093)                     (0.079)    (0.073)    (0.105)
                        Unconstrained       -0.050    -0.003     0.023  -0.030      1519    0.049     0.110      -0.165     -0.005    1501
                                           (0.082)   (0.077)   (0.111)                     (0.060)    (0.055)    (0.083)
      This table reports the main regression results. Each row lists results both in the short run (columns 1-5, when applicable) and long
     run (columns 6-10) for each main outcome variable in the full sample. Sub-rows represent results for the same outcome variable for
     the constrained and unconstrained sub-samples. 1 represents the effect of training (columns 1 and 6), 2 the effect of direct deposit
     (columns 2 and 7), and 3 the effect of both training and direct deposit (columns 3 and 8).  is the total treatment effect of direct
     deposit and training (columns 4 and 9). Columns 5 and 10 report the sample size. All regressions cluster robust standard errors at the
     GP level and include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post lasso. The set of potential
     controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential
     controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10.
   Table B5: Impact of Treatments on Main Outcomes: Full Specification (Part 3)

                                                                   Long Run
                                                 1         2           3                   N
                                                 (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)      (5)
 Table 5: Actual Norms, Female Report
 Actual Norms Index                             0.028  -0.010        0.093     0.110     2464
                                              (0.042) (0.037)        (0.056)
                              Constrained      0.064    0.030         0.121    0.215      903
                                              (0.058) (0.057)        (0.087)
                            Unconstrained      0.013   -0.035         0.072    0.050     1501
                                              (0.050) (0.041)        (0.063)
 Personal Preferences                          -0.014  -0.008        0.119     0.098     2464
                                              (0.041) (0.044)        (0.066)
                              Constrained      0.057   -0.031         0.135    0.160      903
                                              (0.069) (0.071)        (0.108)
                            Unconstrained      -0.063  -0.008        0.130     0.059     1501
                                              (0.045) (0.045)        (0.072)
 Acceptance: Working Women                     0.028   -0.030         0.092    0.091     2464
                                              (0.054) (0.055)        (0.077)
                              Constrained      0.051   -0.004        0.196     0.243      903
                                              (0.069) (0.078)        (0.109)
                            Unconstrained      0.015   -0.048         0.040    0.007     1501
                                              (0.073) (0.064)        (0.095)
 Acceptance: Husbands                           0.002  -0.069         0.154    0.087     2464
                                              (0.083) (0.059)        (0.103)
                              Constrained      0.071    0.075         0.064    0.210      903
                                              (0.092) (0.081)        (0.121)
                            Unconstrained      -0.023 -0.150          0.192    0.019     1501
                                              (0.102) (0.068)        (0.122)
 Table 5: Actual Norms, Male Report
 Actual Norms Index                            -0.037  -0.030          0.056   -0.011    2293
                                              (0.043) (0.038)        (0.057)
                              Constrained      -0.102  -0.027          0.092   -0.036     837
                                              (0.079) (0.083)        (0.104)
                            Unconstrained      0.031   -0.035         0.003    -0.001    1403
                                              (0.047) (0.042)        (0.062)
 Personal Preferences                          -0.022  -0.068          0.032   -0.059    2293
                                              (0.076) (0.070)        (0.103)
                              Constrained      -0.034   0.082         -0.036   0.012      837
                                              (0.111) (0.111)        (0.137)
                            Unconstrained      0.008 -0.152            0.061   -0.083    1403

 Acceptance: Working Women                     -0.037     -0.013      0.065    0.015     2293
                                              (0.048)    (0.047)     (0.068)
                              Constrained      -0.103     -0.059      0.143    -0.020     837
                                              (0.088)    (0.087)     (0.120)
                            Unconstrained      -0.004      0.020      0.024    0.040     1403
                                              (0.062)    (0.060)     (0.086)
 Acceptance: Husbands                          -0.070     -0.070     0.116     -0.024    2293
                                              (0.052)    (0.045)     (0.068)
                              Constrained     -0.167      -0.103      0.171    -0.099     837
                                              (0.098)    (0.101)     (0.128)
                            Unconstrained       0.002     -0.043      0.034    -0.007    1403
                                              (0.054)    (0.052)     (0.074)
 This table reports the main regression results. Each row lists results both in the long run
for each main outcome variable in the full sample. Sub-rows represent results for the same
outcome variable for the constrained and unconstrained sub-samples. 1 represents the effect
of training (column 1), 2 the effect of direct deposit (column 2), and 3 the effect of both
training and direct deposit (column 3).  is the total treatment effect of direct deposit and
training (column 4). Column 5 report the sample size. All regressions cluster robust standard
errors at the GP level and include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are
selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level
characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential
controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10.



                                              51
        Table B6: Impact of Treatments on Main Outcomes: Full Specification (Part 4)

                                                                             Long Run
                                                            1          2         3                    N
                                                            (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)      (5)
 Table 6: Perceived Norms, Female Report
 Perceived Norms Index                                     0.028     -0.032      0.066  0.062       2464
                                                         (0.049)    (0.038)    (0.064)
                                         Constrained       0.083     -0.010     0.042  0.116         903
                                                         (0.068)    (0.073)    (0.097)
                                      Unconstrained       -0.009     -0.053      0.070 0.007        1501
                                                         (0.061)    (0.040)    (0.073)
 Perceived Norms: Acceptance Working Women                 0.068     -0.034     0.045 0.079         2464
                                                         (0.047)    (0.043)    (0.063)
                                         Constrained       0.118     -0.014     -0.008 0.096         903
                                                         (0.078)    (0.079)    (0.105)
                                      Unconstrained        0.039     -0.052     0.065  0.052        1501
                                                         (0.057)    (0.050)    (0.073)
 Perceived Norms: Acceptance Husbands                     -0.002     -0.015     0.068  0.050        2464
                                                         (0.057)    (0.040)    (0.073)
                                         Constrained       0.075      0.039     0.037  0.152         903
                                                         (0.071)    (0.073)    (0.100)
                                      Unconstrained       -0.058     -0.054      0.074 -0.037       1501
                                                         (0.075)    (0.046)    (0.090)
 Table 6: Perceived Norms, Male Report
 Perceived Norms Index                                     0.052     0.019       0.017 0.087        2292
                                                         (0.040)    (0.044)    (0.062)
                                         Constrained      0.011      0.036      0.055   0.102        836
                                                         (0.076)    (0.070)    (0.099)
                                      Unconstrained      0.132       0.049      -0.066 0.115        1403
                                                         (0.044)    (0.047)    (0.064)
 Perceived Norms: Acceptance Working Women                0.039      0.005      0.018   0.062       2292
                                                         (0.049)    (0.057)    (0.078)
                                         Constrained      -0.032     0.006       0.057  0.030        836
                                                         (0.092)    (0.084)    (0.121)
                                      Unconstrained       0.083      0.004      0.003   0.090       1403
                                                         (0.061)    (0.066)    (0.092)
 Perceived Norms: Acceptance Husbands                     0.065      0.033      0.015 0.113         2292
                                                         (0.049)    (0.048)    (0.065)
                                         Constrained      0.054      0.066      0.053 0.174          836
                                                         (0.085)    (0.075)    (0.106)
                                      Unconstrained      0.147       0.066      -0.092 0.121        1403
                                                         (0.052)    (0.052)    (0.070)
 This table reports the main regression results. Each row lists results both in the long run for each
main outcome variable in the full sample. Sub-rows represent results for the same outcome variable for
the constrained and unconstrained sub-samples. 1 represents the effect of training (column 1), 2 the
effect of direct deposit (column 2), and 3 the effect of both training and direct deposit (column 3).
 is the total treatment effect of direct deposit and training (column 4). Column 5 report the sample
size. All regressions cluster robust standard errors at the GP level and include strata and district fixed
effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes
individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete
list of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10.




                                                   52
                             Table B7: Balance on Predetermined Demographic Characteristics - Unconstrained Sample

                                                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)               (6)
                                                                                                                     Accounts
                                                                               Accounts     Accounts
                                                                                                          Accounts   + Direct   P-Value:
                                                                                Only        + Direct                                                  N
                                                                                                         + Training  Deposit   Joint Test
                                                                                Mean        Deposit
                                                                                                                    + Training
      Panel A: Individual Characteristics of Eligible Women
        Age                                                                      41.255       -0.494        -0.413        -1.126         0.746      1472
        Years Education                                                           0.649       -0.091        -0.097         0.093         0.484      1424
        Can Read or Write                                                         0.080        0.001         0.003        0.000          0.998      1462
        Had No Children At Time of Baseline                                       0.017       -0.007        -0.005        -0.006         0.649      1462
        Age Had First Child (Among Women With Kids at Baseline)                  19.126       -0.036         0.021       -0.484          0.085      1442
        In MGNREGS MIS in Past Year+                                              0.558       -0.101         0.029        -0.050         0.403      1417
        Worked for MGNREGS in Past Year at Baseline                               0.250        0.044         0.041         0.076         0.561      1305
      Panel B: Individual Characteristics of Husbands
        Age                                                                      45.866        0.114         -0.974        -1.255        0.358      1441
        Years Education                                                           3.951        -0.564       -0.699         -0.242        0.258      1429
        Can Read or Write                                                         0.554      -0.097        -0.105         -0.086        0.049       1394
        In MGNREGS MIS in Past Year+                                              0.664       -0.102         -0.023       -0.102         0.209      1325
        Ever Worked for MGNREGS Before Baseline                                   0.926        -0.027         0.003       0.027         0.049       1472
        Worked for MGNREGS in Past Year at Baseline                               0.295         0.027         0.004         0.042        0.838      1314
53




      Panel C: Household/Couple Characteristics
        Male-Female Age Gap                                                      4.886        0.342         -0.568        -0.349         0.147      1441
        Male-Female Education Gap                                                3.311        -0.542        -0.526        -0.357         0.422      1384
        Hindu                                                                    0.972         0.011        -0.026         0.007         0.403      1464
        Scheduled Caste or Tribe                                                 0.370        0.046         0.102         0.025          0.674      1371
        Other Backward Caste                                                     0.569        -0.040        -0.103        -0.025         0.575      1371
        Number Household Members on Job Card                                     4.074        -0.358         0.082        -0.113         0.425      1472
      Panel D: GP Characteristics
        Number Eligible Women in GP                                             26.000         7.110         4.637          2.947        0.474       129
        Total GP Population                                                    2883.394     1196.056       811.583        254.732        0.218       129
        Fraction GP Population Female                                           0.463         0.000         -0.001          0.005        0.542       129
        Fraction GP Population SC/ST                                            0.282         -0.012         0.020          0.062        0.302       129
        Fraction Female GP Population Literate                                  0.409         -0.006        -0.006         -0.002        0.986       129
        Fraction Male GP Population Literate                                     0.648        -0.016        -0.005         -0.010        0.804       129
        Female Workers / Female GP Population                                   0.283         -0.004         0.014          0.046        0.387       129
        Male Workers / Male GP Population                                        0.511         0.005         0.013          0.006        0.540       129
      Notes: Each row is a separate regression. All regressions include district and strata fixed effects. Regressions in Panel D are at the GP level with
     robust standard errors; otherwise, regressions are at the individual level with standard errors clustered at the GP level. Standard errors are omitted
     from the table for legibility. The first column gives the mean among the Accounts Only group, columns 2-4 give regression coefficients. Column
     5 gives the p-value from a test that all treatment coefficients are jointly equal to zero. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.01. Variables marked by
      are from the baseline census, and variables marked by + are from the MIS data. All data in Panel D are from the Indian Census. Otherwise,

     data are from the short run survey. Data from the short run survey, such as age, are left as their original values. Sample restricted to women who
     reported having done NREGA work at baseline.
                             Table B8: Balance on Predetermined Demographic Characteristics - Constrained Sample

                                                                                  (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)              (6)
                                                                                                                    Accounts
                                                                              Accounts     Accounts
                                                                                                         Accounts   + Direct   P-Value:
                                                                               Only        + Direct                                                N
                                                                                                        + Training  Deposit   Joint Test
                                                                               Mean        Deposit
                                                                                                                   + Training
      Panel A: Individual Characteristics of Eligible Women
        Age                                                                     37.806       -0.072       1.926          -0.161        0.265      877
        Years Education                                                          1.070        0.138       -0.301          0.152        0.321      853
        Can Read or Write                                                        0.147        0.024       -0.045          0.041        0.122      871
        Had No Children At Time of Baseline                                      0.026        0.006        0.002         -0.004        0.903      870
        Age Had First Child (Among Women With Kids at Baseline)                 18.978        0.227       0.546           0.166        0.284      845
        In MGNREGS MIS in Past Year+                                             0.478       -0.028        0.117         0.130         0.095      833
      Panel B: Individual Characteristics of Husbands
        Age                                                                     42.144        0.621       2.192          -0.438         0.224     865
        Years Education                                                          4.947        0.028       0.046          0.696          0.274     856
        Can Read or Write                                                        0.587       -0.008       0.036          0.065          0.365     845
        In MGNREGS MIS in Past Year+                                             0.667       -0.087       -0.006         -0.040         0.612     772
        Ever Worked for MGNREGS Before Baseline                                  1.000        0.000       0.000          0.000            .       877
        Worked for MGNREGS in Past Year at Baseline                              0.359        0.008       -0.069         -0.034         0.691     756
      Panel C: Household/Couple Characteristics
54




        Male-Female Age Gap                                                     4.479        0.639         0.164         -0.294         0.203     865
        Male-Female Education Gap                                               3.907        -0.140        0.356          0.480         0.313     835
        Hindu                                                                   0.942         0.007        0.003          0.039         0.170     870
        Scheduled Caste or Tribe                                                0.332        -0.051        0.059         0.036          0.462     852
        Other Backward Caste                                                    0.543         0.037        0.020          0.009         0.974     852
        Number Household Members on Job Card                                    3.691         0.098        0.277          0.120         0.889     877
      Panel D: GP Characteristics
        Number Eligible Women in GP                                            26.438         7.706        6.445          3.087         0.374     124
        Total GP Population                                                   2875.813     1242.852      931.687        259.117         0.195     124
        Fraction GP Population Female                                          0.462         0.001         0.001          0.005         0.688     124
        Fraction GP Population SC/ST                                           0.278         -0.028       0.027           0.058         0.143     124
        Fraction Female GP Population Literate                                 0.413         -0.009       -0.008         -0.009         0.962     124
        Fraction Male GP Population Literate                                    0.654        -0.026       -0.004         -0.018         0.440     124
        Female Workers / Female GP Population                                  0.272          0.011        0.037          0.041         0.553     124
        Male Workers / Male GP Population                                       0.510         0.007       0.016           0.008         0.365     124
      Notes: Each row is a separate regression. All regressions include district and strata fixed effects. Regressions in Panel D are at the GP level
     with robust standard errors; otherwise, regressions are at the individual level with standard errors clustered at the GP level. Standard errors are
     omitted from the table for legibility. The first column gives the mean among the Accounts Only group, columns 2-4 give regression coefficients.
     Column 5 gives the p-value from a test that all treatment coefficients are jointly equal to zero. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.01. Variables
     marked by  are from the baseline census, and variables marked by + are from the MIS data. All data in Panel D are from the Indian Census.
     Otherwise, data are from the short run survey. Data from the short run survey, such as age, are left as their original values. Sample restricted to
     women who reported not having done NREGA work at baseline.
                               Table B9: Predictors of Living in a Low FLFP Village

                                                                             (1)           (2)             (3)       (4)
                                                                         High FLFP      Low FLFP       Difference
                                                                                                                      N
                                                                            Mean          Mean         Low-High
 Panel A: Characteristics of Women
  Age+                                                                      39.432         39.951          0.519    1738
                                                                                                         (0.705)
  Years Education+                                                           0.683         0.692           0.009    1683
                                                                                                         (0.130)
  Age Had First Child (Among Women With Kids at Baseline)+                  19.004         19.333          0.328    1631
                                                                                                         (0.201)
  Has Individual Bank Account                                                0.565         0.532          -0.032    1654
                                                                                                         (0.043)
                                                   
  Ever Worked for MGNREGS Before Baseline                                    0.274         0.468        0.194       1699
                                                                                                         (0.057)
  If Worked for Pay in Last Year                                             0.812         0.786          -0.026    1654
                                                                                                         (0.031)
  Earnings Last Month                                                      866.922        679.264       -187.658    1630
                                                                                                       (124.650)
  Private Labor Index                                                        0.013         -0.018         -0.031    1654
                                                                                                         (0.072)
  MGNREGS Labor Index                                                       -0.131         -0.046          0.085    1654
                                                                                                         (0.085)
  Empowerment Index                                                          0.038         0.042           0.004    1644
                                                                                                         (0.033)
  Actual Norms Index                                                        -0.051         -0.124       -0.073      1654
                                                                                                         (0.031)
  Perceived Norms Index: Acceptance Working Women                           -0.013         -0.113        -0.100     1652
                                                                                                         (0.050)
  Perceived Norms Index: Acceptance Husbands                                -0.039         -0.083         -0.044    1652
                                                                                                         (0.051)
 Panel B: Characteristics of Husbands
  Age+                                                                      43.841         45.089        1.248      1694
                                                                                                        (0.988)
                    +
  Years Education                                                            3.771         4.110          0.339     1688
                                                                                                        (0.443)
  Has Individual Bank Account                                                0.829         0.837         0.008      1521
                                                                                                        (0.030)
  If Worked for Pay in Last Year                                             0.990         0.994          0.003     1521
                                                                                                        (0.005)
  Earnings Last Month                                                      1325.313       1790.540     465.227      1503
                                                                                                       (165.303)
  Private Labor Index                                                        0.565         0.794        0.229       1521
                                                                                                        (0.049)
  MGNREGS Labor Index                                                        0.141         0.097         -0.044     1521
                                                                                                        (0.127)
  Actual Norms Index                                                        -0.008         0.083        0.091       1521
                                                                                                        (0.036)
  Perceived Norms Index: Acceptance Working Women                           -0.106         -0.154        -0.048     1521
                                                                                                        (0.054)
  Perceived Norms Index: Acceptance Husbands                                -0.322         -0.352        -0.030     1521
                                                                                                        (0.052)
 Panel C: Household Characteristics
  Other Backwards Caste+                                                     0.525         0.446         -0.079     1614
                                                                                                        (0.080)
  Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe+                                           0.418         0.488          0.070     1614
                                                                                                        (0.085)
  Household Income Last Month (Male Report)                                4960.051       5369.025      408.974     1518
                                                                                                       (465.945)
  DHS Work Index (Residualized)                                              0.040         -0.049      -0.089       1522
                                                                                                        (0.032)
  DHS Work Index (Unresidualized)                                            0.060         -0.046      -0.105       1522
                                                                                                        (0.039)
 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. Sample limited to control group. The mean of the
constrained indicator for this sample is 0.320. + Outcomes are from short run survey; otherwise, outcomes are from long
run survey. Data from short run survey, such as age, are left as their original values.  Index constructed using the Indian
Demographic and Health Survey V (2005-2006) and merged onto our sample at the subcaste level. The residualized
index residualizes out female education, husband education, and the DHS wealth index within the DHS data. See Online
Data Appendix for more details. Variables measured in INR topcoded at the 99th percentile. The exchange rate was
approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015 and INR 65 per USD in 2017. The first two columns show the means among
unconstrained and constrained women. The third column shows the regression coefficient on an indicator variable for being
constrained. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10.



                                                           55
                              Table B10: Impact of Treatments on Receipt of MGNREGS Payments in Individual Accounts

                                           May 1, 2015 - April 30, 2018                          May 1, 2015 - Nov. 30, 2017
                                                                  +
                                               Bank Admin Data                       Bank Admin Data+               MGNREGS Admin Data
                                                                                                                 Any Payment: Value Payments:
                                         Any Payment:     Value Payments:     Any Payment:     Value Payments:
                                                                                                                  Individual     Individual
                                        Project Account   Project Account    Project Account   Project Account
                                                                                                                   Account        Account
                                              (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)           (6)

       : Direct Deposit and Training        0.261            2175.894            0.277           2004.488          0.230         1181.774
                                            (0.046)           (483.149)          (0.042)          (443.212)        (0.032)        (235.112)

       1 : Training                          -0.027           -140.666            -0.021           -256.439         -0.006         5.249
                                            (0.045)          (463.677)           (0.041)          (389.977)        (0.022)       (166.450)
       2 : Direct Deposit                   0.099             724.119            0.107              472.592        0.126         596.901
                                            (0.047)          (418.066)           (0.039)          (347.701)        (0.034)       (226.535)
       3 : Direct Deposit × Training        0.189            1592.441            0.191           1788.334          0.109          579.624
                                            (0.074)          (686.840)           (0.064)          (564.893)        (0.047)       (339.762)
56




      Accts Only Mean                        0.135             968.955            0.106            807.369          0.053         282.351
      N                                      1993               1993              1993              1993            2440           2440
     + Sample limited to GPs served by banking partner providing administrative data.

     The exchange rate was approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015 and INR 65 per USD in 2017.
   Table B11: Impact of Treatments on Gender-Based Violence and Mental Health

                                              Freedom from
                                                                              Mental
                                              Gender-based
                                                                            Health Index
                                              Violence Index
                                         Short-Run      Long-Run      Short-Run      Long-Run
                                            (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
 Panel A: Full sample
  : Direct Deposit and Training             -0.007         0.050         -0.005       -0.081
                                           (0.039)        (0.033)       (0.042)       (0.048)
  Accts Only Mean                           0.000         -0.000         0.000         0.000
  N                                         2504           2463          2501          2460

 Panel B: Constrained Women
  : Direct Deposit and Training             0.067          -0.004        0.055         -0.115
                                           (0.058)        (0.058)       (0.059)       (0.072)
  Accts Only Mean                           -0.046        -0.000         -0.005        -0.012
  N                                          922           903            922           902

 Panel C: Unconstrained Women
  : Direct Deposit and Training             -0.038        0.077          -0.050        -0.053
                                           (0.050)        (0.040)       (0.054)       (0.060)
  Accts Only Mean                           0.024          0.002         0.011         0.008
  N                                         1519           1500          1516          1498


  P-value: Panel B  = Panel C               0.162          0.232         0.164         0.490
 Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions
include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post
lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their
square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10,
** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The aggregate freedom from gender-based violence index is an
average of the freedom from physical violence, autonomy, and freedom from emotional abuse
sub-indices. All sub-index components are standardized with respect to the Accounts Basic
group. The freedom from physical violence index includes indicators for if the respondent has
not experienced each of the following in the past year: pull hair/punch/kick you, push/slap
you, and physically force you to have sexual intercourse when you do not want to. The
autonomy index includes if the respondent reports her husband is never jealous or angry if
she talks to other men, never prevents her from meeting her female friends, never tries to
limit contact with family members, and never insists on knowing where wife is at all times.
The freedom from emotional abuse index includes indicators for if the respondent has not
experienced each of the following in the past year: humiliated in front of others, received
threats/harm to self or others respondent cares about, and been insulted. The aggregate
mental health index is an average of the freedom from depression and anxiety sub-indices.
The freedom from depression index includes indicators for if the respondent experienced the
following (sometimes, a little, or not at all) in the past 30 days: feeling hopeless, worthless,
depressed, and that everything was an effort. The freedom from anxiety index includes
indicators for if the respondent experienced the following (sometimes, a little, or not at all) in
the past 30 days: feeling nervous and restless/fidgety. See Online Data Appendix for further
details on variable construction.




                                               57
Table B12: Robustness of Mental Health in the Long-Run Survey: Setting a Higher
Bar for Mental Health

                                                        Less Than
                                         Original                           No Depression/
                                                     Some Depression/
                                          Index                                Anxiety
                                                         Anxiety
                                            (1)            (2)                     (3)
 Panel A: Full sample
  : Direct Deposit and Training           -0.081            -0.055               0.025
                                          (0.048)          (0.045)              (0.049)
  Accts Only Mean                          0.000            0.000                -0.000
  N                                        2460             2460                  2460

 Panel B: Constrained Women
  : Direct Deposit and Training            -0.115           -0.061               -0.017
                                          (0.072)          (0.080)              (0.083)
  Accts Only Mean                         -0.012            -0.032               -0.010
  N                                        902               902                  902

 Panel C: Unconstrained Women
  : Direct Deposit and Training            -0.053           -0.043               0.051
                                          (0.060)          (0.057)              (0.054)
  Accts Only Mean                          0.008            0.018                0.006
  N                                        1498             1498                 1498


  P-value: Panel B  = Panel C              0.490            0.844                0.455
 Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions
include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post
lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their
square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10, **
p 0.05, *** p 0.10.




                                              58
                       Table B13: Balance on Predetermined Demographic Characteristics: High FLFP (Unconstrained) GP's

                                                                                    (1)         (2)           (3)
                                                                                                                (4)         (5)                      (6)
                                                                                                              Accounts
                                                                                Accounts Accounts
                                                                                                   Accounts   + Direct   P-Value:
                                                                                 Only    + Direct                                                     N
                                                                                                  + Training  Deposit   Joint Test
                                                                                 Mean    Deposit
                                                                                                             + Training
      Panel A: Individual Characteristics of Eligible Women
        Age                                                                       39.151      -0.016        0.149          0.684         0.936      1176
        Years Education                                                            0.819       0.236        -0.030         0.192         0.275      1134
        Can Read or Write                                                          0.095       0.039        0.011          0.015         0.433      1168
        Had No Children At Time of Baseline                                        0.022      -0.007        -0.006        -0.018         0.388      1166
        Age Had First Child (Among Women With Kids at Baseline)                   18.776       0.191        0.421          -0.096        0.146      1142
        Ever Worked for MGNREGS Before Baseline (Unconstrained)                    0.722      -0.008        0.088           0.038        0.196      1176
        Worked for MGNREGS in Past Year at Baseline                                0.178       0.075        0.110         0.098          0.244      1057
        In MGNREGS MIS in Past Year+                                               0.513      -0.031        0.144          -0.050        0.112      1130
      Panel B: Individual Characteristics of Husbands
        Age                                                                       43.308       0.647         0.428          0.303        0.926      1159
        Years Education                                                            3.974       0.255        -0.363          0.462        0.319      1151
        Can Read or Write                                                          0.532      -0.025        -0.058         -0.035        0.715      1124
        Ever Worked for MGNREGS Before Baseline                                    0.940      -0.015        -0.025          0.004        0.163      1176
        Worked for MGNREGS in Past Year at Baseline                                0.315       0.050         0.013          0.050        0.804      1037
59




        In MGNREGS MIS in Past Year+                                               0.637      -0.061         0.034         -0.102        0.324      1065
      Panel C: Household/Couple Characteristics
        Male-Female Age Gap                                                       4.412       0.332         0.060          -0.521        0.167      1159
        Male-Female Education Gap                                                 3.255       -0.180        -0.350         0.121         0.791      1112
        Hindu                                                                     0.968        0.010         0.023         0.019         0.513      1168
        Scheduled Caste or Tribe                                                  0.387       -0.039        0.199          -0.025       0.087       1108
        Other Backward Caste                                                      0.551        0.064       -0.202          -0.016       0.018       1108
        Number Household Members on Job Card                                      3.953       -0.219         0.298         -0.152        0.720      1176
      Panel D: GP Characteristics
        Number Eligible Women in GP                                              31.933         4.341        3.925         1.665         0.970       52
        Total GP Population                                                     2618.067      131.637      145.451       -470.748        0.582       52
        Fraction GP Population Female                                            0.468         -0.007        0.001         0.000         0.505       52
        Fraction GP Population SC/ST                                             0.340         0.010         0.070         0.070         0.646       52
        Fraction Female GP Population Literate                                   0.377         0.006        -0.024        -0.000         0.633       52
        Fraction Male GP Population Literate                                     0.619          0.014       -0.027         0.006         0.793       52
        Female Workers / Female GP Population                                    0.428          0.011        0.028         0.038         0.522       52
        Male Workers / Male GP Population                                         0.535        -0.009       -0.002         0.008         0.670       52
      Notes: Each row is a separate regression. All regressions include district and strata fixed effects. Regressions in Panel D are at the GP level with
     robust standard errors; otherwise, regressions are at the individual level with standard errors clustered at the GP level. Standard errors are omitted
     from the table for legibility. The first column gives the mean among the Accounts Only group, columns 2-4 give regression coefficients. Column 5
     gives the p-value from a test that all treatment coefficients are jointly equal to zero. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.01. Variables marked by  are
     from the baseline census, and variables marked by + are from the MIS data. All data in Panel D are from the Indian Census. Otherwise, data are
     from the short run survey. Data from the short run survey, such as age, are left as their original values. GP-level female labor force participation
     (FLFP) comes from the 2011 Indian Census. GP's are considered constrained if the female labor force participation rate is below the median (among
     the sample GPs) according to the 2011 Indian Census.
                        Table B14: Balance on Predetermined Demographic Characteristics: Low FLFP (Constrained) GP's

                                                                                    (1)         (2)           (3)
                                                                                                                (4)         (5)                      (6)
                                                                                                              Accounts
                                                                                Accounts Accounts
                                                                                                   Accounts   + Direct   P-Value:
                                                                                 Only    + Direct                                                     N
                                                                                                  + Training  Deposit   Joint Test
                                                                                 Mean    Deposit
                                                                                                             + Training
      Panel A: Individual Characteristics of Eligible Women
        Age                                                                       41.223      -1.159        -0.374        -2.039         0.284      1231
        Years Education                                                            0.795      -0.126        -0.292         -0.054        0.417      1198
        Can Read or Write                                                          0.121      -0.003        -0.028         0.000         0.530      1223
        Had No Children At Time of Baseline                                        0.020      -0.004        -0.005         -0.006        0.955      1222
        Age Had First Child (Among Women With Kids at Baseline)                   19.449       0.144         0.077         -0.231        0.570      1197
        Ever Worked for MGNREGS Before Baseline (Unconstrained)                    0.538       0.025        -0.028         -0.024        0.738      1231
        Worked for MGNREGS in Past Year at Baseline                                0.138      -0.012        -0.044         -0.003        0.699      1081
        In MGNREGS MIS in Past Year+                                               0.525      -0.049        -0.022         0.189         0.077      1178
      Panel B: Individual Characteristics of Husbands
        Age                                                                       46.245       -0.592       -0.701        -1.854         0.362      1200
        Years Education                                                            4.655       -0.819       -0.546         -0.409        0.443      1187
        Can Read or Write                                                          0.607      -0.102        -0.071         -0.060        0.416      1165
        Ever Worked for MGNREGS Before Baseline                                    0.916       -0.014        0.014        0.045         0.005       1231
        Worked for MGNREGS in Past Year at Baseline                                0.319        0.023       -0.079         -0.020        0.513      1033
60




        In MGNREGS MIS in Past Year+                                               0.671       -0.060       -0.038          0.048        0.559      1084
      Panel C: Household/Couple Characteristics
        Male-Female Age Gap                                                       5.083       0.605         -0.041         0.244         0.377      1200
        Male-Female Education Gap                                                 3.828       -0.642        -0.144         -0.290        0.504      1157
        Hindu                                                                     0.948       -0.003        -0.043          0.004        0.592      1223
        Scheduled Caste or Tribe                                                  0.326       0.095         0.081          0.075         0.738      1168
        Other Backward Caste                                                      0.564       -0.112        -0.015         -0.019        0.544      1168
        Number Household Members on Job Card                                      3.940       -0.163         0.098          0.034        0.854      1231
      Panel D: GP Characteristics
        Number Eligible Women in GP                                              20.105      10.761          6.622          0.541        0.108       81
        Total GP Population                                                     3009.947     1593.017     1374.232        786.774        0.273       81
        Fraction GP Population Female                                            0.456        0.008         0.003         0.010          0.227       81
        Fraction GP Population SC/ST                                             0.222        0.001          0.053          0.060        0.267       81
        Fraction Female GP Population Literate                                   0.438        -0.007        -0.002         -0.001        0.993       81
        Fraction Male GP Population Literate                                     0.675        -0.030        -0.003         -0.021        0.333       81
        Female Workers / Female GP Population                                    0.157         0.016         0.017          0.033        0.801       81
        Male Workers / Male GP Population                                         0.491       0.014        0.022            0.011        0.107       81
      Notes: Each row is a separate regression. All regressions include district and strata fixed effects. Regressions in Panel D are at the GP level with
     robust standard errors; otherwise, regressions are at the individual level with standard errors clustered at the GP level. Standard errors are omitted
     from the table for legibility. The first column gives the mean among the Accounts Only group, columns 2-4 give regression coefficients. Column 5
     gives the p-value from a test that all treatment coefficients are jointly equal to zero. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.01. Variables marked by  are
     from the baseline census, and variables marked by + are from the MIS data. All data in Panel D are from the Indian Census. Otherwise, data are
     from the short run survey. Data from the short run survey, such as age, are left as their original values. GP-level female labor force participation
     (FLFP) comes from the 2011 Indian Census. GP's are considered constrained if the female labor force participation rate is below the median (among
     the sample GPs) according to the 2011 Indian Census.
          Table B15: Impact of Treatments on Main Outcomes: High/Low Village-level FLFP from 2011 Census (Part 1)

                                                                 Short Run                                    Long Run
                                                 Constrained Unconstrained          P-value   Constrained     Unconstrained      P-value
                                                     (1)         (2)                  (3)         (4)             (5)              (6)
      Table 2: Women's Bank Use
      Account Use Index                             0.291             0.109          0.158       0.300             0.060         0.023
                                                    (0.110)          (0.067)                     (0.081)          (0.067)
      Banking Autonomy Index                                                                     0.465             0.006         0.000
                                                                                                 (0.081)          (0.072)
      CSP Knowledge Index                                                                        0.486             -0.016        0.010
                                                                                                 (0.167)          (0.097)
      Table 3: Women's Labor Supply
      Aggregate Labor Supply Index                  0.151            0.164           0.890       0.178             -0.090        0.010
                                                    (0.062)          (0.067)                     (0.066)          (0.080)
      MGNREGS Labor Supply Sub-Index                 0.129           0.182           0.733        0.047            -0.119         0.347
                                                    (0.135)          (0.077)                     (0.092)          (0.151)
61




      Private Labor Supply Sub-Index                0.192             0.147          0.711       0.240             -0.126        0.004
                                                    (0.080)          (0.090)                     (0.097)          (0.082)
      Table 4: Empowerment
      Aggregate Empowerment Index                     0.031           0.074          0.488        0.083             0.009         0.366
                                                    (0.042)          (0.047)                     (0.053)          (0.062)
      Purchase Index                                  0.086           0.075          0.908       0.158              0.013         0.280
                                                    (0.073)          (0.055)                     (0.094)          (0.095)
      Mobility in Past Year                           0.024           0.047          0.767        0.008             0.012         0.964
                                                    (0.046)          (0.062)                     (0.044)          (0.065)
      Self-Reported Decision Making                  -0.017           0.091          0.354        0.075            -0.025         0.320
                                                    (0.061)          (0.099)                     (0.071)          (0.071)
      In this table, an individual is considered constrained if they reside in a village with a female labor force participation rate below
     the median rate (among the sample villages) according to the 2011 Indian Census. Each cell in columns 1-2 and 4-5 represent the
     total treatment effect of direct deposit and training () from a different regression. All regressions cluster robust standard errors
     at the GP level and include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post lasso. The set of
     potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list
     of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The outcome variables, listed in the left margin, are the same outcomes
     variables used in the main table as indicated.
Table B16: Impact of Treatments on Main Outcomes: High/Low Village-level FLFP from 2011 Census
(Part 2)

                                                                                   Long Run
                                                                   Constrained     Unconstrained      P-value
                                                                       (1)             (2)              (3)
 Table 5: Actual Norms
 Actual Norms Index (Female Report)                                   0.133              0.059         0.408
                                                                      (0.048)          (0.075)
 Personal Preferences (Female Report)                                  0.088             0.048         0.652
                                                                      (0.050)          (0.074)
 Acceptance: Working Women (Female Report)                            0.164              0.018         0.294
                                                                      (0.067)          (0.120)
 Acceptance: Husbands (Female Report)                                  0.146             0.113         0.774
                                                                      (0.075)          (0.085)
 Actual Norms Index (Male Report)                                       0.020           -0.004         0.795
                                                                      (0.084)          (0.037)
 Personal Preferences (Male Report)                                    -0.047           -0.033         0.925
                                                                      (0.122)          (0.095)
 Acceptance: Working Women (Male Report)                               0.033            0.062          0.771
                                                                      (0.080)          (0.060)
 Acceptance: Husbands (Male Report)                                    0.073            -0.073         0.203
                                                                      (0.102)          (0.052)
 Table 6: Perceived Norms
 Perceived Norms Index (Female Report)                                 0.071            0.043          0.704
                                                                      (0.057)          (0.048)
 Perceived Acceptance: Working Women (Female Report)                  0.112             0.037          0.364
                                                                      (0.064)          (0.053)
 Perceived Acceptance: Husbands (Female Report)                        0.049            0.040          0.924
                                                                      (0.063)          (0.063)
 Perceived Norms Index (Male Report)                                  0.169             0.048          0.242
                                                                      (0.079)          (0.066)
 Perceived Acceptance: Working Women (Male Report)                     0.116            0.061          0.643
                                                                      (0.088)          (0.081)
 Perceived Acceptance: Husbands (Male Report)                         0.224             0.035          0.116
                                                                      (0.087)          (0.081)
 In this table, an individual is considered constrained if they reside in a village with a female labor force
participation rate below the median rate (among the sample villages) according to the 2011 Indian Census.
Each cell in columns 1-2 represent the total treatment effect of direct deposit and training () from a different
regression. All regressions cluster robust standard errors at the GP level and include strata and district fixed
effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes
individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of
potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The outcome variables, listed in the left margin, are
the same outcomes variables used in the main table as indicated.




                                                      62
                                       Table B17: Impact of Treatments on Daily Wages

                                                                                 Non-Farm
                                                    Farm Labor                                              MGNREGS
                                                                                  Labor
                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                              Short-Run     Long-Run      Short-Run     Long-Run      Short-Run     Long-Run
      Panel A: Women
       : Direct Deposit and Training             2.563         -6.059       -4.498         -0.290       -4.513         9.098
                                                (9.376)       (6.776)      (12.955)       (9.983)      (11.960)      (12.036)
       Accts Only Mean                         177.982       206.740       191.400       222.143       157.867       198.350
       N                                        1321          1731           275           280           234           226

      Panel B: Men
       : Direct Deposit and Training             -2.756        -9.419       -14.291      -15.943         -7.053        -7.995
                                                (8.661)       (6.966)       (9.931)       (7.075)       (6.598)       (7.901)
63




       Accts Only Mean                         186.449       219.845       227.064       250.124       183.545       222.156
       N                                        1124          1588           988          1265           727           554


       P-value: Panel B  = Panel C               0.539         0.646         0.513         0.209         0.851         0.229
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district
     fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual
     and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential controls. *
     p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. Sample limited to individuals who report working for specified activity and earning
     a non-zero wage. At midline we ask for daily and weekly wages (which we convert to daily by assuming 6 working days
     per week). At endline we ask for daily wages in the high and low seasons separately, so we take the average in order
     to stay consistent with midline. Wages are top-coded at the 99th percentile within gender. The exchange rate was
     approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015 and INR 65 per USD in 2017.
                                                     Figure B1: Timeline of Experimental Activities


                                         2013                         2014                                           2015                                             2017
                                                                                                                                                ...
     Activity                            11 12   1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12         1   2   3   4    5     6   7   8   9
     Baseline Census
     Account Opening at the CSP
     Wave 1 Direct Deposit Signup
     Training Sessions
     Wave 2 Direct Deposit Signup
     Bank Card Disbursement at the CSP
     Short-Run Survey
     Long-Run Survey
64
                              Figure B2: Administrative Data - Use of Project Accounts Over Time


                           A. Number Transactions (cumulative)                                            B. Average Daily Balance




                                                                               800
           20




                                                                               600
           15




                                                                          Amount (Rp)
                                                                             400
         10
         N
65




                                                                               200
           5
           0




                                                                               0
                2014m1   2015m1       2016m1         2017m1      2018m1                 2014m1   2015m1         2016m1         2017m1   2018m1
                                         Date                                                                      Date



                                       Accounts Only                                Accounts + Direct Deposit
                                       Accounts + Training                          Accounts + Direct Deposit + Training


     Notes: Administrative bank account data. All non-account openers are coded as having zero values for all measures. All outcomes are
     top-coded at the 99th percentile by month. Dashed lines demarcate the beginning and end of the short-run and long-run surveys. The
     exchange rate was approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015 and INR 65 per USD in 2017.
Figure B3: Share of Women Receiving MGNREGS Payments in Individual Accounts Over
Time

                                  1
                                  .8
      Share Individual Accounts
                                  .6
                                  .4
                                  .2
                                  0




                                       2013-14   2014-15               2015-16    2016-17           2017-18
                                                                  Fiscal Year

                                                     Madhya Pradesh              National Average
                                                     Study Districts


    Notes: Data from MGNREGS MIS Table R1.2.6: Women Joint Account Detail, accessed
    at http://mnregaweb4.nic.in/netnrega/MISreport4.aspx. Figures for FY 2013-14 omit Andhra
    Pradesh, Manipur, and Dadra and Nagar Haveli due to missing data.




                                                                        66
                        Figure B4: Effects of Accounts Plus Linking by Age of Youngest Child in the Household


                                                                               A. Short-Run Impacts
                        Overall Work Index                   Public Sector Work Subindex              Private Sector Work Subindex                General Work Subindex
          .3




                                                   .3




                                                                                             .3




                                                                                                                                      .3
          .2




                                                   .2




                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                      .2
          .1




                                                   .1




                                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                      .1
          0




                                                   0




                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                      0
          -.1




                                                   -.1




                                                                                             -.1




                                                                                                                                      -.1
                No Child Under 8   Child Under 8         No Child Under 8    Child Under 8         No Child Under 8   Child Under 8         No Child Under 8   Child Under 8
67




                                                                               B. Long-Run Impacts
                        Overall Work Index                   Public Sector Work Subindex              Private Sector Work Subindex                General Work Subindex
          .3




                                                   .3




                                                                                             .3




                                                                                                                                      .3
          .2




                                                   .2




                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                      .2
          .1




                                                   .1




                                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                      .1
          0




                                                   0




                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                      0
          -.1




                                                   -.1




                                                                                             -.1




                                                                                                                                      -.1
                No Child Under 8   Child Under 8         No Child Under 8    Child Under 8         No Child Under 8   Child Under 8         No Child Under 8   Child Under 8




     Notes: This figure graphs treatment effects of Accounts + Direct Deposit + Training relative to Accounts Only by whether or not the
     household has a children under the age of eight. Whiskers give 90 and 95 percent confidence intervals on point estimates. Robust
     standard errors are clustered at the gram panchayat level. All regressions include controls for strata, district, and additional controls
     selected via double lasso.
                                            Figure B5: Non-MGNREGS Activity in Project Bank Accounts

                        A. Number non-MGNREGS Deposits                                        B. Cumulative Non-MGNREGS Deposits                                    C. Cumulative MGNREGS Deposits
          10




                                                                                                                                                 4000
                                                                            4000
          8




                                                                                                                                                 3000
                                                                            3000
          6




                                                                       Amount (Rp)




                                                                                                                                            Amount (Rp)
                                                                                                                                              2000
        N




                                                                        2000
          4
68




                                                                                                                                                 1000
                                                                            1000
          2
          0




                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                 0
               2014m1   2015m1    2016m1      2017m1     2018m1                      2014m1   2015m1      2016m1      2017m1       2018m1                 2014m1   2015m1     2016m1      2017m1     2018m1
                                     Date                                                                    Date                                                                Date



                                                                  Accounts Only                                     Accounts + Direct Deposit
                                                                  Accounts + Training                               Accounts + Direct Deposit + Training


     Notes: Administrative bank account data. All non-account openers are coded as having zero values for all measures. All outcomes are
     top-coded at the 99th percentile by month and gender. Dashed lines demarcate the beginning and end of the short-run and long-run
     surveys. The exchange rate was approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015 and INR 65 per USD in 2017.
                                              Table C1: Impact of Treatments on Banking Sub-Index Components

                                                                 Full Sample                   Constrained             Unconstrained                P-value
                                                                     Mean       N                   Mean      N               Mean        N    Const=Unconst
                                                           (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)         (5)     (6)     (7)       (8)       (9)        (10)
      Panel A: Account Use Index
      Short Run
                         If Own Individual Acct        0.019         0.886     2504   0.042         0.841    922   0.007      0.912     1519         0.383
                                                      (0.026)                        (0.045)                      (0.025)
                               If Visited - 6 months   0.060         0.161     2500 0.093           0.149    920   0.044      0.163     1517         0.359
                                                      (0.037)                        (0.050)                      (0.042)
                            Individual Acct Balance 63.969           84.592    2474 75.333         82.716    911 64.583       82.612    1500         0.822
                                                     (27.988)                       (40.361)                     (35.247)
      Long Run
                             If Own Individual Acct 0.063   0.827 2464 0.103    0.759                        903      0.041  0.865      1501         0.204
                                                    (0.031)             (0.045)                                     (0.034)
                             If Visited - 6 months 0.078    0.181 2454 0.174    0.127                        897      0.015  0.209      1497        0.002
                                                    (0.028)             (0.043)                                     (0.032)
                          Individual Acct Balance 30.948 228.131 2377 48.752 248.627                         880     -8.081 217.986     1440         0.547
                                                   (48.131)            (86.028)                                    (51.371)
      Panel B: Womens Banking Autonomy Index
      Visits Bank
                                             Alone 0.043    0.107 2455 0.077    0.070                        902    0.017     0.128     1493        0.083
69




                                                    (0.025)             (0.030)                                    (0.032)
                        Without Male Supervision 0.079      0.188 2455 0.127    0.141                        902    0.040     0.209     1493        0.066
                                                    (0.035)             (0.046)                                    (0.041)
      CSP
             Comfortable Conducting Transactions 0.097      0.605 2402   0.063  0.594                        865   0.106      0.612     1478         0.537
                                                    (0.047)             (0.071)                                    (0.047)
                       Comfortable Visiting Alone 0.093     0.534 2415 0.138    0.461                        879    0.059     0.580     1477         0.170
                                                    (0.047)             (0.053)                                    (0.053)
                 Believes Can Visit Without Male     0.072  0.426 2425 0.192    0.354                        893    -0.010    0.466     1474        0.002
                                                    (0.049)             (0.061)                                    (0.052)
      Panel C: Women's CSP Knowledge Index
                             Heard of CSP Before     0.029  0.828 2464   0.067  0.799                        903    0.009     0.849     1501         0.208
                                                    (0.039)             (0.049)                                    (0.041)
      Num. Transactions Ever Conducted At CSP 0.207         1.701 2322 0.441    1.637                        839    0.048     1.744     1428        0.008
                                                    (0.121)             (0.170)                                    (0.103)
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are
     selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix
     for the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. All monetary values are denominated in Indian Rupees and top-coded at the
     99th percentile (by gender). The exchange rate was approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015 and INR 65 per USD in 2017. The outcome variables in this table
     feed into the account use, banking autonomy, and CSP knowledge indices. See Online Data Appendix for further details on variable construction.
                                   Table C2: Impact of Treatments on MGNREGS Labor Supply Sub-Index Components

                                                          Full Sample                     Constrained                   Unconstrained              P-value
                                                               Mean        N                   Mean      N                    Mean       N     Const=Unconst
                                                    (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)     (6)       (7)          (8)      (9)         (10)
      Panel A: Self Reports
      Short Run
      Worked for MGNREGS Past Month               0.015        0.017     2504     0.031        0.005    922       0.009       0.021     1519         0.227
                                                 (0.010)                          (0.015)                       (0.012)
        Worked for MGNREGS Past Year              0.006        0.104     2504      0.012       0.072    922      -0.006       0.120     1519         0.555
                                                 (0.022)                          (0.023)                       (0.028)
      Long Run
      Worked for MGNREGS Past Month               -0.007       0.025     2164      0.010       0.027    847      -0.017       0.026     1262         0.267
                                                 (0.016)                          (0.026)                       (0.016)
        Worked for MGNREGS Past Year               0.023       0.129     2196      0.053       0.090    857      -0.003       0.150     1283         0.248
                                                 (0.030)                          (0.041)                       (0.038)
      Panel B: MIS Reports
      Short Run
      Worked for MGNREGS Past Month   0.055      0.029                   2504   0.072    0.019          922   0.050           0.035     1519         0.443
                                       (0.020)                                  (0.029)                       (0.023)
70




        Worked for MGNREGS Past Year   0.090     0.277                   2504    0.109   0.264          922    0.073          0.294     1519         0.615
                                       (0.048)                                  (0.075)                       (0.052)
          MGNREGS Wages Past Month 64.443       34.681                   2504 86.703    22.933          922 60.282           42.513     1519         0.457
                                      (26.590)                                 (37.451)                      (29.576)
            MGNREGS Wages Past Year 153.739    641.045                   2504 141.271 698.173           922 130.260          633.270    1519         0.965
                                     (162.520)                                (284.224)                     (144.236)
      Long Run
      Worked for MGNREGS Past Month     -0.031  0.123                    2464    -0.011  0.090 903    -0.047   0.146                    1501         0.444
                                       (0.040)                                  (0.030)              (0.053)
        Worked for MGNREGS Past Year     0.071  0.288                    2464    0.050   0.221 903    0.085    0.335                    1501         0.570
                                       (0.052)                                  (0.052)              (0.063)
          MGNREGS Wages Past Month -38.126     205.928                   2464     0.016 138.291 903 -67.113   250.097                   1501         0.355
                                      (77.410)                                 (49.847)             (100.004)
            MGNREGS Wages Past Year 290.768 1318.816                     2464 334.683 933.608 903 295.952 1575.897                      1501         0.916
                                     (319.064)                                (283.881)             (409.326)
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are
     selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix
     for the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The exchange rate was approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015 and INR 65
     per USD in 2017. All outcome variables in this table feed into the MGNREGS labor supply index. All monetary values are denominated in Indian Rupees
     and top-coded at the 99th percentile (by gender). See Online Data Appendix for further details on variable construction.
                                               Table C3: Impact of Treatments on Labor Supply Sub-Index Components

                                                                 Full Sample                      Constrained                    Unconstrained               P-value
                                                                      Mean        N                     Mean       N                   Mean       N     Const=Unconst
                                                           (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)      (6)      (7)          (8)      (9)         (10)
      Panel A: Private Labor Supply
      Short Run
      Primary Occupation Past Year was Worker      0.056    0.116  2498   0.062                         0.063     9190.055             0.142     1517         0.872
                                                   (0.024)                (0.027)                                   (0.034)
                     If Worked for Pay Last Year 0.086      0.700  2504  0.153                         0.615   922   0.053             0.746     1519        0.025
                                                   (0.028)                (0.044)                                   (0.031)
               Private Work Earnings Past Year 1094.189 3742.679 2303 1252.180                        2597.358 852 1205.542          4230.647    1393         0.966
                                                 (686.120)              (737.623)                                  (967.725)
      Long Run
      Primary Occupation Past Year was Worker       0.001   0.631  2464   0.154                         0.462       -0.089
                                                                                                                  903                  0.727     1501       0.000
                                                   (0.039)                (0.063)                                   (0.035)
                     If Worked for Pay Last Year    0.009   0.835  2464   0.103                        0.724   903   -0.048            0.903     1501       0.001
                                                   (0.029)                (0.045)                                   (0.029)
               Private Work Earnings Past Year 601.386 4020.259 2361 1605.697                         2906.048 871 126.741           4574.462    1432        0.091
                                                 (422.743)              (689.693)                                  (522.976)
71




      Panel B: Public/Private Labor Supply
      Short Run
                  If Worked for Pay Past Month 0.077        0.203  2469  0.113                          0.112     913    0.075         0.248     1493         0.414
                                                   (0.029)                (0.034)                                        (0.039)
                            Earnings Past Month    68.682  278.362 2459   72.516                       196.488    912    98.447       304.903    1485         0.742
                                                  (48.739)               (55.574)                                       (64.458)
                        Months Worked Past Year 0.748       4.224  2481   1.227                         3.638     918     0.460        4.507     1500         0.134
                                                   (0.343)                (0.495)                                        (0.378)
      Long Run
                  If Worked for Pay Past Month      0.020   0.579  2463   0.108                         0.465     902   -0.035         0.646     1501       0.008
                                                   (0.040)                (0.045)                                      (0.048)
                            Earnings Past Month 129.720    636.506 2403 360.485                        488.474    880 -27.900         703.151    1464       0.009
                                                 (118.763)              (142.962)                                     (120.662)
                        Months Worked Past Year     0.228   3.132  2416    0.453                        2.546     890   0.158          3.463     1467         0.476
                                                   (0.266)                (0.375)                                      (0.308)
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected
     using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete
     list of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The exchange rate was approximately INR 64 per USD in 2015 and INR 65 per USD in 2017. All
     outcome variables in this table feed into the private labor or general labor supply indices. All monetary values are denominated in Indian Rupees and top-coded at
     the 99th percentile (by gender). See Online Data Appendix for further details on variable construction.
                                              Table C4: Impact of Treatments on Norms Sub-Index Components: Female Report

                                                                                          Full Sample              Constrained            Unconstrained              P-value
                                                                                              Mean       N               Mean     N              Mean      N     Const=Unconst
                                                                                    (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)     (7)      (8)     (9)         (10)
      Panel A: Personal Preferences
                                                  Believes Women Can Work          0.034      0.784     2461    0.073    0.759   903  0.020      0.797   1498          0.356
                                                                                  (0.028)                      (0.046)               (0.036)
                                       Prefers Daughter-in-Law Who Works          0.062       0.350     2464    0.056    0.322   903 0.059       0.370   1501          0.959
                                                                                  (0.033)                      (0.051)               (0.042)
                             Prefers Son-in-Law Who Allows Wife to Work            0.035      0.247     2464   0.080     0.211   903 0.003       0.270   1501          0.100
                                                                                  (0.026)                      (0.040)               (0.033)
      Panel B: Acceptance of Working Women
      Believes Working Woman is:
                                                                  Better Wife     0.075       0.542     2463   0.167     0.487   902  0.007      0.576   1501        0.006
                                                                                  (0.035)                      (0.051)               (0.039)
                                                                Better Mother      0.025      0.511     2463   0.104     0.457   902 -0.022      0.535   1501         0.048
                                                                                  (0.038)                      (0.047)               (0.049)
                                                             Better Caretaker      0.035      0.503     2464    0.071    0.462   903 0.025       0.516   1501          0.459
72




                                                                                  (0.031)                      (0.043)               (0.044)
      Panel C: Acceptance of Working Women's Husbands
      Believes Working Woman's Husband is:
                                                    Better Provider               0.056       0.490     2463   0.107     0.449   902  0.004      0.508   1501         0.063
                                                                                  (0.030)                      (0.044)               (0.038)
                                                              Better Husband       0.043      0.499     2464   0.109     0.422   903 0.016       0.535   1501         0.065
                                                                                  (0.035)                      (0.040)               (0.043)
      Panel D: Perceived Norms
      Frac. Community Who Will Not Think Poorly of Working Woman     0.019                    0.619     2457    0.010    0.595   901  0.021      0.636   1496          0.722
                                                                    (0.018)                                    (0.029)               (0.019)
                        Working Woman is Viewed With More Respect 0.046                       0.519     2462   0.079     0.497   902 0.016       0.528   1500          0.262
                                                                    (0.029)                                    (0.040)               (0.039)
               Frac. Community Who Will Not Think Poorly of Husband -0.003                    0.593     2459    0.025    0.558   901 -0.028      0.613   1498          0.119
                                                                    (0.014)                                    (0.029)               (0.016)
               Working Woman's Husband is Viewed With More Respect 0.053                      0.525     2461   0.087     0.500   901 0.017       0.539   1500          0.202
                                                                    (0.031)                                    (0.048)               (0.036)
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using
     double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential
     controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. These questions were only asked in the long run survey. The outcome variables in this table feed into the actual norms and
     perceived norms sub-indices, which then feed into the aggregate norms index. See Online Data Appendix for further details on variable construction.
                                               Table C5: Impact of Treatments on Norms Sub-Index Components: Male Report

                                                                                          Full Sample              Constrained            Unconstrained              P-value
                                                                                              Mean       N               Mean     N              Mean      N     Const=Unconst
                                                                                    (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)     (7)      (8)     (9)         (10)
      Panel A: Personal Preferences
                                                  Believes Women Can Work           0.006     0.674     2293     0.051   0.631   837    -0.017   0.688   1403          0.298
                                                                                  (0.034)                      (0.061)                 (0.036)
                                       Prefers Daughter-in-Law Who Works           -0.022     0.500     2293    -0.029   0.481   837    -0.012   0.510   1403          0.772
                                                                                  (0.039)                      (0.056)                 (0.042)
                             Prefers Son-in-Law Who Allows Wife to Work            -0.062     0.459     2293    -0.012   0.406   837    -0.079   0.484   1403          0.317
                                                                                  (0.040)                      (0.055)                 (0.051)
      Panel B: Acceptance of Working Women
      Believes Working Woman is:
                                                                  Better Wife      -0.011     0.585     2280     0.043   0.565   829  -0.038     0.598   1398          0.202
                                                                                  (0.034)                      (0.055)               (0.041)
                                                                Better Mother      0.006      0.461     2285    -0.016   0.495   832 0.023       0.444   1400          0.523
                                                                                  (0.034)                      (0.053)               (0.038)
                                                             Better Caretaker       0.029     0.511     2282    -0.054   0.565   830 0.076       0.477   1399         0.037
73




                                                                                  (0.028)                      (0.043)               (0.039)
      Panel C: Acceptance of Working Women's Husbands
      Believes Working Woman's Husband is:
                                                    Better Provider                 0.004     0.516     2281    -0.036   0.513   833    0.016    0.515   1396          0.455
                                                                                  (0.030)                      (0.059)                 (0.033)
                                                              Better Husband       -0.041     0.522     2283    -0.062   0.538   831    -0.033   0.520   1399          0.621
                                                                                  (0.034)                      (0.057)                 (0.037)
      Panel D: Perceived Norms
      Frac. Community Who Will Not Think Poorly of Working Woman     0.001                    0.561     2288     0.019   0.527   835  0.005      0.578   1400          0.734
                                                                    (0.020)                                    (0.037)               (0.022)
                        Working Woman is Viewed With More Respect 0.045                       0.486     2288    -0.003   0.497   833 0.080       0.477   1402          0.212
                                                                    (0.032)                                    (0.050)               (0.043)
               Frac. Community Who Will Not Think Poorly of Husband 0.034                     0.430     2283   0.075     0.379   832 0.021       0.457   1398         0.086
                                                                    (0.017)                                    (0.028)               (0.020)
               Working Woman's Husband is Viewed With More Respect 0.047                      0.512     2286     0.031   0.513   834 0.054       0.509   1399          0.741
                                                                    (0.034)                                    (0.059)               (0.040)
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using
     double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential
     controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. These questions were only asked in the long run survey. The outcome variables in this table feed into the actual norms and
     perceived norms sub-indices, which then feed into the aggregate norms index. See Data Appendix for further details on variable construction.
                         Table C6: Impact of Treatments on Purchase Sub-Index Components

                               Full Sample               Constrained                Unconstrained             P-value
                              Mean     N             Mean N                               Mean       N     Const=Unconst
                        (1)    (2)    (3)     (4)      (5)     (6)                (7)      (8)      (9)         (10)
 Panel A: Purhcase Index - Woman has made purchases for [ activity]

 Short Run
                 Food 0.076 0.482 2504 0.138 0.428                     922        0.029    0.503    1519       0.129
                      (0.028)              (0.045)                              (0.045)
           Clothing    0.022  0.384 2504    0.068    0.370             922       -0.004    0.393    1519       0.237
                      (0.030)              (0.052)                              (0.035)
       Child Health    0.039  0.441 2504    0.075    0.394             922       0.034     0.463    1519       0.542
                      (0.030)              (0.051)                              (0.040)
 Home Improvement -0.009 0.243 2504         0.033    0.192             922       -0.021    0.265    1519       0.176
                      (0.027)              (0.039)                              (0.028)
           Festivals   0.053  0.374 2504 0.101 0.332                   922        0.045    0.388    1519       0.287
                      (0.037)              (0.047)                              (0.047)
 Food Outside Home     0.053  0.344 2504 0.158 0.288                   922       -0.001    0.372    1519      0.010
                      (0.033)              (0.052)                              (0.040)
 Long Run
               Food    0.030  0.730 2462 0.138 0.596                   902       -0.034 0.803       1500      0.002
                      (0.029)              (0.045)                              (0.036)
           Clothing -0.032 0.608 2462       0.070    0.510             902      -0.088 0.654        1500      0.029
                      (0.032)              (0.053)                              (0.041)
       Child Health    0.008  0.659 2456 0.103 0.548                   898       -0.040 0.710       1498      0.004
                      (0.028)              (0.038)                              (0.035)
 Home Improvement      0.005  0.478 2461    0.038    0.414             901       -0.005 0.497       1500       0.539
                      (0.043)              (0.056)                              (0.052)
           Festivals   0.023  0.641 2463 0.126 0.535                   902       -0.029 0.692       1501      0.007
                      (0.032)              (0.052)                              (0.035)
 Food Outside Home     0.053  0.634 2463 0.123 0.535                   902        0.025     0.678   1501      0.064
                      (0.032)              (0.047)                              (0.037)
 Panel B: Purchase Index - Woman sometimes/always uses own             funds   for [ activity]

 Short Run
                 Food    0.062      0.424    2504 0.136        0.375   922        0.019    0.444    1519      0.047
                         (0.031)                  (0.046)                       (0.039)
             Clothing     0.043     0.317    2504 0.083        0.298   922        0.029    0.329    1519       0.334
                         (0.030)                  (0.050)                       (0.040)
         Child Health    0.059      0.376    2504 0.100        0.327   922        0.056    0.396    1519       0.465
                         (0.031)                  (0.049)                       (0.040)
 Home Improvement         0.002     0.210    2504  0.040       0.163   922       -0.020    0.227    1519       0.108
                         (0.029)                  (0.040)                       (0.030)
             Festivals   0.067      0.327    2504 0.107        0.303   922        0.062    0.332    1519       0.399
                         (0.038)                  (0.049)                       (0.047)
 Food Outside Home        0.044     0.302    2504 0.132        0.255   922        0.003    0.324    1519      0.036
                         (0.036)                  (0.050)                       (0.044)
 Long Run
                 Food      0.047    0.600    2462   0.166      0.475   902       -0.028    0.665    1500      0.002
                         (0.040)                    (0.054)                     (0.045)
             Clothing      0.003    0.509    2462   0.118      0.384   902       -0.053    0.565    1500      0.012
                         (0.041)                    (0.057)                     (0.046)
         Child Health      0.028    0.547    2456   0.131      0.426   898       -0.025    0.604    1498      0.009
                         (0.038)                    (0.047)                     (0.046)
 Home Improvement         -0.010    0.419    2461    0.056     0.333   901       -0.036    0.454    1500       0.209
                         (0.046)                    (0.058)                     (0.055)
             Festivals     0.044    0.540    2463   0.181      0.429   902       -0.027    0.589    1501      0.000
                         (0.039)                    (0.055)                     (0.040)
 Food Outside Home         0.048    0.540    2463   0.169      0.419   902       -0.009    0.595    1501      0.001
                         (0.041)                    (0.052)                     (0.043)
 Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed
effects. Additional covariates are selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-
level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10, **
p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The outcome variables in this table feed into purchase sub-indices which then feed into the aggregate
empowerment index. See Online Data Appendix for further details on variable construction.



                                                              74
                                            Table C7: Impact of Treatments on Empowerment Sub-Index Components

                                                                            Full Sample               Constrained               Unconstrained              P-value
                                                                                 Mean      N                Mean      N               Mean       N    Const=Unconst
                                                                  (1)             (2)     (3)       (4)      (5)     (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)        (10)
 Panel A: Decision Making Index - Makes decisions about [ activity]

 Short Run
                                                Spending Earnings        0.025   0.483    2456      0.049   0.498    906     0.026    0.470    1489         0.685
                                                                       (0.031)                    (0.045)                   (0.039)
                                              Taking Employment         -0.037   0.264    2441     -0.001   0.205    893     -0.050   0.297    1487         0.340
                                                                       (0.028)                    (0.038)                   (0.039)
 Long Run
                                                Spending Earnings        0.015   0.397    2460     0.061    0.379    901      0.003   0.397    1499         0.332
                                                                       (0.024)                    (0.049)                   (0.030)
                                              Taking Employment         -0.000   0.281    2455     0.004    0.222    900     -0.006   0.313    1495         0.829
                                                                       (0.029)                    (0.043)                   (0.033)
 Panel C: Mobility Index - If Visited [ location] in Past Month
 Short Run
                                                         Market     0.004        0.519    2481     0.042    0.527    911     -0.026   0.522    1507         0.260
                                                                   (0.038)                       (0.047)                    (0.047)
                                                   District Market 0.005         0.178    2494     0.029    0.203    915     -0.000   0.161    1516         0.604
                                                                   (0.029)                       (0.050)                    (0.031)
                                                      Natal Home -0.036          0.301    2487    -0.037    0.329    913     -0.038   0.287    1511         0.979
                                                                   (0.030)                       (0.053)                    (0.028)
                                                       Anganwadi 0.070           0.182    2489   0.100      0.144    914    0.059     0.201    1512         0.367
                                                                   (0.029)                       (0.039)                    (0.034)
                                                             PHC -0.021          0.265    2492    -0.053    0.327    914      0.013   0.228    1515         0.142
                                                                   (0.029)                       (0.043)                    (0.033)
 Long Run
                                                            Market-0.003         0.511    2356     0.040    0.460    869     -0.027   0.541    1428         0.270
                                                                 (0.034)                          (0.048)                   (0.044)
                                                 District Market 0.025           0.100    2373     0.054    0.104    865      0.018   0.096    1450         0.373
                                                                 (0.026)                          (0.036)                   (0.029)
                                                     Natal Home 0.057            0.239    2346     0.037    0.258    866     0.073    0.230    1421         0.545
                                                                 (0.039)                          (0.051)                   (0.046)
                                                      Anganwadi 0.035            0.185    2248     0.062    0.147    829      0.005   0.211    1360         0.249
                                                                 (0.030)                          (0.041)                   (0.039)
                                                            PHC 0.029            0.239    2264     0.022    0.222    837     0.033    0.249    1368         0.850
                                                                 (0.034)                          (0.050)                   (0.040)
 Panel B: Mobility Index - If Visited [ location] in Past Year

 Short Run
                                                            Market  0.016        0.809    2481     0.046    0.797    911  -0.001      0.814    1507         0.367
                                                                   (0.032)                       (0.045)                 (0.038)
                                                   District Market -0.046        0.446    2494    -0.044    0.546    915 -0.051       0.394    1516         0.892
                                                                   (0.043)                       (0.050)                 (0.052)
                                                      Natal Home 0.054           0.837    2487     0.022    0.865    913 0.079        0.818    1511         0.164
                                                                   (0.022)                       (0.026)                 (0.030)
                                                       Anganwadi 0.089           0.314    2489    0.091     0.284    914 0.098        0.330    1512         0.919
                                                                   (0.039)                       (0.048)                 (0.048)
                                                             PHC 0.009           0.645    2492   -0.080     0.732    914  0.055       0.603    1515        0.011
                                                                   (0.038)                       (0.038)                 (0.047)
 Long Run
                                                            Market  -0.010       0.745    2356      0.067   0.658    869    -0.066    0.792    1428        0.012
                                                                   (0.031)                        (0.042)                   (0.038)
                                                   District Market -0.037        0.394    2373     -0.028   0.479    865     -0.035   0.346    1450         0.899
                                                                   (0.040)                        (0.055)                   (0.046)
                                                      Natal Home -0.012          0.886    2346      0.029   0.876    866     -0.043   0.895    1421         0.109
                                                                   (0.020)                        (0.029)                   (0.029)
                                                       Anganwadi 0.072           0.408    2248    0.140     0.342    829      0.021   0.446    1360         0.073
                                                                   (0.048)                        (0.058)                   (0.059)
                                                             PHC 0.024           0.733    2264      0.081   0.703    837     -0.028   0.754    1368         0.087
                                                                   (0.038)                        (0.052)                   (0.044)
 Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are selected using
double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Data Appendix for the complete list of potential
controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The outcome variables in this table feed into decision and mobility sub-indices which then feed into the aggregate
empowerment index. See Online Data Appendix for further details on variable construction.




                                                                                   75
                                 Table C8: Impact of Treatments on Gender Based Violence Sub-Index Components

                                                                 Full Sample               Constrained             Unconstrained              P-value
                                                            Mean     N               Mean N                 Mean                    N    Const=Unconst
                                                     (1)     (2)    (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)     (7)     (8)                   (9)        (10)
 Panel A: Freedom from Physical Violence - If Woman has Not Experienced [ physical violence type] in Past Year

 Short Run
               No Punching, Pulling Hair, or Kicking         -0.026   0.836    2504  0.019      0.827    922    -0.046   0.840    1519         0.148
                                                            (0.024)                 (0.035)                    (0.031)
                               No Pushing or Slapping         0.016   0.884    2504 0.040       0.875    922    0.002    0.890    1519         0.263
                                                            (0.019)                 (0.025)                    (0.025)
                        No Forcing Sexual Intercourse        -0.038   0.779    2504 0.009       0.755    922   -0.061    0.791    1519         0.233
                                                            (0.032)                 (0.056)                    (0.033)
 Long Run
               No Punching, Pulling Hair, or Kicking
                                                   0.010 0.853 2444 -0.029                      0.873    895    0.014    0.847    1490         0.310
                                                  (0.019)           (0.036)                                    (0.023)
                          No Pushing or Slapping 0.014 0.911 2454 0.010                         0.910    901    0.027    0.908    1493         0.592
                                                  (0.016)           (0.026)                                    (0.021)
                    No Forcing Sexual Intercourse 0.001 0.863 2455 -0.019                       0.844    901    0.007    0.870    1495         0.577
                                                  (0.025)           (0.044)                                    (0.027)
 Panel B: Autonomy - Husband Does Not Limit His Wife's Autonomy

 Short Run
                 Never Jealous if Talks to Other Men 0.022 0.539 2499 0.038 0.553 921                            0.021   0.532    1515         0.796
                                                    (0.033)              (0.045)                               (0.044)
            Never Prevents Meeting Female Friends 0.036 0.815 2501 0.070 0.774 922                               0.024   0.837    1516         0.390
                                                    (0.029)              (0.046)                               (0.035)
                 Never Limits Contact With Family 0.021 0.913 2501 0.013 0.909 922                               0.025   0.917    1516         0.725
                                                    (0.019)              (0.030)                               (0.022)
 Does Not Insist on Knowing Location At All Times -0.014 0.581 2500 0.023 0.538 922                             -0.032   0.604    1515         0.365
                                                    (0.037)              (0.053)                               (0.045)
 Long Run
                Never Jealous if Talks to Other Men -0.009 0.632 2422 -0.016 0.638 888                          0.006    0.632    1476         0.721
                                                    (0.026)              (0.044)                               (0.037)
            Never Prevents Meeting Female Friends 0.058 0.784 2313 0.040 0.775 828                             0.065     0.788    1430         0.693
                                                    (0.027)              (0.046)                               (0.037)
                 Never Limits Contact With Family 0.022 0.911 2443 0.037 0.908 895                              0.017    0.915    1490         0.607
                                                    (0.019)              (0.038)                               (0.018)
 Does Not Insist on Knowing Location At All Times -0.012 0.606 2448 -0.038 0.611 898                            -0.001   0.605    1491         0.576
                                                    (0.031)              (0.050)                               (0.041)
 Panel C: Emotional Abuse - If Woman Has Not Experienced [ emotional abuse type] in Past Year

 Short Run
                   Not Humiliated In Front of Others         -0.010   0.876    2504  -0.008     0.875    922  -0.006     0.874    1519         0.978
                                                            (0.022)                 (0.041)                  (0.026)
                                        Not Threatened        0.010   0.884    2504 0.054       0.861    922 -0.007      0.896    1519         0.125
                                                            (0.020)                 (0.034)                  (0.023)
                                            Not Insulted     -0.039   0.732    2504 0.000       0.688    922 -0.058      0.751    1519         0.296
                                                            (0.031)                 (0.042)                  (0.041)
 Long Run
                   Not Humiliated In Front of Others         0.002    0.903    2450  -0.032     0.904    898    0.023    0.902    1492         0.166
                                                            (0.018)                 (0.031)                    (0.022)
                                        Not Threatened      0.029     0.911    2455 0.006       0.924    900   0.039     0.905    1495         0.295
                                                            (0.017)                 (0.028)                    (0.019)
                                            Not Insulted    0.036     0.793    2449 0.030       0.774    895   0.039     0.803    1494         0.847
                                                            (0.020)                 (0.038)                    (0.024)
 Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates are
selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data Appendix for
the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The outcome variables in this table feed into the freedom from physical violence,
autonomy, and emotional abuse sub-indices, which then feed into the aggregate freedom from gender-based violence index. See Online Data Appendix for
further details on variable construction.




                                                                              76
                                        Table C9: Impact of Treatments on Mental Health Sub-Index Components

                                                               Full Sample               Constrained              Unconstrained              P-value
                                                          Mean      N            Mean N                 Mean     N    Const=Unconst
                                                  (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)   (5)    (6)    (7)      (8)    (9)        (10)
      Panel A: Freedom From Depression - Has Not Experienced [ depression symptom] All or Most of the Time in the Past 30 Days

      Short Run
                                        Not Hopeless      -0.012    0.770    2491    -0.001    0.773   918  -0.009      0.767    1511         0.872
                                                         (0.027)                    (0.041)                (0.032)
                                       Not Worthless       0.039    0.747    2493   0.088      0.728   918 0.005        0.759    1512         0.087
                                                         (0.028)                    (0.040)                (0.036)
                                      Not Depressed       -0.016    0.739    2492    0.004     0.734   918 -0.035       0.746    1511         0.467
                                                         (0.024)                    (0.042)                (0.031)
      Not Feeling Like Everything Requires Effort          0.013    0.729    2489     0.043    0.725   917 -0.011       0.732    1509         0.263
                                                         (0.031)                    (0.039)                (0.036)
      Long Run
                                                  -0.048
                                        Not Hopeless                0.919    2453  -0.048      0.913   899  -0.048 0.924 1494                 0.997
                                                  (0.021)                          (0.028)                  (0.029)
                                   Not Worthless -0.033              0.910 2455 -0.035         0.919 901 -0.035 0.910 1494                    1.000
                                                  (0.016)                          (0.027)                  (0.020)
                                  Not Depressed -0.014               0.889 2456 0.018          0.843 901 -0.036 0.915 1495                    0.204
77




                                                  (0.022)                          (0.034)                  (0.025)
      Not Feeling Like Everything Requires Effort -0.027             0.922 2451 -0.026         0.904 899 -0.025 0.932 1492                    0.968
                                                  (0.017)                          (0.027)                  (0.019)
      Panel B: Freedom From Anxiety - Has Not Experienced           [ anxiety symptom] All    or Most of the Time in the Past 30 Days

      Short Run
                                         Not Nervous       0.013    0.741    2494    0.037     0.760   920  -0.010      0.737    1512         0.316
                                                         (0.026)                    (0.039)                (0.032)
                                         Not Restless     -0.029    0.765    2494    -0.001    0.750   918 -0.044       0.778    1513         0.362
                                                         (0.022)                    (0.033)                (0.030)
      Long Run
                                         Not Nervous      -0.019    0.903    2457    -0.036    0.909   902  -0.005      0.899    1495         0.365
                                                         (0.018)                    (0.029)                (0.021)
                                         Not Restless     -0.007    0.903    2452   -0.053     0.914   900 0.017        0.896    1492         0.067
                                                         (0.018)                    (0.030)                (0.024)
      Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the GP level in parentheses. All regressions include strata and district fixed effects. Additional covariates
     are selected using double post lasso. The set of potential controls includes individual and GP-level characteristics and their square. See Online Data
     Appendix for the complete list of potential controls. * p 0.10, ** p 0.05, *** p 0.10. The outcome variables in this table feed into the freedom
     from anxiety and depression sub-indices, which then feed into the aggregate mental health index. See Online Data Appendix for further details on
     variable construction.
Online Data Appendix
The Online Data Appendix, which contains additional detail on variable construction and a
list of lasso controls, is available here:
https://drive.google.com/open?id=1R2tduuO8ZoJrdTJlOHXePjRwY_ix7kdG.




                                           78
