                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                  PRICES AND PROMOTIONS IN U.S. RETAIL MARKETS:
                             EVIDENCE FROM BIG DATA

                                         Günter J. Hitsch
                                          Ali Hortaçsu
                                          Xiliang Lin

                                       Working Paper 26306
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26306


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019

We thank Susan Athey, Pierre Dubois, Paul Ellickson, Kirthi Kalyanam, Carl Mela, Helena
Perrone, Steve Tadelis, and Raphael Thomadsen for their helpful comments and suggestions. We
also benefitted from the comments of seminar participants at the 2017 QME Conference at
Goethe University Frankfurt and the 2017 Columbia Business School Marketing Analytics and
Big Data Conference. Jacob Dorn, George Gui, Jihong Song, and Ningyin Xu provided
outstanding research assistance. Part of this research was funded by the Initiative on Global
Markets (IGM) at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and the Becker Friedman
Institute at the University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Researcher(s)
own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC
and marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing
Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn
from the Nielsen data are those of the researcher(s) and do not reflect the views of Nielsen.
Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the
results reported herein.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26306.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Günter J. Hitsch, Ali Hortaçsu, and Xiliang Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Prices and Promotions in U.S. Retail Markets: Evidence from Big Data
Günter J. Hitsch, Ali Hortaçsu, and Xiliang Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 26306
September 2019
JEL No. L11

                                           ABSTRACT

We document the degree of price dispersion and the similarities as well as differences in pricing
and promotion strategies across stores in the U.S. retail (grocery) industry. Our analysis is based
on "big data" that allow us to draw general conclusions based on the prices for close to 50,000
products (UPC's) in 17,184 stores that belong to 81 different retail chains. Both at the national
and local market level we find a substantial degree of price dispersion for UPC's and brands at a
given moment in time. We document that both persistent base price differences across stores and
price promotions contribute to the overall price variance, and we provide a decomposition of the
price variance into base price and promotion components. There is substantial heterogeneity in
the degree of price dispersion across products. Some of this heterogeneity can be explained by the
degree of product penetration (adoption by households) and the number of retail chains that carry
a product at the market level. Prices and promotions are more homogenous at the retail chain than
at the market level. In particular, within local markets, prices and promotions are substantially
more similar within stores that belong to the same chain than across stores that belong to different
chains. Furthermore, the incidence of price promotions is strongly coordinated within retail
chains, both at the local market level and nationally. We present evidence, based on store-level
demand estimates for 2,000 brands, that price elasticities and promotion effects at the local
market level are substantially more similar within stores that belong to the same chain than across
stores belonging to different retailers. Moreover, we find that retailers can not easily distinguish,
in a statistical sense, among the price elasticities and promotion effects across stores using
retailer-level data. Hence, the limited level of price discrimination across stores by retail chains
likely reflects demand similarity and the inability to distinguish demand across the stores in a
local market.

Günter J. Hitsch                                            Xiliang Lin
University of Chicago                                       JD.com
Booth School of Business                                    linx@chicagobooth.edu
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
guenter.hitsch@ChicagoBooth.edu

Ali Hortaçsu
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
hortacsu@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction
We document the extent of price dispersion and the similarities as well as differences in pricing
and promotion strategies across stores in the U.S. retail (grocery) industry. We also examine if
price similarity is related to similarity in demand. The analysis is based on a sample from the
Nielsen RMS scanner data that comprehensively tracks weekly store-level prices and quantities
sold for nearly 50,000 products in 17,184 stores that belong to 81 different retail chains, including
grocery stores, drug stores, and mass merchandisers. This is a "big" data set with close to 25
billion observations. This comprehensive data set allows us to provide general insights that
are not specific to a small number of products, categories, stores, or retailers as in most of the
extant literature. Our focus is on products, defined either as UPC's (universal product code)
or brands--UPC's that share the same brand name and are physically identical apart from the
packaging or volume. This is different from an analysis of the overall price and promotion tactics
across the whole assortment of products carried by a store, which is not easily possible without
assumptions on how to aggregate products and how to account for differences in the assortments
across stores. The pricing and promotion patterns documented in this paper are intended as a
basis for future research by marketers, industrial organization economists, and macroeconomists.
     We provide an overview structured into three parts: (i) An overview of the main facts of
price dispersion, (ii) a discussion of price and promotion similarity, in particular at the retail
chain level, and (iii) an investigation of the relationship between price similarity and similarity
in product demand.

Main facts of price dispersion

We begin our analysis by documenting the basic facts of the dispersion of prices of identical
or almost identical products across stores at a given moment (week) in time. We measure
price dispersion for products defined as UPC's, which are identical across stores, and also for
products defined as brands, which are only "almost identical" because they are frequently offered
in different assortments of UPC's that differ in form or pack size, although the main product
content is physically identical. We examine price dispersion at different geographic levels, and
find that even at the most narrowly defined geographic level analyzed--3-digit ZIP codes--the
law of one price is violated by an often substantial degree. For example, the ratio of the 95th to
5th percentile of prices is 1.294 for the median UPC and 1.433 for the median brand. Equally
important is the heterogeneity in the degree of price dispersion across products, ranging from
small to very large degrees of price dispersion.
    The next step in the analysis is an examination of the sources of price dispersion at a given
moment in time. In practice, the price of most products alternates between periods when the
product is sold at the every-day shelf price or base price, which typically changes infrequently,
and promotional or sales periods when the product is offered at a temporarily discounted price.
Both persistent differences in the level of base prices across stores or temporary price promotions
that are not perfectly coordinated across stores can be the source of the price dispersion at a
given moment in time. To distinguish between these two sources of price dispersion we use a


                                                 2
newly developed algorithm that classifies prices as base or promoted prices. We first document
the degree of the dispersion of base prices across stores at a given moment in time. As expected,
we find that the degree of base price dispersion is smaller than the degree of price dispersion,
although the differences are not large. For example, the ratio of the 95th to 5th percentile of
base prices at the 3-digit ZIP code level is 1.220 for the median UPC, compared to 1.294 for the
corresponding ratio of prices (for brands, the difference in the dispersion between base prices and
prices is even smaller). Furthermore, we document that the median product is promoted once
in 6.8 weeks, that the median promotional discount is 19.5 percent on the every-day price, and
that 28.7 percent of all product volume is sold on promotion for the median product.
    We then provide a price variance decomposition to quantify the exact contribution of the
different sources of price dispersion to the overall price variance during a year. Within markets,
persistent base price differences across stores account for the largest share of the price variance
(46.5 percent for UPC's and 70.9 percent for brands), whereas the within-store variance of
base prices during a year accounts for only about 20 percent of the base price variance. The
contribution of price promotions to the within-market price variance is 35.2 percent for UPC's
and 10.0 percent for brands. The relatively small contribution of price promotions is due to
a strong strong EDLP (every-day low price) vs. Hi-Lo pricing pattern, whereby stores with
systematically high base prices offer deeper or more frequent price discounts than stores with
systematically low base prices. Thus, this EDLP vs. Hi-Lo pattern compresses the overall price
dispersion across stores. Indeed, for some products the contribution of price promotions to the
overall price variance is negative due to particularly pronounced EDLP vs. Hi-Lo pricing.

Price similarity and promotion coordination

We fist examine if the heterogeneity in the degree of price dispersion across products is related to
observed product attributes. We find that price dispersion is positively related to the distribution
of a product, especially to the number of retail chains that carry the product at the local market
level, and to the level of product penetration (the percentage of all households that purchase a
product within a year). Both factors, distribution and product penetration, may reflect the level
of heterogeneity in product demand.
    Second, we assess the extent by which the variation in prices and the variation in the pro-
motion frequency and promotion depth across stores can be attributed to market versus retail
chain-specific factors. We find that prices are significantly more similar within the 81 retail
chains than within the 840 3-digit ZIP codes in our sample. Furthermore, at the local market
level prices are relatively more homogenous within stores that belong to the same chain. We
obtain almost identical results when we examine the degree to which market and chain-specific
factors can explain the differences in the promotion frequency and promotion depth of a product
across stores.
    To gain a more detailed understanding of the similarity in pricing patterns across stores that
belong to the same chain we first conduct a principal components analysis (PCA) of the store-
level price vectors (the time-series of prices in the store). PCA is a dimensionality reduction
method that allows us to visualize the price vectors, which are high-dimensional objects, in a


                                                 3
low-dimensional space. We find that a small number of principal components explains a large
percentage of the variance in the original price data, such that the original price vectors can
be reconstructed using a small number of the principal components. When we visualize the
store-level price vectors in a two-dimensional space it is apparent that the price vectors are
substantially more similar if the corresponding store belongs to the same retailer than if the
store is in the same local market. We confirm this finding by regressing the projected prices
on market, chain, and market/chain fixed effects and find that chain and market/chain factors
explain a much larger percentage of the variance in projected prices than market factors.
    We then study price promotions and document the extent to which price promotions are
coordinated across stores in the same retail chain. An analysis of retail chain promotion per-
centages--the fraction of stores in a local retail chain that promote a product in the same
week--reveals that the observed distribution of the promotion percentages has a significantly
larger fraction of values that are close to 0 or 1 (the extremes of perfect promotion coordination)
than a simulated distribution of promotion percentages assuming independence in the promotion
incidence across stores.
    We test for promotion coordination more formally using a linear probability model of store-
level promotion incidence. The covariates included in the regression are the inside percentage of
stores in the same chain (not including the focal store itself) contemporaneously promoting a
product and the outside percentage of stores belonging to other chains that promote the product
in the same week. The model is estimated separately for each product and market. The results
provide strong evidence for promotion coordination within a retail chain. Most of the inside
percentage coefficients are positive with a median close to 1, indicating that the probability of
a promotion in a store increases in the percentage of other stores in the same chain promoting
the product. Furthermore, promotions are not only coordinated within a retail chain at the
market level but also at the national level. On the other hand, the estimates of the outside
percentage coefficients are close to 0, indicating that store-level promotions are conditionally
independent of promotions in other retail chains. However, we find evidence for unconditional
promotion dependence--the store-level promotion incidence increases in the outside percentage if
we do not condition on the inside percentage in the linear probability model--which may reflect
promotional allowances that are common to multiple retailers or seasonality in demand.

Relationship between price similarity and product demand

In the final part of the paper we test if demand side factors are able to explain the similarity in
prices and promotions among stores that belong to the same retail chain.
    We first estimate demand models for the top 2,000 brands (based on total revenue) at the
store-level , which results in a total of 27.2 million estimated price and promotion coefficients. The
estimates are stable across different sets of controls for market-level time fixed effects (quarter vs.
month vs. week), suggesting that endogeneity bias is unlikely to affect the estimated coefficients.
We also compare the OLS estimates to the estimates obtained from a Bayesian hierarchical model
that yield regularized estimates of the price and promotion effects.
    We use the price and promotion estimates to test if demand is more similar in stores that be-


                                                  4
long to the same chain. We find that market factors explain 14.6 percent of the variation in price
elasticities across stores, chain factors explain 17.2 percent, and market/chain factors explain
47.3 percent of the variation. The results for promotion effects reveal a similar pattern--market
factors explain 19.3, chain factors explain 30.5, and market/chain factors explain 56.4 percent
of the variation in the estimated promotion effects. Hence, demand is more similar at the chain
than at the market level, and in particular demand is much more similar within the stores in a
market that belong to the same retail chain.
    The finding that demand is substantially more similar within a local retail chain than across
stores belonging to different retailers begs the question if the retailers can easily distinguish
among the price elasticities and promotion effects across its stores. We thus emulate the de-
mand analysis available to a sophisticated retailer, and analyze the price and promotion effects
predicted by a Bayesian hierarchical model that is estimated at the retail chain level. Similar
estimation approaches have been widely employed in the industry since the early 2000's. We find
that market/chain factors explain 70.5 percent of the variation in the price elasticities that likely
correspond to the estimates available to a sophisticated retailer. Similarly, market/chain factors
explain 73.5 percent of the variation in the corresponding promotion effects. In contrast, market
factors alone explain only 20.9 percent of the variation in price elasticities and 18.5 percent of
the variation in promotion effects. Hence, the information available to sophisticated retailers
indicates a large degree of demand similarity among its stores in a local market. Indeed, for the
median brand in a local retail chain, only 7.5 percent of price elasticity estimates are distinguish-
able from the retailer's mean market-level price elasticity across stores using a 95 percent credible
interval. The corresponding number is somewhat larger, 11.6 percent, for the 250 largest brands.
Using an 80 percent credible interval, 21.2 percent of all price elasticities and 28.4 percent of the
elasticities of the 250 largest brands are distinguishable from the local retail-chain mean. We
corresponding numbers for the store-level promotion effect estimates are similar.
    The results suggest that demand similarity and the inability to distinguish demand across the
stores in a local market are likely the primary reason for the similarity in prices and promotions.
This conclusion is consistent with the anecdotal evidence from conversations with retail chain
managers, who frequently indicated that local price discrimination ("store-specific marketing") is
challenging to implement in practice.
    The similarity in demand is consistent with the similarity of prices and promotions within
a retail chain, although the estimated degree of similarity in demand is less than the estimated
degree of similarity in prices and promotions. Whether this reflects unexploited price discrimina-
tion opportunities across stores, or simply measurement error in the price and promotion effect
estimates is beyond the scope of this paper but an important question to be asked in future
research.

The paper is organized as follows. We discuss the related literature in Section 2, and then provide
an overview of the data sources in Section 3. In Section 4 we present the basic facts of price
dispersion 5, and we separately document the degree of base price dispersion and the prevalence
of price promotions in Section 6. In Section 6 we decompose the overall price variance into
base price and promotion factors. In Section 7 we examine if price dispersion is systematically

                                                 5
related to product characteristics and to market or retail chain factors. A detailed discussion of
price similarity and promotion coordination within chains is provided in Section 8. In Section 9
we examine if demand similarity is a source of price similarity within retail chains. Section 10
concludes.


2    Literature review
There are several other studies that document price dispersion for products sold in retail stores
(supermarkets), based on data for a smaller number of products or categories compared to our
work (e.g. Lach 2002, Dubois and Perrone 2015, and Eizenberg et al. 2017) or have limited
coverage of markets or retail chains (e.g. Eden 2014). We single out important prior work by
Kaplan and Menzio (2015), which studies price dispersion in the U.S. retail industry using the
Nielsen Homescan household panel data set. Their analysis overlaps with one part of this paper,
the discussion of the basic facts of price dispersion in Section 4. However, the sample of product
prices employed in Section 4 differs in important ways from the sample in Kaplan and Menzio
(2015).
    First, the prices recorded in the Nielsen Homescan data that are studied by Kaplan and
Menzio (2015) only cover products that are purchased by a household. The sample of prices
for products that households choose to buy is not a random sample of prices at which products
are sold, and is systematically more likely to include low prices and omit high prices from the
distribution of prices at which the products are sold. This problem affects our sample of prices
to a much lesser degree, because we observe the price of a product in a given store and week
whenever at least one unit of the product was sold (Section 3.1). Furthermore, we impute store-
level prices in weeks when the product did not sell using the most recent base (non-promoted)
price. We predict base prices based on an algorithm that classifies prices into promoted and
non-promoted prices.
    Second, using the purchase records of the approximately 50,000 Homescan households, it is
only possible to systematically capture the prices of a small number of products at the market
(Scantrack) level. The baseline results in Kaplan and Menzio (2015) are based on a sample of
products with a minimum of 25 observations at the quarter/Scantrack-market level. Replicating
the sample-selection approach of Kaplan and Menzio (2015), we found that the median number
of products (UPC's) at the quarter/Scantrack level in their sample was 147. In contrast, in
our sample the median number of products (UPC's) with at least 25 observations at the quar-
ter/Scantrack level is 32,416. We also note that the 840 3-digit ZIP codes in our sample represent
substantially smaller market areas compared to the 54 Scantrack markets in Kaplan and Menzio
(2015). The difference in product coverage implies a substantial difference in the generality of
our findings. Moreover, because our initial goal is to document the distribution of prices at a
given moment in time, we summarize price dispersion at the week level, the shortest time period
at which prices are reported in the Nielsen RMS data. We also decompose the yearly variance of
prices into components including temporary price promotions and the variance of regular (base)
price levels over time. In contrast, Kaplan and Menzio (2015) document the distribution of prices


                                                6
at the quarterly level and do not distinguish between regular and promoted prices.
    In principle, the Homescan data provides better coverage of all retail chains than the RMS
data provided by the Kilts Center for Marketing. For example, the Homescan data cover shop-
ping trips at Walmart (although the exact retail chain identity is not revealed in the Kilts Nielsen
data), whereas Wal-Mart is not among the retail chains included in the RMS data. To measure
price dispersion across stores, the sample in Kaplan and Menzio (2015) only includes the approx-
imately one third of all transactions for which a store-identifier (store_code_uc) is present in
the Homescan data. However, the 2004-2009 Homescan data do not include a store-identifier for
transactions at Wal-Mart (Wal-Mart stopped sharing its data with Nielsen in 2001 but resumed
a sharing agreement in 2011). Therefore, de facto the sample in Kaplan and Menzio (2015) does
not provide better coverage of retail chains than the RMS sample used in this paper.1
    A key finding in this paper is the fact that prices for a given product are substantially more
similar across stores within a given retail chain than across stores belonging to different retail
chains, especially when focusing on a specific local market. A similar result, based on a sample
of 100 UPC's, is reported in Nakamura (2008), who found that 65 percent of the overall price
variation is common to stores within a given retail chain. Contemporaneous work by DellaVigna
and Gentzkow (2019) that is also based on Nielsen RMS scanner data focuses (similar to parts
of this paper) on what the authors term "uniform pricing" in U.S. retail chains. Their paper
highlights managerial inertia and brand image concerns as key drivers of this finding, and focuses
on quantifying the potential profit and welfare losses from the (relative) lack of price variation
across stores within a retail chain. In Section 9 we provide an alternative explanation: That stores
belonging to a given retail chain in a local market face demand curves that are substantially more
similar than demand curves across stores belonging to different chains. Furthermore, store-level
price elasticities estimated using retailer-level data are statistically hard to distinguish from the
local chain-level mean. Hence, the implementation of store-specific pricing in a local retail chain
is practically difficult using extant data and business-analytic tools.
    Related to our work, Adams and Williams (2019) provide evidence on retail price similarity
in the home improvement industry. Similar to our findings, they document that prices are not
store-specific, but cluster within pricing zones. The number of pricing zones created by national
retailers, however, differs across product categories.
    Our analysis, which focuses on the dispersion of prices at a given moment in time, is related
to work that provides generalizable evidence on the time-series variation in prices (Bronnenberg
et al. 2006). A related literature documents the frequency of price adjustments and price rigidity,
which has important implications for macroeconomics (Nakamura and Steinsson 2008, Nakamura
and Steinsson 2013). Our work is also related to research on assortments across stores. For a
sample of products in four categories, Hwang et al. (2010) find that stores that belong to the
same retail chain in a market (state) carry similar assortments. This finding mirrors our results
on price and promotion similarities within retail chains.
    Our analysis of store-level brand price elasticities and promotion effects (Section9.2) is related
   1
     In contemporaneous work that has a different focus than our study, Kaplan et al. (2019) analyze the extent
to which product-level price dispersion is due to persistent price-level differences across stores, based on a sample
of 1,000 UPC's from the Nielsen RMS data.


                                                         7
to meta-analyses of price elasticities in the marketing literature, in particular Tellis (1988) and
Bijmolt et al. (2005). Other studies relate brand or category elasticities and promotion effects
to market characteristics (Bolton 1989), demographic and competitor information (Hoch et al.
1995, Boatwright et al. 2004), and category characteristics (Narasimhan et al. 1996).


3       Data description
Our analysis is primarily based on the Nielsen RMS (Retail Measurement Services) retail scanner
data that is made available for academic research purposes through a partnership between the
Nielsen Company and the James M. Kilts Center for Marketing at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business.2 We also use the Nielsen Homescan consumer panel data to select the
products in our sample.

3.1     Nielsen RMS retail scanner data
The Nielsen RMS retail scanner data includes information on store-level sales units and prices
at the UPC (universal product code) level. The data that are available from the Kilts Center for
Marketing covers close to 40,000 stores across various channels, including grocery stores, mass
merchandisers, drug stores, convenience stores, and gas stations. Although the data cover a
broad range of stores and retailers, the subset of the RMS data available from the Kilts Center
for Marketing is neither a census nor a randomly selected sample. Some big retail chains, most
notably Walmart, are not included in the data. The data have broad geographic coverage and, on
average, account for between 50 and 60 percent of all market-level spending in grocery and drug
stores and for one third of all spending at mass merchandisers.3 The data contain a retail-chain
ID for each store, and hence we can identify all stores that belong to the same retailer. However,
the exact identity (name) of a retail chain is concealed.
    The RMS scanner data record sales units and prices at the week-level, separately for all stores
and UPC's. Over time, a UPC can be reassigned to a different product. Therefore, the Kilts
Center for Marketing also provides a version code (upc_ver_uc) such that the combination of
the UPC and UPC version code uniquely identifies a product.4 A change of the brand name
(description) is one of the reasons why a new UPC version is created. Sometimes, a new UPC
version reflects a different spelling or abbreviation of the brand name, for example "MOUNTAIN
DEW R" versus "MTN DEW R." We attempt to identify and correct all such instances. From
now on, we will refer only to UPC's, with the understanding that at the most disaggregated level
a product is characterized by a unique combination of a UPC and UPC version code.
    In the data, a week is a seven-day period that ends on a Saturday. If the shelf price of a UPC
changes during this period the quantity-weighted average over the shelf prices is recorded.
    2
     http://research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen/
    3
     See the Retail Scanner Dataset Manual provided by the Kilts Center for Marketing for the Scantrack market-
level data indicating the coverage of spending for the three main retail channels.
   4
     A new UPC version is created when one or more of the "core" UPC attributes change. The core attributes
include the product module (category) code, brand code, pack size (volume), and a multi-pack variable indicating
the number of product units bundled together.



                                                       8
    The RMS data only contain records for weeks when at least one unit of the product was
sold. For the top products that sell in most weeks this is of no concern, but for smaller products
the incidence of weeks without a data record is more frequent. For such products the observed
sample of prices will be more likely to include relatively low, promoted price levels than regular
price levels, and hence the sample will not accurately reflect the true distribution of prices. To
ameliorate this problem we impute the missing prices using on an algorithm that first classifies the
observed prices as either base (regular) prices or promoted prices. The algorithm distinguishes
between regular and promoted prices based on the frequently observed saw-tooth pattern in a
store-level time series of prices whereby prices alternate between periods with (almost) constant
regular price levels and shorter periods with temporarily reduced price levels. We perform this
classification separately for each store. We assume that weeks without sales are non-promoted
weeks (this assumption is justified by the frequently large sales spikes observed in promoted
weeks), and hence we impute the missing prices using the predictions of the current regular
(non-promoted) price levels based on the price classification algorithm. Two examples of UPC,
store-level price series and the corresponding predicted base prices are given in the Appendix in
Figures 24 and 25.

3.2    Nielsen Homescan household panel data
We use the Nielsen Homescan household panel data to select the product sample for our analysis
(see Section 3.3 below). During the sample period in this paper, 2008-2010, the Homescan panel
includes more than 60,000 households. Nielsen provides sampling weights (projection factors) to
make summary statistics from the data, such as total spending in retail stores, representative of
the U.S. population at large. The participating households scan all purchased items after each
shopping trip, and thus Homescan provides us with comprehensive data on the UPC's purchased
and the corresponding prices that the households paid.

3.3    Sample selection and size distribution
The number of products in the Nielsen RMS data is large. Between 2008 and 2010 the RMS data
include information on almost one million (to be exact: 967,832) products (UPC's).5 However,
a large percentage of the total sales revenue is concentrated among a relatively small number of
products. To illustrate, in Figure 1 we rank all products based on total revenue between 2008
and 2010 and plot the cumulative revenue of the top N products on the y-axis. For example,
the top 1,000 products account for 20.7 percent, the top 10,000 products account for 56.5, and
the top 50,000 products account for 89.3 percent of the total revenue in the 2008-2010 data,
respectively.
    We intend to base our analysis on a product sample that is as comprehensive as possible.
However, including all products in our analysis poses some problems, in particular because the
small (in terms of revenue) products rarely sell. As discussed in Section 3.1 we do not observe the
product price in a week when store-level sales are zero, and using our price imputation algorithm
  5
    If we define a product as a combination of UPC and UPC version (the variable upc_ver_uc) the number is
967,863.


                                                    9
is likely to yield noisy results if price observations are only available in a small fraction of all
weeks. Therefore, we use only a subset of all products in our empirical analysis. To select these
products, we choose all products (UPC's) that are observed in both the Nielsen RMS scanner
data and the Homescan household panel data. We then choose the top 50,000 products based on
total Homescan expenditure. These 50,000 products account for 73 percent of total Homescan
expenditure and 79 percent of revenue in the RMS scanner data. We select products based on
Homescan expenditure instead of RMS revenue for a better assessment of how general our sample
of product is. As discussed above, the Homescan data provide a comprehensive view of household
purchasing behavior across all retailers, while the RMS data contain a select sample of retailers
and products that are not necessarily fully representative of the whole population distribution.
The top 50,000 still represent a large number of products, and some of these products are only
infrequently sold. As indicated above, this presents problems for the price imputation algorithm,
and we hence exclude some of the infrequently sold products from the analysis.
     Ultimately, our sample includes 47,355 products. Table 1 provides summary statistics of the
product sample that covers the years 2008-2010. In each year we observe more than 6 billion
prices. In total, we have 18.81 billion price observations corresponding to 434 billion dollars in
sales. Including the imputed prices the number of price observations is 27.09 billion . Overall,
30.6 percent of all the prices at the product/store/week level used in our analysis are imputed.

3.4   Products/UPC's versus brands
We often compare results at the product (UPC) level with results if products are aggregated
to the brand level. Our basis of brand-level aggregation is the brand name of one or multiple
products. For example, all products with the brand description "COCA-COLA CLASSIC R" or
"COCA-COLA R" belong to the same brand, Coca-Cola, while products with the description
"COCA-COLA DT" belong to a different brand, Diet Coke. We aggregate products based on
equivalent units such as ounces or counts. The sales volume of a brand is measured in the
number of corresponding equivalent units (e.g. 10,000 ounces) and the brand price is measured
as the average price per equivalent unit (e.g. 12 cents per ounce). We calculate weighted average
prices, using the total product-level revenue summed over all stores and weeks as weights. Thus,
differences in brand prices are entirely due to differences in the underlying product prices, not
due to differences in the aggregation weights.
    We obtain 11,279 brands using the aggregation process. Summary statistics of the brand
sample are contained in Table 1. The sample includes more than 2.3 billion brand-level price
observations per year, and 7.1 billion price observations in total.

3.5   Private label products
The Nielsen data contain both national brand and private label products. However, the brand
description of private label products is always "CTL BR" (control brand), and hence we do not
know the brand name under which the product is sold. Also, we cannot infer the brand name
based on the store where the product was sold because the name of the retail chain that the
store belongs to is not revealed. However, we know the product (UPC) description of a product,

                                                10
such as "CTL BR RS BRAN RTE" for a private label Raisin Bran product in the ready-to-eat
breakfast cereal category.
    In our analysis we treat all private label UPC's as the same product if they share the same
product description and contain the same volume. In particular, we treat such UPC's as the
same product even if the UPC's are different. The UPC's are typically different because the
product is sold by different retail chains, whereas the product itself of often physically identical
because it is produced by the same manufacturer that supplies multiple retailers. Even if the
product is identical the packaging and specific brand name (e.g. "Kroger Raisin Bran") will differ
across retailers. Hence, treating different private label UPC's as the same product is not entirely
innocuous, but it is the best we can do to compare the price dispersion of national brands to the
price dispersion of private label products across retail chains.
    Table 1 shows the percentage of observations accounted for by private label products. Private
label products account for 10.8 percent of all price observations and 15.4 percent of total revenue.

3.6   Chain and store coverage
For some stores we observe a large incidence of weeks when the products in our sample do not sell.
If the price of a product is not recorded for a large percentage of l weeks the price prediction based
on our imputation algorithm becomes unreliable. Hence, to avoid a large degree of measurement
error, we exclude such predominantly small stores, especially convenience stores and gas stations,
from the sample used in our analysis. The final data include 17,184 stores that belong to 81
different retail chains, including grocery stores, drug stores, and mass merchandisers. These
stores represent more than 90 percent of total revenue in the Kilts-Nielsen RMS data.
    In Table 2 we summarize the observed number of chains and stores in our sample at the
DMA level and the ZIP+3 level. Note that three-digit ZIP codes and counties are the smallest
geographic areas available to researchers in the Kilts Center of Marketing release of the Nielsen
RMS data. At the DMA level the median number of chains is 6 and the median number of stores
is 32. At the ZIP+3 level the corresponding numbers are 4 and 10, respectively. Hence, even
at the smallest geographic level that we will analyze there are typically multiple retailers and
stores. This is an important fact, because the measured price dispersion in a specific geography
would obviously be limited if there were only a small number of stores or retailers present.
    Table 2 also provides chain-level summary statistics on the geographic coverage and the
number of stores of retail chains. The median number of different DMA's where a chain is
present is 5, and the corresponding median number of different ZIP+3 codes is 13. The median
number of stores that belong to the same retail chain is 77 at the national level, 5 at the DMA
level, and 2 at the ZIP+3 level.

3.7   Product assortments
The degree of price dispersion is limited by the extent to which a product is available at different
stores or retail chains. Hence, we document the distribution of product and brand availability
across stores and retail chains in our sample. We classify a product (brand) as available in a
specific store or retail chain if it was sold in the store or chain at least once during 2010.

                                                 11
    Figure 2 displays the distribution of store availability for brands (column one) and products
(column two). The histograms are shown separately for the top 100 (based on total revenue),
top 1,000, and top 10,000 brands and products, and--at the bottom of the figure--also for all
brands and products included in the analysis. The median product in the top 100 group is sold
in 12,771 stores, whereas the corresponding median brand is sold in 15,985 stores, representing
93 percent of all 17,184 stores. Hence, the top products and in particular the top brands are
widely available. However, even the top 100 products and brands are not consistently available
across all stores, indicating differences in store-level assortment choices. Also, the top brands are
more consistently available across stores than products, implying assortment differences whereby
stores that carry the same brand offer the brand in different pack sizes or forms (e.g. cans versus
bottles).
    Whereas the top 100 and also top 1,000 products and brands are widely available, the cor-
responding distributions for the top 10,000 and all products and brands indicate much less
consistent availability across stores. For example, the median product among all products in
the sample is available only at 3,854 stores, and the median brand is available at 5,281 stores,
representing 31 percent of all stores. Both the product and brand availability distributions are
right-skewed with a mode close to zero. Overall, we find that assortments across stores tend to
be specialized, with the exception of a relatively small number of top-selling product and brands
that are typically available at a vast majority of all stores and chains.
    The distributions of brand and product availability across retail chains, shown in columns
three and four of Figure 2, are similar to the corresponding distributions across stores. In
particular, whereas the top-selling brand and products are widely available (for example, the
median brand among the top 100 is sold in 76 out of 81 retail chains), availability is much more
limited among the top 10,000 and among all brands and products in the sample. Compared to
the store availability distributions, however, the differences across the top and bottom groups are
less pronounced. For example, the median brand among all brands in the sample is still available
in the majority of retail chains (45 out of 81). In particular, the brand availability distribution
for all brands exhibits a pronounced bi-modal shape, indicating a mass of brands available at
most retailers and a mass of brands available at a very limited number of retail chains.


4    Price dispersion: The basic facts
We start our analysis by presenting the basic facts--the price dispersion of identical or almost
identical products across stores at any given moment in time. We present the results separately
for the case when a product is defined as a UPC and the case when a product is defined as
a brand. UPC's are identical across stores. In the case of brands, we calculate the store-level
brand price per equivalent unit as a weighted average over the prices of the individual UPC's
that share the same brand name (see Section 3.4). These UPC's typically differ along pack size
(15 oz, 20 oz, etc.) or form factor (bottles, cans, etc.). Different stores may offer the same brand
in different UPC's. Hence, products defined as brands may not be exactly identical across stores
but may exhibit some degree of product differentiation due to differences in the size or form


                                                 12
factor of the UPC's. However, apart from the packaging, the main product is de facto physically
identical across UPC's, and consumers are also likely to perceive the main product as identical
across UPC's that share the exact same brand name. Therefore, a comparison of the average
price at which one (equivalent) unit of a brand can be purchased across stores is meaningful, and
we will refer to brands as almost identical products.

4.1   Dispersion measures
For each product j in the sample we measure the dispersion of prices in week t using two statistics.
Both statistics are based on the sample of store-level prices, Pjt = {pjst : s  Sjt }, where Sjt is
the set of all stores that sell product j in week t.
    The first statistic is the standard deviation of the log of prices from the overall mean,

                                       1                                       2
                           jt =                       log(pjst ) - log(pjt )       .
                                    Njt - 1
                                              sSjt

jt measures the dispersion of prices as percentage differences from the geometric mean of prices
across stores. The second statistic, rjt (0.05), is the ratio of the 95th to the 5th percentile of the
price observations Pjt . We calculate the statistics for each week in 2010, and then take the mean
over all weeks to report the average, representative dispersion statistics j and rj (0.05).

4.2   Price dispersion: UPC's
Figure 3 and Table 3 summarize the distribution of the price dispersion statistics across all
47,355 products in our sample. To account for differences in the "importance" of each product
we summarize the weighted distributions of the dispersion statistics using total RMS revenue
(across all stores and weeks) for each product in 2010 as weights.
    The panels in the top row of Figure 3 display the weighted distributions of the product price
dispersion statistics at the national level. Overall, the degree of price dispersion for identical
products across stores at any given moment in time is large. The log-price standard deviation
for the median product (based on the revenue-weighted distribution of j ) is 0.161, which roughly
indicates that 95 percent of prices vary over a range from 32 percent below up to 32 percent
above the average national price of the median product. The ratio of the 95th to 5th percentile
of prices is 1.646 for the median product, indicating a similarly large degree of price dispersion.
    The large degree of price dispersion at the national level may simply reflect systematic differ-
ences in price levels across regions due to differences in regional wage levels and the cost of living.
Our main focus, however, is on documenting the price dispersion of identical products in local
markets, where consumers could at least in principle buy these products at any store. Hence,
to account for systematic regional price differences, we first calculate the dispersion statistics
separately for each market m based on the price observations Pjmt = {pjts : s  Sjmt }, where
Sjmt is the set of all stores that sell product j in market m in week t. We then take the weighted
average over all market-level dispersion statistics for product j using the number of observations
in each market as weights. We use two separate market definitions: DMA's (designated market


                                                     13
areas) and 3-digit ZIP codes. Our sample contains 205 DMA's and 840 3-digit ZIP codes with
at least one store. Also, as already discussed in Section 3.6 there are 32 stores in the median
DMA and 10 stores in the median 3-digit ZIP code. A small fraction of markets (2 DMA's
and 45 3-digit ZIP codes) contain only one store. We exclude these markets from the analysis,
and--more generally--we do not include markets where only one store carries product j in the
average of regional dispersion statistics for product j.
    We summarize the market-average price dispersion statistics in the middle and lower panels
of Figure 3 and in Table 3. The standard deviation of log prices for the median product is
0.110 at the DMA level and 0.099 at the 3-digit ZIP code level. Hence, even at the 3-digit ZIP
code level we find a large degree of price dispersion for identical products, although systematic
price level differences across markets account for up to 39 percent of the price dispersion at the
national level. The ratio of the 95th to 5th percentile of prices--1.360 for the median product
at the DMA level and 1.294 at the 3-digit ZIP code level--confirms this finding.
    While the overall degree of price dispersion of identical products at any given moment in time
is large, Figure 3 and Table 3 also reveal another, equally important fact: There is substantial
heterogeneity in the dispersion statistics across products. Focusing on the market-level (3-digit
ZIP code) results, the standard deviation of log prices ranges from from 0.021 at the 5th percentile
to 0.196 at the 95th percentile of the dispersion statistics. Similarly, the 95th to 5th percentile
ratio of prices ranges from 1.045 to 1.713 when comparing the 5th and 95th percentile values.

4.3    Price dispersion: Brands
We now compare the degree of price dispersion for UPC's to the analogous brand-level statistics.
As discussed, brand prices are measured as the weighted average across the prices of UPC's that
share the same brand name, expressed in dollars per equivalent unit. The weights are based
on the total revenue of a UPC across all observations and hence neither store nor time-specific.
Therefore, differences in brand prices across stores with the same brand-level assortment of
UPC's are entirely due to differences in the underlying UPC-level prices, not due to differences
in how these prices are weighted. However, stores are often differentiated along their product
assortments (Section 3.7), and therefore brand-level prices across stores may differ even if the
prices of the common UPC's are identical.6
    Measuring price dispersion using brands instead of UPC's as product definition has pros and
cons. A disadvantage of comparing brand prices across stores is that we compare products that
are not exactly identical but may differ in pack size or form. On the other hand, when comparing
brand prices instead of UPC-level prices we directly focus on a price comparison of the main
product (content) that is sold, irrespective of pack size or form differences across stores that may
only be of secondary importance to consumers.
    The distributions of the brand price dispersion statistics are summarized in Figure 4 and
Table 3. We generally find a larger degree of price dispersion at the brand level compared to the
   6
    Suppose store A carries 12 oz Cheerios at $3.13 and 18 oz Cheerios at $3.58, while store B carries 18 oz
Cheerios at $3.58 and 21 oz Cheerios at $3.96. If all UPC's have equal weights, then the average brand-level price
of the Cheerios in store A is $3.355 and the average price in store B is $3.77.



                                                       14
UPC level. At the national level, the standard deviation of log brand prices is 0.175, compared
to 0.161 when measured using UPC-level prices. At the 3-digit ZIP code level the corresponding
numbers are 0.129 (brand-level) and 0.099 (UPC-level), respectively. Similarly, the 95th to 5th
percentile ratio of brand prices at the 3-digit ZIP code level is 1.433, whereas the UPC price
ratio is 1.294.
    The large heterogeneity in the dispersion statistics across products that we documented for
UPC's is also evident for products defined as brands. For example, at the 3-digit ZIP code level
the standard deviation of log brand prices is 0.060 at the 5th percentile, compared to 0.239 at
the 95th percentile of the dispersion statistics.

4.4     Comparison to Kaplan and Menzio (2015)
Our results are not directly comparable to Kaplan and Menzio (2015) because their work is based
on different data and a substantially smaller number of products, as we already discussed in
Section 2. Also, they measure price dispersion using the standard deviation of prices normalized
relative to the market-average price level, pjst /p
                                                  ¯jmt , whereas our main price dispersion measure
is the standard deviation of log-prices. However, as expected, the different dispersion statistics
yield almost identical dispersion measures (see the sensitivity analysis in Appendix C.1) and
hence they are not a source of differences in the results.
    Kaplan and Menzio (2015) report that the standard deviation of normalized prices for the
mean UPC at the Scantrack/quarter level is 0.19. In our data, the corresponding standard
deviation is 0.10 for the median UPC at the 3-digit ZIP code/week level and 0.12 at the the
Scantrack/week level. Hence, the price dispersion of identical products at a given moment in
time is substantially smaller than the dispersion level that Kaplan and Menzio report at the
quarter level for a small product sample. Comparable brand-level results are not reported in
Kaplan and Menzio (2015).7


5       Base prices and promotions
For many products, prices alternate over time between periods when the product is sold at the
base price (regular or every-day shelf price) and periods when the product is promoted and offered
at a discount over the base price. Base prices change only infrequently over time. This pricing
pattern is visible in a typical time series plot of prices, and it reflects the institutional practice
by which prices are set in the retail industry. The Nielsen RMS data do not contain information
that indicates if a price was intended as a promotion. Instead, as discussed in Section 3.1, we
use an algorithm that allows us to classify prices as base prices or promoted prices.
    In Section 4 above we documented a large degree of price dispersion for identical products at
any given moment in time, even at the local market (DMA or 3-digit ZIP code) level. This price
dispersion could be due either to differences in base prices across stores, reflecting a relatively
persistent component in the dispersion of prices, or price promotions that are not coordinated
    7
    In Kaplan and Menzio (2015) a brand aggregate is obtained using a "set of products that share the same
features and the same size, but may have different brands and different UPCs."


                                                   15
across stores or retail chains. In this section we document the extent of price dispersion arising
from cross-sectional base price differences and the promotion policies across the products in our
sample. We also document the "importance" of price promotions, measured by the percentage of
total product volume sold at a discounted price.

5.1   Base prices
To document the dispersion of base prices, Bjt = {bjst : s  Sjt }, we use the same approach
as before in Section 4 and provide two dispersion statistics, the standard deviation of the log
of base prices and the ratio of the 95th to the 5th percentile of base prices across stores. We
show the results separately using UPC's as product definition in Figure 5 and brands as product
definition in Figure 6. The key summary statistics and percentiles are also contained in Table 3.
    Generally, the degree of base price dispersion is substantial. The standard deviation of the
log of base prices is 0.133 for the median product at the national level and 0.078 at the 3-digit
ZIP code level. The degree of base price dispersion is not much smaller than the degree of price
dispersion. For example, the standard deviation of the log of prices at the 3-digit ZIP code level
is 0.099, compared to 0.078 for the log of base prices. When using brands as the definition of a
product the difference is even smaller: The standard deviation of the log of base prices is 0.118
for the median brand, compared to 0.129 for the median product. The 95th to 5th percentile
statistics mirror these findings. Similar to the results in Section 4 we also find a substantial
degree of heterogeneity in the base price dispersion statistics across products. For example, for
brands at the 3-digit ZIP code level the standard deviation of log base prices ranges from 0.055
at the 5th percentile to 0.231 at the 95th percentile.
    In summary, there is a substantial degree of dispersion in the every-day shelf prices of prod-
ucts, defined either as UPC's or brands, both at the national and at the local market level. In
particular, the dispersion statistics for base prices are not much smaller than the corresponding
statistics for prices, including promoted and every-day shelf prices. Hence, base price differences
across stores are an important component in the overall dispersion of prices.

5.2   Price promotions
The Nielsen RMS data do not directly indicate if a product was promoted. Instead, we infer a
price promotion from the difference between the imputed base price and the realized price. First,
we define the percentage price discount, or promotion depth, as follows:

                                                bjst - pjst
                                        jst =               .
                                                    bjst

Then we classify the product as promoted if the percentage price discount is at least as large as
some threshold  ¯. The indicator variable Djst = I{jst      ¯} captures promotional events, such
that product j is promoted if and only if Djst = 1.
    We conducted the price dispersion analysis in Section 4 using data from 2010. Here we extend
the sample period to 2008-2010 to reduce measurement error, in particular in the promotion
frequency statistic discussed below.

                                                16
Choice of promotion threshold ¯

Assuming that every event when the price of a product is strictly less than the base price is
a price promotion, we could define the promotion indicator as Djst = I{jst > 0}. However,
it is unlikely that any brand or category manager designs a price promotion that offers only
a negligible price discount. Hence, to find a suitable threshold value    ¯ to use in our analysis
we examine the distribution of the percentage price discounts, jst , pooled across all products,
stores, and weeks when pjst < bjst  jst > 0. This distribution is shown in the top right
panel of Figure 7 and summarized in Table 4. The median percentage price discount across all
events is 17.7 percent. There are instances of small percentage price discounts, but the overall
incidence of such events is small. For example, in only slightly less than 10 percent of all events
the price discount is less than 5 percent, 0 < jst < 0.05. Again, it is implausible that these
observations represent a planned price promotion. Rather, such observations are likely due to
measurement error in either the price or base price. Such measurement error can arise due to
differences between the promotional calendar in a store and the Nielsen RMS definition of a
week. For example, suppose a product was offered at a 20 percent price discount during a two
week period starting on a Monday and ending on Sunday, May 30. Because a week in the RMS
data ends on a Saturday, the RMS week that begins on May 30 and ends on Saturday, June
4 will include one day when the product was offered at the 20 percent price discount and six
days when the product was sold at the regular (base) price. The data report the average price
over these seven days, which is an average over the promoted and non-promoted prices. The
inferred percentage price discount, jst , is likely to be small in this example, and it will not
accurately represent the promotional price discount. In order to ameliorate measurement error
we use a promotion threshold of    ¯ = 0.05 in our analysis. Even then some measurement error
will remain, and--if measurement error is predominantly due to the averaging problem that we
discussed--the consequence will be that we understate both the true promotional discounts and
promotion frequency.

Promotion frequency and promotion depth

We measure the promotion frequency of product j in store s as

                                                      1
                                              js =                Djst ,
                                                     Njs
                                                           tTjs


where Tjs is the set of all observation periods (weeks) in 2008-2010 when product j was sold
in store s, and Njs is the corresponding number of observations. Using js we then calculate
a product-level promotion frequency statistic, j , by taking a weighted average over js across
all stores using the number of store-level observations, Njs , as weights.8 We also measure the
heterogeneity of the promotion frequency across stores based on the difference between the 95th
and the 5th percentile among all js observations (weighted by Njs ) across stores.
    Correspondingly, we measure the average promotional discount or promotion depth of product
  8
      This is equivalent to calculating j based on all Djst observations, pooled across stores and weeks.


                                                        17
j in store s across all weeks when the product was promoted, Djst = 1:

                                             1
                                    js =      D
                                                                  jst ,
                                            Njs   tTjs ,Djst =1


where Njs  D is the number of promotion events. We obtain a product-level promotion depth

statistics, j , based on a weighted average of js across all stores using the number of observations,
NjsD , as weights. Also, as in the case of promotion frequency, we measure the heterogeneity in

the promotion depth across stores using the difference between the 95th and the 5th percentile
of js across stores (the distribution of js is weighted using Njs   D ).

    The left panel in the middle row of Figure 7 displays the weighted distribution (using total
product revenue) of the promotion frequency, j , across products (see also Table 4 for some
key summary statistics). The average promotion frequency for the median product is 0.147,
which implies that the product is promoted about once in 6.8 weeks on average. The average
promotion frequency varies strongly across products, ranging from 0.011 (once in 91 weeks) at
the 5th percentile to 0.370 (once in 2.7 weeks) at the 95th percentile level. The left panel in
the middle row of Figure 7 shows the corresponding differences between the 95th and the 5th
percentile of js across stores s. For the median product this difference is 0.314, compared to
the average promotion frequency level of 0.147. Hence, the average promotion frequency masks
large differences in the promotion frequencies across stores.
    The bottom row of Figure 7 shows the distributions of the average promotion depth, j ,
and the across-store heterogeneity in js . Note that--unlike in the top left panel of Figure
7--the promotion depth statistics are calculated based on promotional events, defined as Djst =
I{jst  0.05} = 1. The average promotional discount for the median product is 19.5 percent
on the base price, and the whole distribution across products ranges from 10.2 percent at the
5th percentile to 31.5 percent at the 95th percentile. Much as in the case of the promotion
frequencies, the promotion depth differs strongly across stores. For example, for the median
product the difference between the 95th and 5th percentiles of js across stores is 18.0 points.

5.3   Volume sold on promotion
We end this section by documenting the "importance" of promotions, measured using the per-
centage of product volume that is sold during a promotional period:

                                              tTjs ,Djst =1 qjst
                                     js =                            .
                                                    tTjs qjst

Here, qjst is the number of product j units sold in store s in week t. To calculate a corresponding
product-level statistic, j , we take a weighted average of js over all stores s, with weights Njs ,
the number of observations for store s. We also document the ratio of the average product
volume sold during a promotion relative to the average product volume when the product was




                                                   18
not promoted:
                                                    tTjs ,Djst =1 qjst
                                                           D
                                                         Njs
                                          Ljs =                          .
                                                    tTjs ,Djst =0 qjst
                                                     Njs -Njs  D



In the retail industry and in brand management Ljs is called a lift factor or promotion multiplier.9
To obtain a product-level lift factor Lj we aggregate over Ljs using the same process that we
used to aggregate the volume percentages above.
    The top left panel in Figure 8 displays the weighted distribution of the percentage volume
sold on promotion across products (as always, we use total product revenue weights), and Table
4 provide detailed summary statistics. The median percentage of volume sold on promotion is
28.7 percent, and ranges from 1.8 percent to 61.4 percent at the 5th and 95th percentiles. The
bottom left panel displays the corresponding distribution of the promotion multipliers, with a
median of 3.04 and a range from 1.34 to 9.22. Hence, as expected, the volume sold on promotion
is disproportionately high (relative to the overall incidence of promotions), and units sales spike
relative to the non-promoted volume when a product is promoted. As can be seen in the right
panels in Figure 8, the product-level averages mask a large degree of heterogeneity in js and
Ljs across stores for most products.


6       Price variance decomposition
In Section 5 we documented a substantial degree of dispersion of the base prices of UPC's and
brands. Furthermore, we found that many UPC's are frequently promoted, with an average
promotional discount of 19.5 percent for the median product. In this section we quantify the
relative contribution of these and other related sources to the overall level of price dispersion. In
particular, we decompose the overall price variance of a product into components that capture
(i) price differences across markets, (ii) persistent price or base price differences across stores at
the market level, (iii) within-store price or base price variation over time, and (iv) price variation
due to promotions.
    We calculate the price variance decomposition separately for each product (UPC or brand)
j, and we drop the j subscript to simplify the notation. M is the set of all markets, and S is
the set of all stores in the whole sample. For each store s we observe prices in periods t  Ts . Ns
is the number of observations for stores s, Nm is the total number of observations (across stores
and time periods) in market m, and N is the total number of observations across all markets.
p
¯ is defined as the overall (national) average price, p ¯m is the average price in market m, and p  ¯s
is the average price in stores s. We calculate the overall price variance of a product using the
sample P = {pst : s  S , t  Ts }:

                                                   1
                                     var(pst ) =                       ¯)2 .
                                                                (pst - p
                                                   N
                                                       sS tTs
    9
    Alternatively, we could calculate Ljs using the predicted volume in the absence of a promotion in the denom-
inator, based on a demand model or a weighted average of the observed non-promoted volume.



                                                       19
All results below are derived in detail in Appendix A.

6.1   Basic decomposition
We first provide a decomposition that does not distinguish between base and promoted prices.
var(¯
    pm ) is the variance of average market-level prices across markets, var(¯   ps |m) is the within-
market variance of average store-level prices, and var(pst |s) is the within-store variance of prices
over time. var(pm ) and var(¯ ps |m) are calculated as weighted averages, using the number of
observations in each market and the number of observations for each store as weights (see Ap-
pendix A). We can decompose the overall price variance into the variance of (average) prices
across markets, the within-market variance of prices across stores, and the within-store variance
of prices over time :

                      var(pst ) = var(¯
                                      pm )                          (across-market)
                                     1                                                              (1)
                                 +   N             ps |m)
                                         mM Nm var(¯                (across-store)
                                     1
                                 +   N   sS     Ns var(pst |s).     (within-store)

This decomposition is based on weighted averages of the within-market and within-store vari-
ances, using the number of observations as weights.
    We report the mean of the variance components (weighted by total product revenue) in Table
5, calculated based on all price observations in 2010. The percentage of the price variance due to
price-level differences across markets, defined as ZIP+3 areas, is 32.7 percent for UPC's and 29.7
percent for brands. Hence, at least about 68 percent of the national variance in prices is due to
price variation at the local, ZIP+3 level. For UPC's, 27.0 percent of the overall price variance is
due to price-level differences across stores, and 40.3 percent is due to within-store price variation
during 2010. For brands, we find that the across-store price differences explain a substantially
higher percentage of the overall price variation--42.3 percent--whereas 28.0 percent of the price
variation is due to the within-store price variation.

6.2   Decomposition into base prices and promotions
We now provide a more detailed decomposition that distinguishes between the contribution of
base price differences, both across stores and within stores over time, and the contribution of
price promotions to the overall variance of prices:

       var(pst ) = var(¯
                       pm )                                        (across-market)
                      1                  ¯
                  +   N   mM Nm var(bs |m)                         (across-store base price var.)
                      1                                                                             (2)
                  +   N   sS   Ns var(bst |s)                      (within-store base price var.)
                      1
                  +   N   mM Nm var(bst         - pst |m)          (promotional discount var.)
                     1
                  - 2N     mM Nm cov(bst         - pst , bst |m)   (EDLP vs. Hi-Lo adjustment)


                                                       20
The first component captures the variance of price levels across markets. The second component
is the within-market variance of base prices, indicating persistent base price differences across
stores, whereas the third component is the within-store variance in base prices over time.
    The last two terms capture the contribution of price promotions to the overall price variance.
The fourth term is the variance of promotional price discounts, bst - pst . This variance is zero
if and only the promotional discounts are identical across all stores s and periods t, which is
equivalent to bst = pst for all observations because at least sometimes the product is sold at the
base price. In other words, the variance of promotional price discounts can only be zero in the
absence of any price promotions.
    The last term in (2) is negative if the observation-weighted average of the market-level co-
variances between the promotional price discounts and the store-level base price is positive.
Such a positive correlation indicates an EDLP (everyday low price) vs. Hi-Lo pricing pattern
at the product level: Stores with above average base prices offer larger promotional price dis-
counts than stores with below average base prices. Correspondingly, we call the last term in the
decomposition (2) the "EDLP vs. Hi-Lo adjustment."
    Price promotions increase the overall price variance in the absence of an EDLP vs. Hi-Lo
pricing pattern. For example, in the special case when all base prices in a market are identical,
bst  ¯ bm , the EDLP vs. Hi-Lo adjustment is zero and the combined contribution of the price
promotion terms in (2) to the price variance is positive. However, if there is EDLP vs. Hi-Lo
pricing, then the adjustment term will be negative and the overall variance in prices will be
reduced. Below we present an example to demonstrate that price promotions may even decrease
the overall price variance if there is a pronounced EDLP vs. Hi-Lo pricing pattern.

Example: Price promotions may decrease the overall price variance For notational
simplicity we use expectations instead of sample averages, and we focus only on price variation
within one market and thus drop the subscript m. Assume that base prices in each store s are
constant over time, bst  ¯    bs , and uniformly distributed around the mean base price ¯   b on the
interval [¯
          b - , ¯ b +  ]. Suppose that only stores with above average base prices, bst = ¯   bs > ¯b,
promote the product, and that the promoted price is always pst = ¯     b. All stores with base prices
      ¯     ¯
bst = bs  b always sell the product at the base price, pst = bst . The incidence of promotions is
constant,   Pr{Dst = 1|bst > ¯      b}. There is a continuum of stores with mass 1, and promotions
are independent across stores and across time periods. As shown in Appendix A.3, the EDLP
vs. Hi-Lo adjustment factor is positive (if  > 0) and strictly increasing in  , and the variance
of prices is strictly decreasing in the frequency of promotions,  :

                                                     1  2
                                  var(pst ) = v 2     - -        .
                                                     3 6  16

Results The results in Table 5 indicate that the within-market variance of mean base prices
across stores accounts for 31.3 percent of the overall price variance for UPC's and for 49.9
percent of the overall price variance for brands. Hence, for UPC's the within-market variance
of the average every-day shelf price is almost as large as the variance in average prices across


                                                    21
markets, and for brands the within-market mean base price variance is even larger than the
variance in mean prices across markets. In other words, at the local, 3-digit ZIP code level the
persistent variation in base prices is comparable to or exceeds the price variation across 3-digit
ZIP codes in the U.S. On the other hand, the within-store base price variance over the course
of a year accounts for a comparably small percentage of the overall price variance--12.3 percent
for UPC's and 13.4 percent for brands. Hence, we confirm that store-level base prices are highly
persistent over the course of a year.
    Of particular interest if the role of price promotions. The promotional price discount com-
ponent in the variance decomposition (2) is large and positive--36.0 percent for UPC's and 29.9
percent for brands. However, the EDLP vs. Hi-Lo adjustment term is negative, -12.3 percent for
UPC's and -22.9 percent for brands. Hence, there is strong evidence for EDLP vs. Hi-Lo pricing
at the product-level, such that stores with above average base prices offer deeper promotional
discounts than stores with low base prices. The EDLP vs. Hi-Lo pricing pattern reduces the
contribution of price promotions to the overall price variance. Table 5 also shows the total con-
tribution of promotions to the overall price variance, including the variance of the promotional
price discounts and the EDLP vs. Hi-Lo component. The total contribution of promotions to
the overall price variance is 23.7 percent for UPC's and 7.0 percent for brands.
    The last two columns in Table 5 express the contributions of the across-store and within-store
base price variances and the contribution of price promotions as a percentage of the within-marke t
variance of prices. These results highlight the importance of persistent base price differences
across stores (46.5 percent of the within-market variance for UPC's and 70.9 percent for brands)
relative to the total contribution of price promotions (35.2 percent for UPC's and 10 percent for
brands).
    More detailed statistics, including the key percentiles of the price variance components, are
provided in Table 13 in the Appendix. In particular, Table 13 reports the percentage of products
for which price promotions decrease the overall price variance: 3.6 percent for UPC's and 30.8
percent for brands.


7     What factors explain price dispersion?
7.1   Product-level price dispersion and product characteristics
In Section 4 we showed that there is a substantial degree of price dispersion at the 3-digit ZIP
code market level and we found much heterogeneity in the degree of price dispersion across
products. Our goal is to understand if this across-product heterogeneity in price dispersion is
related to observed product characteristics. In particular, we focus on two measures of product
size or "importance": (i) The purchase volume of a product, measured in total revenue dollars
in a year, and (ii) the product penetration rate, measured as the percentage of all households
that buy a product at least once within a year. To capture these two "importance" measures we
first rank all UPC's in the sample according to total product revenue or the product penetration
rate in in 2010, and then we create dummy variables that indicate if a product is among the
top 100, 101-250, 251-500, 501-1000, 1001-5000, 5001-10000, or 10001-20000 products. We also


                                                22
estimate if the level of price dispersion varies across national brands and private-label products,
and we examine if the dispersion levels cluster, i.e. are more similar within a product category
than across product categories. We measure price dispersion based on the standard deviation of
the log of prices for a UPC at the market (3-digit ZIP code) level. Due to the large number of
UPC/market combinations we base our analysis on a random sample of one million observations,
which is sufficient to achieve a high degree of statistical power.
    In Table 6, specification (1), we show the results from a regression of the price dispersion
measure on the purchase volume rank indicators. The estimates indicate a larger degree of price
dispersion for the top-selling products, and the differences in the degree of price dispersion across
the product size groups are substantial. For example, the difference in the log-price standard
deviation among the top thousand products compared to the top 10-20 thousand products is
between 0.017 and 0.026 (recall that the standard deviation of log-prices for the median product
is 0.099 at the 3-digit ZIP code level).
    High-selling products are likely available at a larger number of stores and chains. Hence,
to account for differences in the distribution of the products, we include the log of the number
of stores and retail chains that carry a UPC at the local market level in specification (2). The
monotonically decreasing pattern in the estimated degree of price dispersion associated with the
rank indicators largely disappears. On the other hand, the number of stores and especially the
number of retail chains carrying a product are positively related to the degree of price dispersion.
This pattern is unchanged when we also control for the market size using the log of the local
population size in specification (3). One interpretation is that controlling for market size, "large"
products with inherently high demand are carried by a larger number of retail chains that employ
heterogeneous pricing policies, possibly reflecting heterogeneous consumer demand. Note that
the R2 in regressions (2) and (3) is 0.372, compared to 0.030 in specification (1). Hence, the
distribution variables--the number of stores and retail chains that carry a product in a local
market--explain a substantial degree of the variation in price dispersion across products.10
    We repeat this analysis using rank indicators based on the level of product penetration. The
results are reported in Table 7. We find a strong, positive relationship between penetration and
price dispersion (specification 1). Unlike in the results above that are based on revenue rank
indicators, this pattern persists even controlling for the number of stores and chains that carry
the product and the market size (specifications 2 and 3). Possibly, a larger degree of product
penetration among households is associated with a larger degree of heterogeneity in demand, and
this may be the source of a larger degree of local price dispersion.
    In contrast to our findings, Kaplan and Menzio (2015) document a hump-shaped relationship
between the log of total product expenditure and product-level price dispersion. Their analysis
does not account for market size or distribution.
    In Tables 6 and 7, specification (4), we add a dummy variable that indicates if a UPC is a
private-label product. Generally, private-label products have a larger degree of price dispersion
than national brands--the difference in the log-price standard deviation is between 0.012 and
  10
    If we control for the distribution factors using a completely flexible approach with a separate indicator variable
for each value of the number of stores or chains that carry a product the R2 increases modestly, from 0.372 to
0.405.


                                                         23
0.014.
    Finally, we examine if the degree of price dispersion systematically differs across product cat-
egories. We employ two definitions of product category: Product group (e.g. "DETERGENTS"),
and product module (e.g. "DETERGENTS - HEAVY DUTY - LIQUID"), which represents more
narrowly defined sub-categories of a product group. The results (specifications 5 and 6) reveal
only a small increase in the R2 of the regressions. Hence, the across-product heterogeneity in
price dispersion cannot be explained by systematic differences in the degree of price dispersion
across product categories.

7.2    Price dispersion across stores and market vs. retail chain factors
We now assess how much of the overall variance in prices, as well as the variation in the promotion
frequency and promotion depth for a product across stores can be attributed to market versus
retail chain-specific factors.
    We know from the analysis in Sections 4 and 6 that there is a substantial degree of price
variation at the local market (3-digit ZIP code) level. We confirm this finding by regressing
the UPC prices, pjst , on dummy variables for all 3-digit ZIP codes in our sample. We estimate
the regression models separately for each product j and week t in 2010, and then we take the
average over all weeks to obtain a single R2 value for each product. The revenue-weighted
distribution of the corresponding product-level R2 values (the percentage of the price variance
explained by market-specific factors) is displayed in the top row of Figure 9, and Table 14 in the
Appendix contains details of the results. For the median product, somewhat less than half--46.5
percent--of the price variance can be attributed to local market factors.11 When we regress pjst
on chain dummies we find that the distribution of R2 values shifts to the right, with a median
of 69.9 percent. Hence, prices are substantially more homogenous within the 81 different retail
chains than within the 840 different 3-digit ZIP code areas in our sample. When we regress the
prices on market/chain dummy variables the distribution shifts even further to the right, with
a median of 88.1 percent--for half of all products, chain/market-specific factors explain at least
88.1 percent of the overall variance in prices. Indeed, for 90 percent of all products in the sample
the R2 values are above 26.6 percent for the market-level regressions and above 70.7 percent for
the market/chain-level regressions,12 indicating that retail chain-specific factors can explain a
substantial fraction of the overall price variance at the local, 3-digit ZIP code level.
    We perform a similar analysis for the store-level promotion frequency and promotion depth
statistics, js and js . The results are shown in the middle row (promotion frequency) and
bottom row (promotion depth) of Figure 9. The results mirror the findings that we obtained
for prices. Comparing the median R2 statistics based on regressions of promotion frequency on
the different indicator variables, the values increase from 36.1 percent for market dummies to
62.3 percent for chain dummies and to 80.0 percent for market/chain dummies. For promotion
  11
     The R2 values from the market-dummy regressions are comparable to the across-market price variance compo-
nent in the variance decomposition (1). The values are not identical, however, because the variance decomposition
in Section 6 was performed using all weeks in 2010, whereas the product-level R2 values in this section are obtained
by averaging over the R2 values from week-level regressions.
  12
     The details of the percentiles of the distributions of the R2 values are shown in Table 14 in the Appendix.


                                                        24
depth, the corresponding R2 values are 38.0 percent (market), 58.9 percent (chain), and 80.7
percent (market/chain). Hence, both prices and promotions are more homogenous in the 81
retail chains compared to the 840 3-digit ZIP codes in our sample, and prices and promotions are
also relatively more homogenous in stores belonging to the same retail chain at the local market
level.

7.3      Price dispersion at the retail chain level: Summary statistics
In the previous section we documented that prices are relatively similar at the chain and especially
chain/market level. We now quantify the price dispersion at the retail chain level and compare
the dispersion statistics to the corresponding results in Section 4. Table 8 shows the results
using UPC's as the product definition. Overall, the standard deviation of log prices at the chain
level is 0.079. The standard deviation of log prices at the retail chain level within a market is
substantially smaller than the overall market level standard deviation: 0.050 versus 0.110 at the
DMA level, and 0.039 versus 0.099 at the 3-digit ZIP code level. The pattern is similar if we
compare the standard deviation of log base prices at the chain/market and overall market level:
0.037 versus 0.088 at the DMA level, and 0.027 versus 0.078 at the 3-digit ZIP code level.13
    As discussed in Section 5.2, the discrepancy between a retailer's promotion calendar and
the Nielsen RMS week definition creates some measurement error in prices. This measurement
error predominantly affects promoted prices, not base prices. Hence the documented base price
dispersion at the market/chain level shows that prices are not identical, but very similar at the
market/chain level, consistent with the results in the previous section. We confirmed this result
using a visual inspection of a large number of store-level time series of prices and base prices.
Overall, for the median chain/market (3-digit ZIP code) observation, the percentage of weeks
with identical prices is 42.8 percent, and the percentage of weeks when the largest absolute price
difference across stores is less than 1 percent is 45.5 percent. Hence, identical or nearly identical
prices at the chain/market level are observed frequently but not always.


8        Price similarity and promotion coordination within chains
We documented in Section 7.2 that chain identity explains a large fraction of the variance in
prices, promotion frequency, and promotion depth across products. These results hold with and
without controlling for market fixed effects. In this section we provide a closer examination of
the similarity in product pricing and promotions across stores that belong to the same retail
chain.

8.1      Similarity in pricing patterns
We first examine the similarity of pricing patterns across stores based on the whole time series of
prices observed in a store. For any product j , we observe the vectors of prices, ps = (ps1 , . . . , psT )
    13
    A qualitatively similar pattern emerges using the ratio of the 95th to 5th percentile of prices and base prices
as the dispersion measure.



                                                        25
for each store s  S (we suppress the index j for notational simplicity). Our sample of prices for
product j then consists of p1 , . . . , pS . Our goal is to visualize the price vectors ps . However, this is
not possible because of the dimensionality of ps --each price vector has components corresponding
to each sample period t = 1, . . . , T , typically the whole period from 2008-2010. Instead, we
conduct a principal components analysis (PCA) of the store-level price vectors. PCA is an
unsupervised dimensionality reduction technique that allows us to represent each ps in a low-
dimensional space while maintaining as much of the original information (variance) contained in
ps as possible.14
    For a given dimension K < T , the principal components algorithm finds the optimal linear
reconstruction of the original price data,

                                                ~s  p
                                                p   ^ s = V K s .

Here, p~ s = ps - p¯ is the centered vector of prices in store s, relative to the overall (national)
average of prices. V K is a T × K matrix with columns v 1 , . . . , v K . These columns, called
the principal components of the data, are orthogonal and have unit length, v k = 1. The
principal components v 1 , . . . , v K form a basis for a K -dimensional linear subspace of RT . p      ^ s is
                  ~ s into this space, such that s = (V K V K ) V K p
the projection of p                                                     - 1  ~s = V K p~ s . Expressed within
the coordinate system defined by the basis v 1 , . . . , v K , reconstruction of the price vector p     ~ s in
K dimensions is given by s = (1s , . . . , Ks ). s is the desired low-dimensional representation
of the original data.
    The first principal component v 1 has the property that the variance of the data projected
onto the linear subspace spanned by v 1 , v 1 p    ~ 1, . . . , v1p
                                                                  ~ S , has the largest variance among all
possible directions v . Furthermore, the variance of the data projected onto the space spanned
by v 2 has the largest variance among all possible directions that are orthogonal to v 1 , etc. Thus,
the linear reconstruction of the data provided by the principal components algorithm is optimal
in the sense that the highest amount of the variance in the original data is maintained.
    We perform a PCA for the top 1,000 products (UPC's) in our sample, based on total revenue
rank. We only choose these top products because we need to be able to consistently observe the
weekly prices, pst , across stores for the analysis to be feasible. For smaller products there is a
larger incidence of missing values.
    The top panel in Figure 10 displays box plots of the percentage of the price variance that
is explained by the first twenty principal components. Each box plot shows the distribution
(weighted by total product revenue) of these percentages across the products in our sample.
The first principal component explains 20 percent of the price variance for the median product,
and all the first five principal components explain at least 5 percent of the price variance. In
the bottom panel of Figure 10 we display box plots of the cumulative percentage of the price
variance explained by the top principal components. The top five principal components explain
53 percent and the top ten principal components explain 68 percent of the price variance for the
median product. Hence, a large percentage of the information in the original store-level price
vectors over the 2008-2010 period can be explained by a small number of principal components. A
  14
       See, for example, Hastie et al. (2009) for a thorough introduction to principal components analysis.


                                                          26
representation of the original, high-dimensional price data in a low-dimensional space is therefore
meaningful.
    In Figure 11 we present a two-dimensional representation of the store-level price vectors
using the projections onto the first two principal components for the case of Tide HE Liquid
Laundry Detergent (100 oz). The graph is split into six panels that contain identical gray dots
representing all projected store-level price vectors. In each of the panels some of the dots are
colored according to the retail chain that the corresponding store-level prices belong to. All
stores that belong to the same retail chain appear in exactly one panel. However, the color
labels are not mutually exclusive across the panels. For example, red dots in two different panels
represent the projected prices for stores that belong to two different retail chains. The graph
allows us to visually examine the similarity in prices within a chain. Figure 11 reveals a strong
degree of similarity--the projected price vectors that belong to the same retail chain cluster and
exhibit much less variance compared to the overall variance in projected prices. In Figure 12 we
color the projected store-level price vectors according to the market (DMA) that a store belongs
to. We use DMA's, not 3-digit ZIP codes, as the market definition because the large number
of 3-digit ZIP codes is hard to visualize on one page. We see some clustering of prices also at
the DMA level, but the similarity of prices within a DMA appears to be much smaller than the
similarity of prices within a retail chain.
    We present additional examples in Figure 13, including Prilosec (42 count), Pepsi (12 oz
cans 12 pack), and private-label milk (2 percent, 1 gallon). In this graph we only include the
store-level price vectors for a subset of all retail chains. For Prilosec and Pepsi we find a pattern
that is similar to the case of Tide laundry detergent--a large degree of price similarity within
retail chains and a significantly smaller degree of price similarity at the market level. The case
of private-label milk is very different: there is much heterogeneity in prices both at the chain
and the market level.
    To summarize the price similarity patterns across all products in our sample we project the
price vectors onto the first principal components and then regress (for each product separately)
the projections on DMA, chain, and chain-DMA fixed effects. Figure 14 presents histograms of
the percentage of the projected price variance (R2 ) explained by these three factors. The results
are shown separately for each of the top six principal components. The results indicate that
there is a consistently higher degree of price similarity at the chain than at the DMA level, and
a moderately higher degree of price similarity at the chain-DMA level compared to the chain
level. For example, for the first principal component we find a median R2 of 0.291 at the DMA
level, compared to an R2 at the chain level of 0.844 and an R2 at the chain-DMA level of 0.913.
The R2 levels are generally smaller for the lower-ranked principal components, but the general
pattern persists.

8.2   Promotion coordination
We now focus on price promotions in particular, and examine if promotions are coordinated, in
the sense that the same product is systematically promoted at the same time among the stores in
a retail chain or in a market. We measure promotion incidence using the indicator Djst  {0, 1},


                                                 27
such that Djst = 1 if product j is promoted in stores s in week t.

Overview of promotion coordination

To provide an overview of promotion coordination we first summarize the percentage of all stores
in a retail chain that promote a specific product during week t. Let Sjcmt be the set of stores
that belong to the retail chain c in market m and carry product j in week t. We then calculate
the chain/market level promotion percentage for product j :

                                               sSjcmt   Djst
                                    jcmt =                     .
                                                |Sjcmt |

The graphs in the top row of Figure 15 display histograms of the promotion percentages jcmt ,
pooled over all products, chains, markets, and time periods between 2008 and 2010 (see Table 9
for the detailed summary statistics). The distributions are weighted using total product revenue
weights. We display the promotion percentage distributions conditional on jcmt > 0, i.e. weeks
when at least one store in chain cand market m promotes the product, to avoid that the his-
tograms are dominated by large mass points at 0. The percentage of observations when none of
the stores promoted the product, jcmt = 0, is indicated separately at the bottom of each graph.
We define markets as DMA's to ensure that the retail chains have a larger number of stores in a
market compared to 3-digit ZIP codes as market definition (see Table 2 for summary statistics
on the number of stores per retail chain at the DMA and ZIP+3 level). With a larger number of
stores the promotion percentage jcmt can take a larger number of values compared to a small
number of stores. In the extreme case where a chain has only one local store, the promotion
percentage is always 0 or 1, indicating perfect promotion coordination. For the same reason, we
summarize the promotion percentage distributions only for observations when the retail chain c
carries the product in at least five stores in the local market.
    The top row in Figure 15 shows the promotion percentage distributions for all products (left
panel) and the top 1,000 products as measured by annual, national product revenue (right panel).
Both histograms reveal a large mass point at 1, indicating perfect promotion coordination. The
promotion percentages, conditional on jcmt > 0, are overall larger among the top 1,000 products,
with a median of 0.548 compared to a median of 0.41 for all products. This indicates a larger
degree of promotion coordination among the top-selling products, although the percentage of
jcmt = 0 observations is smaller for the top 1,000 products: 55.06 percent versus 62.18 percent
among all products. However, the latter finding may simply reflect an overall higher promotion
frequency among the top 1,000 products, not a smaller degree of coordination on weeks when
none of the stores in the chain promote the product.
    Although suggestive of promotion coordination, in particular due to the mass of promotion
percentages at or close to 1, the overall extent of promotion coordination conveyed by Figure 15
is difficult to assess without a comparison to a baseline where promotions are not coordinated
across stores. To provide such a baseline we simulate a data set assuming that promotions
are chosen independently at the store level. For each product j and stores s we calculate the
promotion frequency js using the 2008-2010 data, as in Section 5.2. For each store s and


                                               28
week t we then draw a promotion indicator D     ~ jst from a Bernoulli distribution with success
probability js . We show the distributions of promotion percentages for the simulated data
in the second row of Figure 15 and in Table 9.15 The histograms indicate a much smaller
degree of promotion coordination compared to the observed promotion percentages. The median
promotion percentage among all products in the simulated data is 0.200, compared to 0.41 in the
actual data, and the corresponding percentages among the top 1,000 products are 0.279 in the
simulated data versus 0.548 in the observed data. Indeed, the displayed distributions understate
the difference between the simulated and the original data because they are conditional on
jcmt > 0, and hence do not reveal the large difference in observations where none of the stores in
a chain promotes a product. In the observed data, jcmt = 0 in 62.18 percent of all observations,
compared to 28.27 percent of all observations in the simulated data.
    The distributions in the top rows of Figure 15 are based on observations at the chain/market
level in a given week, conditional on at least one store in the chain promoting product j . This
leads to an asymmetry between observations with highly coordinated promotions and obser-
vations with a small number of stores promoting a product. For example, suppose that all
promotions were perfectly coordinated within a retail chain such that jcmt = 1 in the week
when the promotion is held. Suppose there were some small differences in the timing of the end
date of the promotion across stores in the chain, such that a small number of stores would still
offer the promotion for a few days in week t + 1. Then each perfectly coordinated promotion ob-
servation, jcmt = 1, would have an associated observation with a small, positive jcm,t+1 value,
suggesting that perfectly coordinated promotion events were as frequent as almost completely
uncoordinated promotion events. Hence, as an alternative summary of promotion coordination
we associate each store-level promotion event, Djst = 1, with the corresponding promotion per-
centage, jcmt , and display the distribution of the promotion percentages based on all store
level observations such that Djst = 1. This is equivalent to displaying the distribution of jcmt
weighted by the number of stores that promote product j in chain c and market m in week t.
The results are shown in the third row of Figure 15 (see Table 9 for the detailed numbers), and
strongly indicate that store-level promotions are coordinated at the chain-market level. Further-
more, the differences between the actual and simulated data, shown in the bottom row of Figure
15, are large.

Estimating the dependence in promotion incidence

We now test more formally if the incidence of promotions is dependent across stores. For any
store s in market (DMA) m we define the inside promotion percentage of all stores in market m
that belong to the same chain as store s and promote the product in period t:

                                                    1
                                       Ijst =                             Djrt .
                                                |Ssm | - 1
                                                             rSsm , r=s

  15
    To make the observed and simulated distributions comparable we only display the simulated promotion
percentages corresponding to observations where a chain sells product j in at least five stores in the local market.




                                                        29
Here, Ssm is the set of all stores in market m that belong to the same retail chain as store s.
Note that the inside percentage is calculated based on the promotion incidence of all other stores
in the local retail chain, not including store s. Vice versa, the outside promotion percentage of
stores that belong to any other chain in market m and promote the product in week t is

                                             1
                                     Ojst = ¯                Djrt ,
                                           |Ssm |      ¯sm
                                                      rS


where S¯sm is the set of all stores in market m that belong to a retail chain other than the chain
that store s belongs to.
    In our main regression specification we estimate the relationship between the promotion
indicator Djst and the inside and outside promotion percentages, xjst = (Ijst , Ojst ), separately
for each product j and store s.

                     E(Djst |xjst ) = Pr{Djst |xjst } = js + js Ijst + js Ojst .                 (3)

If the promotions in store s are set independently of the same-chain or other-chain promotions
in market m, then js = js = 0.
    Figure 16 displays histograms of the estimates of js , js , and js , pooled across products and
stores, and Table 10 contains corresponding summary statistics and percentiles. As always, we
present weighted distributions using the total product revenue for product j as weights. For now
we focus on the market-level results in the left column of Figure 16. The median across all inside
percentage coefficients, js , is 1.005, and 97.7 percent of all estimates are positive. Furthermore,
we reject the null hypothesis that the inside percentage coefficient is not positive, js  0, for
95.8 percent of all estimates, and 52.8 percent of the estimates are not statistically different from
1 at a 5 percent level. These results provide clear evidence that the price promotions for most
products are dependent (coordinated) across stores within the same retail chain. On the other
hand, the median of the outside percentage coefficients, js , is -0.001, and 89.7 percent of the js
estimates are not statistically different from 0. Hence, conditional on on the inside promotion
percentage, Ijst , information on the contemporaneous promotion incidence in other retail chains
in the local market is typically not predictive of Djst . Also, the estimates of the intercept are
small and mostly not distinguishable from 0, indicating that the probability of a promotion in a
store is zero if none of the other stores in the chain promote the product. This is further evidence
that promotions are coordinated within a retail chain.
    To investigate if promotions are also unconditionally independent of promotions in other
retail chains, we estimate a restricted version of (3) where Djst is regressed on the outside
percentage, Ojst , only. The corresponding results are presented in the bottom panel of the left
column in Figure 16 and in Table 10. The median of the outside percentage coefficients, js , is
0.082, and the distribution of the estimates is skewed to the right. Hence, for some products
there is evidence that the promotion incidence in store s is unconditionally dependent on the
promotion incidence in the other retail chains at the market level. This dependence is likely
due to promotional allowances--trade deals that are offered by the product manufacturers to


                                                 30
multiple or all retail chains. Another explanation is seasonality in demand, although seasonality
is unlikely to account for the large degree in promotion coordination that we documented.
    We also test if promotions are coordinated nationally, across markets. We thus define the
national inside promotion percentage based on all stores that belong to the same chain as store
s but are not in the same market:
                                                1
                                    Ijst =                             Djrt .
                                             |Ss,-m |
                                                        rSs,-m , r=s


Here, Ss,-m includes all stores in the same chain at the national level, excluding the market
that store s belongs to. We similarly define the national outside promotion percentage, Ojst ,
using only promotion observations in other chains outside the market. The right column in
Figure 16 shows the corresponding estimates (see also Table 10). The estimates reveal that
promotions are strongly coordinated also at the national level. The median of the national inside
promotion percentage estimates is 1.017. 97.2 percent of the estimates are positive, and for 93.3
percent we reject the null hypothesis that the estimate is non-positive. Furthermore, mirroring
the market-level results, promotions in store s are conditionally independent of the promotions
in other retails chains outside the market. However, in the restricted regression where we regress
Djst on the outside percentage only, the median of the national outside percentage coefficients is
0.363. Thus, the national-level estimates provide stronger evidence for unconditional promotion
dependence across retail chains than the market-level results.

8.3    Feature advertising and price similarity
Retailers use feature advertising to make households aware of specific products and the price of
the products. These ads are distributed in the form of circulars (print or digital) or newspaper
inserts. Frequently, a featured product is also promoted. Because feature ads typically apply to
all stores in a market, feature advertising places a constraint on the degree of price discrimination
that is feasible for a retail chain. Hence, we analyze if the documented similarity of prices within
retail chains is primarily due to feature advertising.
     Data on feature advertising are available as part of the Nielsen RMS retail scanner data for
a sub-sample that includes 17 percent of all stores. Most retail chains have stores that are in
the sub-sample (only four chains are not covered). Among the covered retailers, feature data
are recorded for about 20 percent of stores, and in these stores feature advertising is measured
consistently for most products and weeks.16
     We originally intended to test if feature advertising makes prices more similar by comparing
the price dispersion at the local retail chain level across weeks with and without feature adver-
tising. Contrary to the hypothesis that feature advertising makes prices more similar, we found
that the price similarity is frequently reduced in weeks when a product is featured. For exam-
ple, we found instances with virtually identical prices in non-featured weeks but a substantial
degree of price variation in weeks with feature ads. However, this pattern is likely an artifact of
  16
    Among the covered stores, feature advertising is measured for 99 percent of all non-imputed product/week
observations and for almost 90 percent of all products.


                                                        31
measurement error in the prices. Recall (Section 5.2) that measurement error in prices is due
to the difference between a retailer's promotion calendar and the Nielsen RMS definition of a
week. If the beginning or end of a promotion does not coincide with the Nielsen week definition,
the measured price is a weighted average of the promoted price and the base price, where the
weights are based on the realized store-level purchase quantities. Hence, differences in these
weights across stores result in different measured prices, even if the actual prices are the same.
Empirically, products that are featured in a given week are also likely to be promoted. In our
data, the probability of being promoted, conditional on being featured, is 0.62 (averaged across
products), but only 0.12 conditional on not being featured. The degree of measurement error in
prices will hence be larger in featured weeks, which leads to the erroneous impression that there
is more within-chain price dispersion if a product is featured. Due to this confound with mea-
surement error in prices, we consider the results from the comparison of price similarity across
featured and non-featured weeks to be inconclusive.
    Instead, we only focus on base prices. In the non-promoted weeks, a product is typically also
not featured (the probability of being featured, conditional on not being promoted, is 0.03 in the
data). Using the base prices only, we repeat the analysis in Section 7.2, where we measured how
much of the overall price variance can be attributed to market versus retail chain-specific factors.
In Figure 17 we display the revenue-weighted distributions of the product level R2 values from
regressions of the base prices on market (3-digit ZIP code), chain, and market/chain dummy
variables. For comparison, we also show the distributions of R2 values for the corresponding
price regressions that do not differentiate between promoted and non-promoted prices. For the
median product, the R2 values are somewhat larger for the base price compared to the price
regressions. For example, the median R2 from the regressions of base prices on market/chain
factors is 90.6 percent, compared to 88.1 percent for the analogous price regressions. Hence,
the large degree of price similarity at the local chain level arises even in the absence of feature
advertising. This finding does not rule out that prices will be even more similar if a product
is featured. However, the large degree of homogeneity in base prices at the chain level shows
that the small degree of price discrimination is not primarily due to feature advertising as an
institutional constraint on price discrimination.

8.4   Discussion
The strong similarity in pricing and promotion strategies among stores that belong to the same
retail chain may contradict the documented heterogeneity in pricing strategies within the same
retail chain in Ellickson and Misra (2008) (see, for example, the results in Tables 2 and 3 in their
paper). Ellickson and Misra (2008) use data from the 1998 Trade Dimensions Supermarkets Plus
Database, which provides information on store-level pricing strategies based on surveys of retail
chain managers. Hence, the data are not directly comparable and cover a different time period
than our work. In particular, the managers surveyed in the Trade Dimensions data classify
store-level pricing policies as EDLP (everyday low price), promotional/Hi-Lo, or as a hybrid of
EDLP and Hi-Lo. These qualitative responses may be consistent with the residual variation in
pricing and promotion policies after accounting for market/chain dummies as shown in Figure


                                                32
9. We leave a more detailed comparison of our results with the results in Ellickson and Misra
(2008) for future research.
    Recent work by Arcidiacono et al. (2019) implies that the price similarity pattern remains
unchanged even after the entry of a strong competitor in the local market. In particular, their
work documents that the entry of a Walmart Supercenter leads to a 16 percent drop in the
revenue of the nearby incumbent retailers, but to no corresponding change in the prices offered
by the incumbents.


9     Can similarity in demand explain the similarity in prices within
      chains?
We have extensively documented that prices and promotions are much more similar within stores
belonging to the same retail chain than across stores belonging to different chains. In particular,
this price similarity is strongest within chains at the local market level. There are different reasons
that can explain this fact. A demand side explanation is that retail chains target customers who
are similar in their shopping behavior and product preferences. This targeting can be achieved
by the choice of store locations--even at the ZIP+3 market level there is often a substantial
degree of heterogeneity among the local customers--or by sorting of customers into retail chains.
Other explanations include supply-side or institutional factors. For example, retail chains be
be limited in their ability or willingness to use data and analytics to drive pricing decisions at
the store level (this hypothesis may be consistent with a demand side explanation if differences
in demand across stores are hard to detect). Also, as some marketers have conjectured, retail
chains may be unwilling to engage in micro-marketing because they advertise (feature) prices
and promotions uniformly at the market level. However, this hypothesis is contradicted by the
evidence presented in Section 8.3, where we show that the price similarity pattern also holds for
base prices, which are typically not featured.
    We focus on the demand side explanation, and investigate if product demand is more similar
at the chain than at the local market level. To this end, we first estimate product (brand)
demand models for a large number of products in our sample.
    Providing a general overview of price elasticities and promotion effects is interesting not just
for the specific purpose of explaining the similarity patterns in prices and promotions that we
documented. Given the extremely comprehensive nature of our sample, the estimated distri-
bution of price elasticities and promotion effects provides a general overview of the magnitude
of these effects for the kind of products that are contained in our data. We also discuss the
usual endogeneity problem and provide some evidence that the estimated price elasticities and
promotion effects can be interpreted as causal.

9.1    Demand model
We estimate demand at the brand level separately for each store. Alternatively we could estimate
demand at the UPC level, but this is challenging because of the large number of UPC's in most
product categories and because even stores that belong to the same retail chain often carry

                                                  33
a brand in different pack sizes or forms. Correspondingly, the majority of studies on product
demand in the Industrial Organization and Marketing literature (e.g. Hoch et al. 1995 and Nevo
2001) use brands a product definition.
    Our sample includes observations on brand j in store s in week t. Let Jjs be the set of all
products in store s that are in the same category that brand j belongs to, including brand j
itself. We estimate a log-linear demand model for brand j in store s:

                 log(1 + qjst ) = js +           jks log(pkst ) +          jks Dkst + j (s, t) +   jst .   (4)
                                          kJjs                      kJjs


js is a brand-store fixed effect. qjst denotes unit sales of brand j, pkst is the price of brand k , and
Dkst is a promotion indicator. Note that (4) is not strictly speaking a log-linear demand model
because we add 1 to qjst before taking the log to be able to incorporate observations qjst = 0.
Despite using log(1 + qjst ) instead of log(qjst ) as the dependent variable, jjs is the own-price
elasticity and jks (k = j ) is the cross-price elasticity with respect to product k .
    j (s, t) is a time fixed effect to account for demand shocks that may be observable to retail
chains hence potentially correlated with store-level prices and promotions. The fixed effects are
constant across stores in the same local market, defined as a 3-digit ZIP code, and they are also
constant within a time period, defined either as a quarter, month, or week in any given year. For
example, consider the case of year/month fixed effects at the 3-digit ZIP code market level. If
s and s are two stores in the same 3-digit ZIP code, and if t and t are two weeks in the same
year and month, then j (s, t) = j (s , t ).
    We estimate demand models for the top 2,000 brands during the 2008-2010 sample period,
ranked according to total revenue. We choose this subset to avoid brands with many missing price
observations (when qjst = 0) in the raw data and the corresponding potential for measurement
error if a large percentage of prices are imputed based on our price algorithm. Similarly, for each
chosen brand we only include stores when prices are observed in at least 80 percent of weeks. In
total, we estimate 27.2 million brand-store demand models.
    In many categories there is sizable number of competing brands. Including the prices and
promotions for all these brands in our demand model is infeasible, and hence we limit the number
of brands included to either the brands that account for at least 80 percent of the category revenue
or a maximum of five.
    Because the time fixed effects, j (s, t), are common across all stores in a local market we
estimate the regressions separately for each brand/market combination.

9.2       Estimation results
The top panel in Figure 18 displays the distribution of the estimated own-price elasticities, pooled
across all brand-store estimates, and Table 11 contains the corresponding summary statistics of
the distribution. All estimates are weighted based on total brand revenue.17 We color estimates
that are not statistically significant (in the sense that we cannot reject the null hypothesis jjs = 0
at a 5 percent level) in gray and all other estimates in blue.
  17
       The weights are brand, not store-specific.


                                                         34
    Figure 18 shows the estimated elasticities based on our main specification that accounts
for local demand shocks using 3-digit ZIP code/month fixed effects. The median price elasticity
across all brand-store estimates is -1.93. There is a large degree of heterogeneity in the estimates,
ranging from -6.647 at the 5th percentile to 2.025 at the 95th percentile of the distribution (see
Table 11). The percentage of own-price elasticity estimates that is negative is 85.6 percent,
although only a small percentage of the non-negative estimates is statistically significant, as is
evident from Figure 18. Exactly 4.1 percent of all own-price elasticity estimates are positive and
statistically different from 0. Note that all demand model parameters are brand/store-specific,
and the number of observations to estimate these parameters is at most 156 weeks (the 2008-2010
period). Hence, it should be expected that not all elasticities are precisely estimated or have
the expected sign. Finally, 70.6 percent of the estimated elasticities indicate elastic demand,
jjs < -1.

Endogeneity

So far we have referred to the estimates,    ^jjs , as own-price elasticities, and thus we have given
the estimates a causal interpretation corresponding to the demand model (4). However, in the
presence of price endogeneity the estimates will be biased and will not correspond to the true
elasticities. Before we delve into this problem more deeply we note that even if the estimates
were biased it would still be valid to examine if the biased elasticity estimates were more similar
at the chain level than at the market level, at least if the bias was approximately constant across
all estimates for a given brand. Nonetheless, a more careful discussion of price endogeneity is
warranted.
    Price endogeneity arises if the retail chains are able to set prices or promotions conditional
on demand shocks that are observed to them, but not to us, the researchers. A large literature,
starting with Berry (1994) and Berry et al. (1995), highlights the endogeneity problem and
provides a solution based on instrumental variables. However, in practice good instruments are
often hard to find, a point that many researchers have recognized and that has recently received
more attention in the literature. Rossi (2014) argues that many instruments that have been used
in the literature are either not valid (such as lagged prices) or weak. We agree with these points,
especially in our context where the goal of providing a general overview of price elasticities for
a larger number of brands makes it impossible to find good instruments that will generally be
suitable for all brands and categories.
    Our main strategy to avoid endogeneity bias, in addition to the time-invariant store fixed
effects js , is to include the market/time fixed effects j (s, t) in the estimated models to account
for demand shocks and brand-specific trends in demand at a narrowly defined geographic level.
We can interpret the estimates     ^jks as store-specific price elasticities if (i) j (s, t) captures all
time-varying demand components that may be correlated with the prices pkst , (ii) there is vari-
ation in the price changes over time across stores, and (iii) the difference in price changes across
stores reflects store or chain-specific changes in costs, wholesale prices, markups, or other factors
that affect prices but not directly demand. These assumptions are not directly testable, but
we can perform an analysis to indicate if our estimates are sensitive to the inclusion and exact


                                                   35
specification of the fixed effects. Thus, we first estimate demand without fixed effects, and then
including j (s, t) defined at the 3-digit ZIP code/quarter, 3-digit ZIP code/month, and 3-digit
ZIP code/week levels.
    The estimated distributions of the price effects are shown in Figure 19 and summarized in
Table 11. The median elasticity estimate is -1.767 in the model without fixed effects, -1.924
in the model with 3-digit ZIP code/quarter fixed effects, -1.93 with 3-digit ZIP code/month
fixed effects, and -1.859 with 3-digit ZIP code/week fixed effects. Hence, controlling for time
fixed effects at the local market level moderately changes the distribution of the estimates, and
the direction of this change is consistent with price endogeneity if positive demand shocks are
correlated with higher prices. However, the elasticity estimates are not particularly sensitive
to the exact choice of fixed effects, and the direction of the change in the estimated elasticities
when we use year-month or year-week fixed effects instead of year-quarter fixed effects is not
indicative of a price endogeneity problem. Indeed, for a serious price endogeneity problem to
exist it would have to be true that there are high-frequency demand shocks that occur at level
that is more local than a 3-digit ZIP code area, and that the store or chain managers are able to
predict these shocks and correspondingly change prices. To us, this seems a priori implausible,
and in particular such localized price-setting is inconsistent with the strong similarity in price
and promotion patterns at the retail chain level that we documented.

Figure 20 displays the distributions of the estimated cross-price elasticities with respect to the
two largest (measured using total revenue) competitors in the product category for each brand,
and the estimated distribution of the own-promotion effects jjs . Although the medians of the
cross-price elasticities are positive, a large fraction of the estimates is negative (42.8 percent for
the largest and 44.7 percent for the second largest competitor), and the majority of the estimates
is not statistically different from zero. Hence, estimating cross-price effects at the brand/store
level with weekly data during a three-year period is daunting. To improve on these estimates
we would need to impose parameter restrictions or estimate a demand model that relies on a
smaller number of parameters, such as a logit market share model (Berry 1994). Among the
own-promotion effect estimates a larger percentage have the expected sign: 77.5 percent of all
estimates and 94.8 percent of the statistically significant estimates are positive.

Sensitivity analysis: Bayesian hierarchical demand model

We compare the OLS estimates of the parameters in the log-linear demand model (4) to estimates
(the posterior means) obtained using a Bayesian hierarchical model. For brand j , let js be a pa-
rameter vector that includes the store-specific intercept, js , the own and cross-price elasticities,
jks , and the promotion parameters, jks . In the Bayesian hierarchical model specification js is
drawn from a prior distribution p(). We assume that the prior is normal, N (      ¯j , Vj ), although
more flexible priors, such as a mixture of normals distribution, have been used in the literature
(see Rossi et al. 2005). We first project the data on 3-digit ZIP code/month fixed effects, j (s, t),
and then use the residualized data to estimate the brand/store-level demand parameters. The
posterior distribution of the model parameters is obtained using MCMC sampling. We use diffuse


                                                 36
prior settings (the default values in the bayesm package). See Appendix B for a more detailed
summary of the model specification.
    There are two reasons that motivate us to provide these additional estimates. First, the
posterior means in the Bayesian hierarchical model are shrinkage estimators, whereby store-
level estimates that are imprecise, in particular due to insufficient variation in the independent
variables, are shrunk to the population mean. This shrinkage property provides a form of reg-
ularization to guard against unreasonable parameter estimates. This is particularly important
given our goal to obtain a large number of brand/store-level demand estimates. Second, Bayesian
hierarchical models are widely used in the industry by analytics companies that provide demand
estimates as part of their services for retail chains and brand manufacturers.
    The bottom panel in Figure 18 displays the distribution of the own-price elasticity estimates
from a Bayesian hierarchical model, and Table 11 provides the corresponding detailed summary
statistics. The median of all own-price elasticity estimates is almost identical for the OLS and
Bayesian hierarchical model estimates. However, from Figure 18 it is evident that the distribution
of the Bayesian hierarchical model estimates has thinner tails than the distribution of the OLS
estimates, which is expected due to the shrinkage property of the Bayesian hierarchical model.
The detailed percentiles in Table 11 confirm this result. Also, comparing the Bayesian hierarchical
model estimates to the OLS estimates we find that the percentage of negative elasticities is larger
(90.3 versus 85.6 percent), and there is also a higher incidence of estimates indication elastic
demand (74.9 versus 70.6 percent). In this sense, the Bayesian hierarchical model estimates
conform more to prior expectations, although the overall difference with respect to the OLS
estimates is only moderate.

9.3   Similarity of price elasticities and promotion effects: Market vs. retail
      chain factors
We conduct an analysis that is similar to the analysis in Section 7.2, where we measured the
percentage of the variance in prices, promotion frequency, and promotion depth that can be
attributed to market versus retail chain-specific factors. Here, we regress the estimated store-
level own-price elasticities,  ^jjs , and promotion coefficients, ^jjs , on market (3-digit ZIP code)
dummies, retail chain dummies, and market/chain dummies.
    The distribution of the revenue-weighted R2 values is displayed in Figure 21 (see Table 15 in
the Appendix for the details of the results). The results in the top row are based on the own-price
elasticity estimates from the main model specification that includes 3-digit ZIP code/month fixed
effects. Local market factors explain 14.6 percent (the median across products) of the overall
variance in elasticities across stores, whereas chain factors explain a slightly larger fraction,
17.2 percent. In contrast, market/chain factors explain 47.3 percent, i.e. close to half of the
overall variation in elasticities across stores. Hence, while market factors account for some of the
differences in the own-price elasticity of demand, the elasticities are much more similar within
the stores that belong to the same retail chain at the local market level.
    Even at the local chain level, however, the price elasticities are not identical--slightly more
than half of the variation is not captured by the market/chain fixed effects. This remaining


                                                 37
variation in elasticities might represent an unexploited opportunity to price discriminate across
stores, but it may also simply reflect that our analysis is based on estimates of the true own-price
elasticities that are affected by measurement error. Hence, we compare the distribution of the R2
values based on the OLS estimates to the results in the second row of Figure 21 that are based
on the posterior means of the store-level own price elasticities from the Bayesian hierarchical
demand model. The shrinkage properties of the Bayesian estimation method may ameliorate the
potential for measurement error in the price elasticities, which is consistent with the results. The
R2 values are now uniformly higher, and we find that local market factors explain 20.7 percent of
the overall variance in elasticities, whereas chain factors explain 23.5 percent and market/chain
factors explain more than half of the variation in own-price elasticities--52.3 percent. Still, a
substantial percentage of the variation in elasticities is not captured by market/chain factors.
    In the bottom two rows of Figure 21 we perform an identical analysis for the estimated
own-promotion coefficients. Here, chain factors explain a substantially larger percentage of the
variance in the estimated coefficients, and the percentage of the variance explained by mar-
ket/chain factors is somewhat higher than in the case of own-price elasticities. For example,
based on the estimates using the Bayesian hierarchical model, market factors explain 19.3, chain
factors explain 30.5, and market/chain factors explain 56.4 percent of the overall variance in the
estimated promotion effects.

9.4   Can retailers distinguish among store-level price elasticities and promo-
      tion effects?
The analysis in the previous section begs the question if differences in store-level price elasticities
or promotion effects are apparent to the retailers. Indeed, prices and promotions may be similar
across stores if the price and promotion effects are hard to distinguish. Hence, in this section
we analyze the price elasticity and promotion effect estimates that are available to sophisticated
retailers who base their price and promotion decisions on modern marketing analytics.
     Bayesian hierarchical models of demand that are similar to the specification used in this
paper have been used in the industry since the early 2000's. For example, DemandTec, which
was founded in 1999 and later acquired by IBM, offered analytic services to its retail clients using
such demand models. To emulate the empirical analysis available to a sophisticated retailer, we
employ the same Bayesian hierarchical model as before, but we now estimate demand separately
for each retailer (in practice, scanner data from competing stores are not available for the analysis
performed for a retail client). The key difference compared to the previous analysis is that now
the store-level estimates are shrunk to the retail chain mean, not to the national mean. Hence, the
price elasticity and promotion estimates as viewed by a retailer may look more similar compared
to the corresponding estimates using a national prior.
     In Figure 22 we replicate the results in Section 9.3 (Figure 21), where we analyzed the percent-
age of the variance in the estimated store-level own-price elasticities and promotion coefficients
that can be explained by market (3-digit ZIP code), retail chain, and market/chain factors. For
comparison, the Bayesian hierarchical model estimates using a national prior are displayed in the
first row, whereas the results using chain-level priors are shown in the second row of each panel.


                                                  38
When we attempt to explain the variation in price elasticities and promotion coefficients using
local market factors, the revenue-weighted R2 values are almost identical across the two spec-
ifications. However, when using chain or market/chain factors the R2 values are substantially
larger if the estimates are obtained using chain-level priors. Chain factors explain 23.5 percent
of the variation in price elasticities using a national prior but 51.0 percent of the variation using
chain-level priors. Using market/chain factors, the median of the R2 values increases from 52.3
percent to 70.5 percent when we compare the results using a national prior and chain-level priors.
Similarly, for the promotion effects the median of R2 values increase from 30.5 to 56.0 percent
when using chain factors and from 56.4 to 73.5 percent using market/chain factors.
     Based on these results the conclusions drawn in Section 9.3 are strengthened. Much of the
dispersion in price elasticities at the market level is explained by systematic differences in demand
across the local retail chains, especially when we focus on the demand estimates that are available
to sophisticated retailers who employ marketing analytics.
     Given this similarity in demand, we further examine if and to what extent the local price and
promotion effects within a chain are distinguishable to the retailers. In particular, even though
the point estimates of the price elasticities and promotion effects are different, there may be much
statistical uncertainty around these estimates, and correspondingly the retailers may consider
price discrimination across local stores impractical or infeasible. We again emulate the demand
information that sophisticated retailers use in practice, and we construct credible intervals for all
store-level price elasticity and promotion effect estimates. For each brand/market/retail chain
combination, we then record the percentage of elasticities and promotion effects with credible
intervals that do not contain the mean of the local chain-level estimates. In other words, we
calculate the percentage of store-level price elasticity and promotion effect estimates that are
statistically different from the mean price elasticity and promotion effect at the retail chain in
the local market.
     In Figure 23 we present histograms of the corresponding percentages of price elasticities (top
panel) and promotion effects (bottom panel) that are distinguishable from the local chain-level
mean across all brand/market/retail chain observations. We show the results separately using 95,
90, and 80 percent credible intervals. The histograms in the top rows of each panel display the
distributions for all brands, whereas the histograms in the bottom row show the distributions for
the 250 largest (based on revenue) brands. When we focus on all brands, the median percentage
of statistically distinguishable price elasticities is just slightly larger than the type I error rate: 7.5
percent for 95 credible intervals, 12.4 percent for 90 percent credible intervals, and 21.2 percent
for 80 percent credible intervals. For the top 250 brands, the median percentage of distinguishable
elasticity estimates is somewhat larger, which is likely due to a higher degree of precision for the
elasticity estimates of those products: 11.6 percent for 95 percent credible intervals, 17.7 percent
for 90 percent credible intervals, and 28.4 percent for 80 percent credible intervals, respectively.
Hence, even for the largest brands, category managers who engage in a similar analysis will find
that using an 80 percent credible interval, 71.6 percent of all price elasticity estimates are not
distinguishable from the local retail chain-level mean. A similar pattern holds for the estimated
promotion effects in the bottom panel of Figure 23. The lack in precision of the individual



                                                    39
estimates may lead managers to conclude that price discrimination across stores at the local
market level is not feasible in practice. Note that we could have potentially obtained more
precise demand estimates using data that covered a larger number of years than the three years
used in our analysis. In practice, however, demand analyses performed for manufacturers and
retailers have typically been based on at most two years of data. Hence, the demand estimates
that we analyze are likely to overstate, not understate the precision of estimates available in the
industry practice.
    Our analysis provides a potential explanation for the observed lack of local price discrimina-
tion by retailers. This explanation also conforms with the anecdotal evidence that we gathered
when we asked retail chain managers why they did not engage in more price discrimination. We
emphasize, however, that our analysis is not normative : We do not recommend that retailers
should not attempt to engage in store-level pricing given the indistinguishability of the elasticity
and promotion effect estimates based on a procedure that mimics a frequentist hypothesis test.
Indeed, a strategy that sets store-level prices based on the posterior means of the store-level
demand estimates may increase profits despite the uncertainty in the estimates. An empirical
investigation if such a price discrimination strategy can improve retailer profits is left for future
work.


10     Conclusions
This work documents some key facts on retail (grocery) price and promotion strategies and on
the relationship between pricing strategies and product demand. We emphasize generalizable
results that are based on a large sample of products, representing almost 80 percent of retail
revenue and sold across a large number of stores.
    One central finding is the substantial degree of price dispersion at a given moment in time
for identical products (UPC's) and almost identical products (brands) across U.S. retail stores.
We observe this deviation from the law of one price even at a fairly narrow geographic level
(3-digit ZIP codes). This dispersion in prices is due both to persistent differences in base prices
and temporary price promotions. However, although the majority of products is frequently
promoted, the overall contribution of price promotions to the variance of prices is diminished
due to a pervasive EDLP vs. Hi-Lo pricing pattern that is observed for most products.
    The degree of price dispersion varies strongly across products, which in part can by explained
by differences in the distribution of a product across chains and the level of product "importance"
as measured by the product penetration rate. The degree of distribution and product penetration
may reflect heterogeneity in product demand.
    More importantly, the price dispersion for a given product across stores follows a systematic
pattern. Prices are overall more homogenous within a local market area (3-digit ZIP code), and
in particular prices are substantially more homogenous among the local stores that belong to
the same retail chain. Similarly, both the frequency and depth of price promotions is relatively
more homogenous within stores in the same retail chain at the local market level. Furthermore,
price promotions are strongly coordinated within retail chains, both in local markets and at


                                                 40
the national level. The price and promotion similarity finding contradicts what we believe had
been the conventional wisdom in the academic marketing community, that retail chains were
implementing sophisticated price discrimination strategies as part of "store-specific marketing."
    We provide evidence that the documented price and promotion homogeneity is related to
product demand similarity at the retail chain/market level. We estimate demand for 2,000
brands, and show, based on the estimated store-level price elasticities and promotion effects, that
in a local market demand is significantly more homogenous within a retail chain than across stores
that belong to different retail chains. This pattern is particularly pronounced when we emulate
the demand analysis available to a sophisticated retailer, and thus examine price elasticity and
promotion effect similarity using the estimates available to retailers. Furthermore, the estimated
price and promotion effects are hard to distinguish in a statistical sense from the retail chain
mean effects at the local market level. Hence, the limited extent of price discrimination across
stores, especially at the local market level, likely reflects similarity in demand at the retail chain
level and the inability to easily distinguish between price elasticities and promotion effects across
stores.
    In this work, we are unable to address if the similarity in demand in a retail chain reflects
location choices or a a form of sorting whereby chains attract similar consumers. We also do
not address if the unexplained portion of the variance in demand parameters simply reflects
measurement error or hints at unexploited gains of store-level price discrimination, possibly due
to institutional constraints on how category management is performed. Related, we do not take
a stance on whether the observed prices and promotions are optimal given the estimated demand
systems. Indeed, such an exercise is infeasible without either additional data (wholesale prices
and market development funds provided to the retailers) or auxiliary assumptions.




                                                 41
References
Adams, B. and K. R. Williams (2019): "Zone Pricing in Retail Oligopoly," American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Microeconomics, 11, 124­156.

Arcidiacono, P., P. B. Ellickson, C. F. Mela, and J. D. Singleton (2019): "The
 Competitive Effects of Entry: Evidence from Supercenter Expansion," American Economic
 Journal: Applied Economics (forthcoming).

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): "Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,"
 Econometrica, 63, 841­890.

Berry, S. T. (1994): "Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation," Rand
 Journal of Economics, 25, 242­262.

Bijmolt, T. H. A., H. J. van Heerde, and R. G. M. Pieters (2005): "New Empirical
  Generalizations on the Determinants of Price Elasticity," Journal of Marketing Research, 42,
  141­156.

Boatwright, P., S. Dhar, and P. E. Rossi (2004): "The Role of Retail Competition,
 Demographics and Account Retail Strategy as Drivers of Promotional Sensitivity," Quantitative
 Marketing and Economics, 2, 169­190.

Bolton, R. N. (1989): "The Relationship Between Market Characteristics and Promotional
 Price Elasticities," Marketing Science, 8, 153­169.

Bronnenberg, B. J., C. F. Mela, and W. Boulding (2006): "The Periodicity of Pricing,"
 Journal of Marketing Research, 43, 477­493.

DellaVigna, S. and M. Gentzkow (2019): "Uniform Pricing in US Retail Chains," Quarterly
 Journal of Economics (forthcoming).

Dubois, P. and H. Perrone (2015): "Price Dispersion and Informational Frictions: Evidence
 from Supermarket Purchases," manuscript.

Eden, B. (2014): "Price Dispersion and Demand Uncertainty: Evidence from US Scanner Data,"
 manuscript.

Eizenberg, A., S. Lach, and M. Yiftach (2017): "Retail Prices in a City," manuscript.

Ellickson, P. B. and S. Misra (2008): "Supermarket Pricing Strategies," Marketing Science,
  27, 811­828.

Hastie, T., R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman (2009): The Elements of Statistical Learning,
 Springer, second ed.

Hoch, S. J., B.-D. Kim, A. L. Montgomery, and P. E. Rossi (1995): "Determinants of
 Store-Level Price Elasticity," Journal of Marketing Research, 32, 17­29.

                                             42
Hwang, M., B. J. Bronnenberg, and R. Thomadsen (2010): "An Empirical Analysis of
 Assortment Similarities Across U.S. Supermarkets," Marketing Science, 29, 858­879.

Kaplan, G. and G. Menzio (2015): "The Morphology of Price Dispersion," International
 Economic Review, 56, 1165­1205.

Kaplan, G., G. Menzio, L. Rudanko, and N. Trachter (2019): "Relative Price Dispersion:
 Theory and Evidence," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 11, 68­124.

Lach, S. (2002): "Existence and Persistence of Price Dispersion: An Empirical Analysis," The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 433­444.

Nakamura, E. (2008): "Pass-Through in Retail and Wholesale," NBER Working Paper 13965.

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008): "Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
 Cost Models," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1415­1464.

------ (2013): "Price Rigidity: Microeconomic Evidence and Macroeconomic Implications,"
  Annual Review of Economics, 5, 133­163.

Narasimhan, C., S. A. Neslin, and S. K. Sen (1996): "Promotional Elasticities and Category
 Characteristics," Journal of Marketing, 60, 17­30.

Nevo, A. (2001): "Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry," Economet-
 rica, 69, 307­342.

Rossi, P., G. Allenby, and R. McCulloch (2005): Bayesian Statistics and Marketing,
 John Wiley & Sons.

Rossi, P. E. (2014): "Even the Rich Can Make Themselves Poor: The Dangers of IV and
 Related Methods in Marketing Applications," Marketing Science, 33, 655­672.

Tellis, G. J. (1988): "The Price Elasticity of Selective Demand: A Meta-Analysis of Econo-
 metric Models of Sales," Journal of Marketing Research, 25, 331­341.




                                            43
       Table 1: Product sample descriptive statistics

Year         Observed prices         Observed and     Revenue
                                  imputed prices
                 (million)             (million)     ($ million)


                  Panel A: Products (UPC's)
2008              6100.0                8669.9        140156.7
2009              6352.7                9226.3        146830.2
2010              6355.4                9192.4        146608.4
All              18808.1               27088.6        433595.3
                 Percent imputed prices 30.57


                          Panel B: Brands
2008              2302.9                2958.2        140156.7
2009              2401.8                3131.4        146830.2
2010              2409.5                3146.7        146608.4
All               7114.2                9236.3        433595.3
                 Percent imputed prices 22.97


                Panel C: Percent private label
Products           10.8                  9.3            15.4
Brands              8.6                  7.6            15.4
Note: The first column indicates the number of price observa-
tions obtained from the RMS data. The second column also in-
cludes the imputed prices for weeks with zero sales. The obser-
vation numbers are expressed in millions, and the revenue data
are expressed in millions of dollars. The table also indicates the
percentage of imputed prices among all observed and imputed
prices, and the percentage of private label observations among
all product or brand price observations and revenue.




                                44
                Table 2: Retail chain and store descriptive statistics

Panel A: At National level
No. of retail chains    81
No. of stores          17184


                       Mean     SD      Min               Percentiles          Max
                                                10   25      50     75   90

Panel B: At DMA level
No. of retail chains    6.0      2.6     1      3     4      6      7     9    18
No. of stores          83.8    143.7     1      6    13      32     82   224   1061



Panel C: At ZIP+3 level
No. of retail chains    4.4      2.2     1      2     3      4      6     8    11
No. of stores          20.5     24.9     1      2     5      10     27   54    170



Panel D: Markets covered by retail chains
No. of DMA's           15.1     34.8     1      1     2      5      9    31    192
No. of ZIP+3           45.9    105.7     1      4     6      13     32   112   572



Panel E: Stores per retail chain
National               212.1   443.8     2      10   25      77    171   505   3007
DMA                    14.0     26.7     1      1     2      5      13   36    320
ZIP+3                   4.6      6.6     1      1     1      2      5    11    109




                                         45
                             Table 3: Price and base price dispersion statistics

                                       Median   Mean                            Percentiles
                                                        0.01    0.05    0.1     0.25    0.75    0.9     0.95    0.99
Prices
Product definition: UPC

    Log-price SD            National    0.161   0.163   0.015   0.059   0.090   0.124   0.200   0.238   0.268   0.318
                            DMA         0.110   0.114   0.006   0.032   0.050   0.078   0.147   0.185   0.208   0.249
                            ZIP+3       0.099   0.103   0.002   0.021   0.039   0.066   0.136   0.174   0.196   0.236
    95/5 percentile ratio   National    1.646   1.690   1.018   1.171   1.300   1.460   1.869   2.103   2.331   2.836
                            DMA         1.360   1.398   1.011   1.075   1.129   1.232   1.524   1.721   1.831   2.071
                            ZIP+3       1.294   1.329   1.004   1.045   1.094   1.182   1.438   1.614   1.713   1.946


Product definition: Brand

    Log-price SD            National    0.175   0.185   0.074   0.098   0.114   0.141   0.216   0.260   0.320   0.427
                            DMA         0.138   0.146   0.045   0.067   0.084   0.105   0.174   0.214   0.250   0.356
                            ZIP+3       0.129   0.137   0.035   0.060   0.072   0.097   0.165   0.202   0.239   0.341
    95/5 percentile ratio   National    1.728   1.841   1.232   1.340   1.414   1.537   1.981   2.289   2.753   4.002
                            DMA         1.508   1.583   1.113   1.208   1.264   1.367   1.697   1.929   2.146   3.042
                            ZIP+3       1.433   1.492   1.081   1.170   1.211   1.303   1.593   1.786   1.978   2.666


Base prices
Product definition: UPC

    Log-price SD            National    0.133   0.138   0.006   0.046   0.073   0.103   0.168   0.205   0.240   0.320
                            DMA         0.088   0.093   0.002   0.023   0.039   0.062   0.118   0.151   0.177   0.239
                            ZIP+3       0.078   0.083   0.001   0.014   0.029   0.052   0.107   0.140   0.166   0.225
    95/5 percentile ratio   National    1.516   1.564   1.001   1.130   1.230   1.373   1.702   1.933   2.131   2.710
                            DMA         1.276   1.310   1.003   1.050   1.096   1.177   1.399   1.556   1.680   1.983
                            ZIP+3       1.220   1.250   1.001   1.028   1.066   1.134   1.328   1.464   1.569   1.832


Product definition: Brand

    Log-price SD            National    0.162   0.174   0.062   0.091   0.101   0.127   0.206   0.253   0.310   0.425
                            DMA         0.126   0.137   0.034   0.062   0.071   0.093   0.166   0.209   0.244   0.357
                            ZIP+3       0.118   0.127   0.025   0.055   0.064   0.086   0.157   0.197   0.231   0.345
    95/5 percentile ratio   National    1.654   1.780   1.187   1.297   1.350   1.478   1.912   2.229   2.671   3.857
                            DMA         1.460   1.541   1.081   1.192   1.225   1.315   1.659   1.893   2.133   2.918
                            ZIP+3       1.389   1.453   1.054   1.154   1.185   1.257   1.564   1.759   1.953   2.645




                                                        46
                                        Table 4: Price promotion statistics

                                            Median    Mean                                Percentiles

                                                                1%      5%      10%      25%      75%     90%      95%      99%


Pooled across products, stores, and weeks

Percentage price discount                    0.177     0.207   0.013   0.032   0.051     0.101    0.287   0.402    0.486    0.595


Product-level statistics

Promotion frequency                          0.147     0.163   0.001   0.011   0.023     0.074    0.231   0.317    0.370    0.502
Promotion depth                              0.195     0.201   0.083   0.102   0.119     0.149    0.246   0.290    0.315    0.390
Percentage volume on promotion               0.287     0.298   0.002   0.018   0.046     0.157    0.426   0.544    0.614    0.755
Promotion multiplier                         3.043     3.783   1.054   1.335   1.610     2.169    4.458   6.790    9.220    23.297


Product-level statistics: Differences between 95th and 5th percentiles across stores

Promotion frequency difference               0.314     0.316   0.007   0.046   0.083     0.184    0.436   0.545    0.591    0.667
Promotion depth difference                   0.180     0.190   0.023   0.070   0.096     0.135    0.233   0.292    0.342    0.444
Percentage promoted volume difference        0.541     0.510   0.013   0.085   0.163     0.381    0.658   0.758    0.821    0.933
Promotion multiplier difference              5.531     7.854   0.603   1.316   1.897     3.225    9.096   16.289   25.518   65.013




                                      Table 5: Price variance decomposition

                                                                                             Within-Market
                                                                       UPC      Brand        UPC          Brand
               Basic decomposition

               Across-market                                           32.7       29.7
               Across-store                                            27.0       42.3           40.2      60.1
               Within-store                                            40.3       28.0           59.8      39.9


               Decomposition into base prices and promotions

               Across-market                                           32.7       29.7
               Across-store mean base price variance                   31.3       49.9           46.5      70.9
               Within-store base price variance                        12.3       13.4           18.3      19.0
               Total contribution of promotions                        23.7        7.0           35.2      10.0

               Promotional price discounts                             36.0       29.9           53.5      42.6
               EDLP vs. Hi-Lo adjustment                               -12.3     -22.9       -18.3         -32.6


                                                               47
Table 6: Relationship between price dispersion and product characteristics (product rank indi-
cators based on revenue)

                                         Dependent variable: log-price standard deviation
                                (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

 Revenue rank, 1-100         0.043        0.004         0.004        0.002      0.012       0.017
                              (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
 Revenue rank, 101-250       0.034        -0.001         -0.001     -0.002      0.005       0.011
                              (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
 Revenue rank, 251-500       0.041        0.007         0.007       0.006       0.011       0.015
                              (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
 Revenue rank, 501-1000      0.040        0.007         0.007       0.007       0.011       0.016
                              (0.001)    (0.0005)       (0.0005)    (0.0005)    (0.0005)    (0.0005)
 Revenue rank, 1001-5000     0.030        0.002         0.002       0.002       0.005       0.009
                             (0.0002)    (0.0002)       (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.0002)
 Revenue rank, 5001-10000    0.025        0.002         0.002       0.002       0.004       0.006
                             (0.0002)    (0.0002)       (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.0002)
 Revenue rank, 10001-20000   0.017        0.002         0.002       0.002       0.003       0.004
                             (0.0002)    (0.0002)       (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.0002)
 Log(no. stores)                          0.006         0.007       0.006       0.006       0.006
                                         (0.0001)       (0.0001)    (0.0001)    (0.0001)    (0.0001)
 Log(no. chains)                          0.064         0.064       0.067       0.066       0.065
                                         (0.0001)       (0.0001)    (0.0001)    (0.0002)    (0.0002)
 Log(population)                                        -0.0005     -0.001      -0.0002     0.00003
                                                        (0.0001)    (0.0001)    (0.0001)    (0.0001)
 Private-Label                                                      0.014       0.013       0.013
                                                                    (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.0002)
 Constant                    0.062        0.020         0.019       0.017
                             (0.0001)    (0.0001)       (0.0002)    (0.0002)
 Product group dummy            No          No             No          No         Yes          No
 Product module dummy           No          No             No          No          No         Yes
 Observations                1,000,000   1,000,000      1,000,000   1,000,000   1,000,000   1,000,000
 R2                           0.030        0.372         0.372       0.376       0.399       0.421
 Note:                                                                    p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01




                                                   48
Table 7: Relationship between price dispersion and product characteristics (product rank indi-
cators based on product penetration)

                                             Dependent variable: log-price standard deviation
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)

 Penetration rank, 1-100         0.073         0.045       0.045      0.043       0.047         0.050
                                  (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)
 Penetration rank, 101-250       0.066         0.036       0.037      0.034       0.037         0.039
                                  (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)
 Penetration rank, 251-500       0.063         0.035       0.035      0.034       0.037         0.040
                                  (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)
 Penetration rank, 501-1000      0.052         0.027       0.028      0.027       0.029         0.030
                                  (0.001)      (0.0004)    (0.0004)   (0.0004)    (0.0004)      (0.0004)
 Penetration rank, 1001-5000     0.037         0.019       0.020      0.019       0.022         0.023
                                 (0.0002)      (0.0002)    (0.0002)   (0.0002)    (0.0002)      (0.0002)
 Penetration rank, 5001-10000    0.023         0.012       0.012      0.012       0.014         0.015
                                 (0.0002)      (0.0002)    (0.0002)   (0.0002)    (0.0002)      (0.0002)
 Penetration rank, 10001-20000   0.015         0.008       0.008      0.008       0.009         0.009
                                 (0.0002)      (0.0001)    (0.0001)   (0.0001)    (0.0002)      (0.0002)
 Log(no. stores)                               0.006       0.006      0.005       0.006         0.006
                                               (0.0001)    (0.0001)   (0.0001)    (0.0001)      (0.0001)
 Log(no. chains)                               0.063       0.063      0.066       0.064         0.064
                                               (0.0001)    (0.0001)   (0.0001)    (0.0002)      (0.0001)
 Log(population)                                           0.001      0.001       0.001         0.001
                                                           (0.0001)   (0.0001)    (0.0001)      (0.0001)
 Private-Label                                                        0.013       0.012         0.013
                                                                      (0.0002)    (0.0002)      (0.0002)
 Constant                        0.060         0.015       0.017      0.015
                                 (0.0001)      (0.0001)    (0.0002)   (0.0002)
 Product group dummy                No            No         No          No          Yes           No
 Product module dummy               No            No         No          No          No           Yes
 Observations                    1,000,000    1,000,000   1,000,000   1,000,000   1,000,000     1,000,000
 R2                               0.045         0.385       0.385       0.388       0.409        0.430
 Note:                                                                     p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01




                                                   49
     Table 8: UPC price and base price dispersion statistics: Market vs. retail chain-level


                                              Median    Mean                            Percentiles

                                                                 1%      5%     10%     25%     75%     90%     95%     99%

Prices
Product definition: UPC
         Log-price SD            DMA            0.110   0.114   0.006   0.032   0.050   0.078   0.147   0.185   0.208   0.249
                                 ZIP3           0.099   0.103   0.002   0.021   0.039   0.066   0.136   0.174   0.196   0.236
                                 Chain          0.079   0.083   0.008   0.032   0.043   0.061   0.101   0.125   0.145   0.220
                                 Chain/DMA      0.050   0.054   0.004   0.018   0.025   0.036   0.067   0.085   0.103   0.163
                                 Chain/ZIP3     0.039   0.043   0.002   0.012   0.018   0.027   0.054   0.070   0.087   0.151
         95/5 percentile ratio   DMA            1.360   1.398   1.011   1.075   1.129   1.232   1.524   1.721   1.831   2.071
                                 ZIP3           1.294   1.329   1.004   1.045   1.094   1.182   1.438   1.614   1.713   1.946
                                 Chain          1.254   1.281   1.006   1.070   1.112   1.183   1.346   1.471   1.570   1.960
                                 Chain/DMA      1.131   1.148   1.004   1.035   1.054   1.086   1.186   1.253   1.317   1.560
                                 Chain/ZIP3     1.072   1.085   1.001   1.011   1.025   1.044   1.109   1.153   1.196   1.351
Base Prices
Product definition: UPC
         Log-price SD            DMA            0.088   0.093   0.002   0.023   0.039   0.062   0.118   0.151   0.177   0.239
                                 ZIP3           0.078   0.083   0.001   0.014   0.029   0.052   0.107   0.140   0.166   0.225
                                 Chain          0.064   0.067   0.002   0.020   0.032   0.048   0.081   0.104   0.125   0.188
                                 Chain/DMA      0.037   0.040   0.000   0.010   0.017   0.026   0.050   0.065   0.077   0.126
                                 Chain/ZIP3     0.027   0.031   0.000   0.006   0.011   0.019   0.038   0.052   0.063   0.111
         95/5 percentile ratio   DMA            1.276   1.310   1.003   1.050   1.096   1.177   1.399   1.556   1.680   1.983
                                 ZIP3           1.220   1.250   1.001   1.028   1.066   1.134   1.328   1.464   1.569   1.832
                                 Chain          1.197   1.219   1.000   1.037   1.080   1.137   1.267   1.368   1.484   1.776
                                 Chain/DMA      1.091   1.103   1.000   1.017   1.035   1.060   1.129   1.177   1.213   1.404
                                 Chain/ZIP3     1.045   1.054   1.000   1.005   1.014   1.028   1.068   1.098   1.123   1.245




                                                           50
                           Table 9: Promotion coordination: Summary statistics

                            Median      Mean     %=0                                 Percentiles

                                                             1%      5%      10%     25%      75%     90%     95%     99%

 DMA/chain promotion percentages

 Top 1,000    Data            0.548     0.541     55.060    0.011   0.026    0.048   0.143   0.991    1.000   1.000   1.000
              Simulated       0.279     0.313     22.451    0.025   0.060    0.091   0.167   0.429    0.600   0.667   0.833
 All          Data            0.410     0.484     62.184    0.010   0.023    0.039   0.111   0.886    1.000   1.000   1.000
              Simulated       0.200     0.255     28.274    0.021   0.048    0.071   0.125   0.353    0.500   0.600   0.800


 DMA/chain promotion percentages, store/promotion-weighted

 Top 1,000    Data            0.957     0.822               0.047   0.188    0.379   0.745   1.000    1.000   1.000   1.000
              Simulated       0.416     0.419               0.060   0.125    0.174   0.274   0.556    0.667   0.732   0.833
 All          Data            0.901     0.779               0.038   0.158    0.323   0.650   0.991    1.000   1.000   1.000
              Simulated       0.333     0.355               0.045   0.094    0.132   0.212   0.482    0.606   0.681   0.800
Note: Results are based observations when a product is carried in at least 5 stores by the retailer in the DMA.




                                                             51
                                             Table 10: Promotion coordination: Promotion dependence regressions

                                   Median     Mean      NR = 0      NR = 1      R0        Est. > 0                              Percentiles

                                                                                                     0.01     0.05      0.1      0.25    0.75    0.9     0.95    0.99

      DMA

      (1)   Inside Percentage       1.005      0.975                  0.528      0.958      0.977    -0.147   0.297    0.553    0.861    1.086   1.233   1.401   2.247
            Outside Percentage      -0.001     0.008      0.897                  0.036      0.490    -0.768   -0.272   -0.168   -0.064   0.064   0.183   0.309   0.916
            Intercept               0.000      0.008      0.872                             0.497    -0.125   -0.056   -0.037   -0.015   0.021   0.060   0.097   0.235

      (2)   Inside Percentage       1.006      0.977                  0.525      0.961      0.978    -0.131   0.311    0.563    0.866    1.085   1.232   1.399   2.243
            Intercept               0.000      0.009      0.838                             0.493    -0.093   -0.042   -0.027   -0.011   0.018   0.053   0.088   0.218

      (3)   Outside Percentage      0.082      0.173      0.777                  0.252      0.631    -1.036   -0.363   -0.222   -0.067   0.308   0.646   0.957   2.106




52
            Intercept               0.147      0.186      0.289                             0.956    -0.044   0.003    0.017    0.060    0.272   0.419   0.513   0.686


      National

      (1)   Inside Percentage       1.017      1.036                  0.503      0.933      0.972    -0.294   0.183    0.458    0.825    1.140   1.369   1.629   3.296
            Outside Percentage      0.000      0.027      0.876                  0.044      0.498    -1.374   -0.560   -0.360   -0.144   0.164   0.429   0.685   1.666
            Intercept               -0.002     0.006      0.873                             0.476    -0.267   -0.115   -0.074   -0.029   0.030   0.091   0.154   0.383

      (2)   Inside Percentage       1.018      1.033                  0.497      0.938      0.973    -0.254   0.204    0.475    0.834    1.138   1.366   1.624   3.288
            Intercept               -0.002     0.010      0.799                             0.463    -0.153   -0.064   -0.041   -0.017   0.021   0.070   0.125   0.338

      (3)   Outside Percentage      0.363      0.510      0.649                  0.394      0.754    -1.299   -0.499   -0.268   0.006    0.875   1.495   1.961   3.553
            Intercept               0.077      0.114      0.635                             0.794    -0.255   -0.101   -0.047   0.010    0.190   0.338   0.449   0.693
     Note: NR stands for "Not Rejected", R stands for "Rejected", and "Est." stands for "Estimate"
                                                               Table 11: Demand estimates

                             Median   Mean     %>0     %<0       % < -1   % significant                               Percentiles

                                                                                           1%        5%      10%      25%      75%      90%      95%     99%

     OLS

     Own-price, no FE's      -1.767   -1.941           0.839      0.670       0.564       -15.182   -6.803   -4.907   -3.078   -0.585   0.689    2.093   9.095
      Year-quarter/ZIP+3     -1.924   -2.046           0.857      0.704       0.595       -13.849   -6.608   -4.906   -3.204   -0.753   0.534    1.958   8.851
      Year-month/ZIP+3       -1.930   -2.050           0.856      0.706       0.601       -13.948   -6.647   -4.929   -3.216   -0.763   0.557    2.025   9.116
      Year-week/ZIP+3        -1.859   -1.972           0.847      0.692       0.592       -14.153   -6.658   -4.878   -3.137   -0.691   0.669    2.198   9.568
     Cross-price 1            0.153   0.157    0.572                          0.203       -8.767    -3.251   -1.855   -0.538   0.925    2.144    3.424   8.338




53
     Cross-price 2            0.067   0.080    0.553                          0.180       -6.733    -2.508   -1.401   -0.410   0.611    1.578    2.587   6.482
     Cross-price 3            0.048   0.049    0.540                          0.163       -6.827    -2.499   -1.395   -0.411   0.547    1.474    2.518   6.657
     Own-promotion effect     0.178   0.373    0.775                          0.347       -0.610    -0.218   -0.112   0.016    0.494    1.216    1.913   3.579


     Bayesian hierarchical

     Own-price               -1.970   -2.026           0.903      0.749       0.708       -8.215    -5.116   -4.163   -2.989   -0.994   -0.033   0.754   4.070
     Cross-price 1            0.159   0.193    0.626                          0.191       -3.511    -1.364   -0.768   -0.195   0.615    1.205    1.734   3.899
     Cross-price 2            0.089   0.084    0.592                          0.177       -3.253    -1.226   -0.676   -0.196   0.405    0.871    1.300   2.751
     Cross-price 3            0.070   0.063    0.584                          0.148       -2.392    -1.029   -0.614   -0.184   0.336    0.718    1.080   2.389
     Own-promotion effect     0.184   0.299    0.844                          0.452       -0.271    -0.104   -0.042   0.052    0.408    0.835    1.247   2.353
                         100



                          80
                                   1,000
Cumulative Revenue (%)




                          60



                          40



                          20



                           0

                               0           1   2   3    4        5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                       Rank (10,000s)


    Figure 1: Cumulative revenue for top 100,000 products




                                                            54
                                            Top 100 Brands                       Top 100 Products                                       Top 100 Brands                         Top 100 Products

                               0.3                    15984.5                           12770.5                                                       76                                      70.5
                                                                                                                         0.3

                               0.2
                                                                                                                         0.2

                               0.1
                                                                                                                         0.1


                               0.0                                                                                       0.0

                                           Top 1000 Brands                      Top 1000 Products                                   Top 1000 Brands                           Top 1000 Products

                               0.3                 14080.5                             11615.5                                                        73                                          68
                                                                                                                         0.3

                               0.2
                                                                                                                         0.2

                               0.1
                                                                                                                         0.1


                               0.0                                                                                       0.0

                                           Top 10000 Brands                     Top 10000 Products                                  Top 10000 Brands                          Top 10000 Products




                   Frequency
                                                                                                             Frequency
                               0.3        6325                                     9121                                                     50                                               59
                                                                                                                         0.3

                               0.2




55
                                                                                                                         0.2

                               0.1
                                                                                                                         0.1


                               0.0                                                                                       0.0

                                           All (11279) Brands                   Top 47355 Products                                 All (11279) Brands                         Top 47355 Products

                               0.3       5281                                   3854                                                       45                                      34
                                                                                                                         0.3

                               0.2
                                                                                                                         0.2

                               0.1
                                                                                                                         0.1


                               0.0                                                                                       0.0
                                     0           10000          20000      0             10000       20000                     0   20      40    60        80   100      0    20        40    60       80   100
                                                                  Store Count                                                                                   Chain Count



                                                         Figure 2: Product and brand availability across stores and retail chains

     Note: The graph displays the distribution of the number of stores (the two columns to the left) and chains (the two columns to the right) at which a
     product or brand is available. The median of each distribution is indicated using a vertical line. A product (brand) is classified as available if it was
     sold at least once in a store or chain in 2010. The sample includes 17,184 stores and 81 retail chains.
                                   0.161                                                           1.646
            6                                                                6
Frequency




                                                                 Frequency
            4                                                                4


            2                                                                2


            0                                                                0
                0.0      0.1          0.2       0.3                              1.0      1.5            2.0     2.5
                      Log-price SD (National)                                            95/5 ratio (National)



            8                                                          10.0
                            0.11                                                            1.36

            6                                                                7.5
Frequency




                                                           Frequency




            4                                                                5.0


            2                                                                2.5


            0                                                                0.0
                0.0      0.1         0.2        0.3                                1.0      1.5           2.0     2.5
                       Log-price SD (DMA)                                                   95/5 ratio (DMA)




            8              0.099                                                         1.294
                                                                             9
            6
Frequency




                                                                 Frequency




                                                                             6
            4

            2                                                                3


            0                                                                0
                0.0      0.1          0.2       0.3                              1.0      1.5            2.0     2.5
                       Log-price SD (ZIP+3)                                               95/5 ratio (ZIP+3)



                              Figure 3: Price dispersion statistics: UPC prices




                                                      56
                8
                                         0.175                                                           1.728
                                                                                 6
                6
    Frequency




                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                 4
                4

                2                                                                2


                0                                                                0
                    0.0      0.1          0.2       0.3                              1.0      1.5            2.0     2.5
                          Log-price SD (National)                                            95/5 ratio (National)



                8                   0.138                                                          1.508
                                                                             7.5
                6
    Frequency




                                                                 Frequency



                                                                             5.0
                4

                2                                                            2.5


                0                                                            0.0
                    0.0      0.1         0.2        0.3                                1.0     1.5           2.0     2.5
                           Log-price SD (DMA)                                                  95/5 ratio (DMA)



                                                                           10.0
                                   0.129                                                         1.433
            7.5
                                                                                 7.5
Frequency




                                                               Frequency




            5.0
                                                                                 5.0

            2.5                                                                  2.5


            0.0                                                                  0.0
                    0.0      0.1          0.2       0.3                                1.0     1.5            2.0     2.5
                           Log-price SD (ZIP+3)                                                95/5 ratio (ZIP+3)



                              Figure 4: Price dispersion statistics: Brand-level prices




                                                          57
                                        0.133                                                           1.516
              7.5
                                                                                 7.5
  Frequency




                                                                    Frequency
              5.0                                                                5.0

              2.5                                                                2.5


              0.0                                                                0.0
                        0.0      0.1          0.2       0.3                            1.0       1.5            2.0     2.5
                              Log-price SD (National)                                           95/5 ratio (National)




                                0.088                                            12           1.276
                  9
      Frequency




                                                                     Frequency


                                                                                  8
                  6

                                                                                  4
                  3


                  0                                                               0
                      0.0       0.1         0.2         0.3                            1.0          1.5           2.0   2.5
                              Log-price SD (DMA)                                                    95/5 ratio (DMA)



            10.0                                                                 15
                                0.078                                                        1.22

                  7.5
Frequency




                                                                     Frequency




                                                                                 10

                  5.0
                                                                                  5
                  2.5

                  0.0                                                             0
                        0.0      0.1          0.2        0.3                           1.0      1.5            2.0      2.5
                               Log-price SD (ZIP+3)                                             95/5 ratio (ZIP+3)



                              Figure 5: Base prices dispersion statistics: UPC base prices




                                                               58
                8
                                          0.162                                                      1.654
                                                                            7.5
                6
    Frequency




                                                                Frequency
                                                                            5.0
                4


                2                                                           2.5


                0                                                           0.0
                    0.0       0.1          0.2       0.3                            1.0    1.5            2.0     2.5
                           Log-price SD (National)                                        95/5 ratio (National)




                                    0.126                                                     1.46
            7.5
                                                                            7.5
Frequency




                                                                Frequency



            5.0                                                             5.0


            2.5                                                             2.5


            0.0                                                             0.0
                    0.0        0.1         0.2       0.3                            1.0    1.5           2.0      2.5
                             Log-price SD (DMA)                                            95/5 ratio (DMA)




                8                 0.118                                                   1.389
                                                                                9
                6
    Frequency




                                                                    Frequency




                                                                                6
                4

                                                                                3
                2

                0                                                               0
                    0.0       0.1          0.2       0.3                            1.0   1.5            2.0      2.5
                            Log-price SD (ZIP+3)                                          95/5 ratio (ZIP+3)



                          Figure 6: Base prices dispersion statistics: Brand-level base prices




                                                           59
                                        0.176

                 0.075
     Frequency




                 0.050



                 0.025



                 0.000
                          0.0   0.1     0.2     0.3    0.4   0.5     0.6     0.7   0.8
                                        Percentage price discount
                                         0.147                                                                                    0.314

                 0.075
                                                                                                      0.04
     Frequency




                                                                                          Frequency
                 0.050


                                                                                                      0.02
                 0.025



                 0.000                                                                                0.00
                          0.0     0.1         0.2      0.3     0.4         0.5     0.6                       0.0   0.1   0.2    0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8
                                          Promotion frequency                                                      95-5 promotion frequency difference
                                               0.195                                                                     0.18
                                                                                                      0.15


                 0.09

                                                                                                      0.10
     Frequency




                                                                                          Frequency




                 0.06


                                                                                                      0.05
                 0.03



                 0.00                                                                                 0.00
                         0.0     0.1          0.2      0.3    0.4          0.5     0.6                       0.0   0.1   0.2    0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8
                                              Promotion depth                                                        95-5 promotion depth difference


Figure 7: Promotion depth, frequency, and differences in promotion depth and frequency across
stores
Note: The top-left panel displays the distribution of the percentage price discounts, jst , pooled across all products
j, stores s, and weeks t when the price is strictly less than the base price, pjst < bjst . The middle and bottom-left
panels display the weighted distribution of promotion frequency and promotion depth across products, j . Here,
promotion depth is measured conditional on the product being promoted at a 5 percent promotion threshold.
The middle and bottom-right panels summarize across-store differences in promotion frequency and promotion
depth for all products. In particular, for each product j the differences are based on the 95th and 5th percentile
of promotion frequency and promotion depth across all stores where the product is sold.




                                                                                         60
                                    0.287                                                                                  0.541

                0.09
                                                                                    0.09
    Frequency




                                                                        Frequency
                0.06                                                                0.06



                0.03                                                                0.03



                0.00                                                                0.00
                       0.0    0.2       0.4      0.6       0.8   1.0                       0.0     0.2          0.4         0.6         0.8   1.0
                             Percentage volume on promotion                                       95-5 promoted volume difference
                                    3.043                                                                    5.531
                0.15                                                                0.12




                                                                                    0.08
    Frequency




                                                                        Frequency




                0.10




                0.05                                                                0.04




                0.00                                                                0.00
                       0      2         4         6        8     10                        0             5            10           15         20
                                    Promotion multiplier                                         95-5 Promotion multiplier difference


Figure 8: Promotion volume and multiplier, and differences in volume and multipliers across
stores




                                                                       61
                                 ZIP3                               Chain                                ZIP3*Chain
            0.3             0.465                                       0.699                                         0.881



            0.2




                                                                                                                                     Price
            0.1




            0.0

            0.3          0.361                                         0.632                                          0.8




                                                                                                                                     Promotion Frequency
            0.2
Frequency




            0.1




            0.0

            0.3           0.38                                      0.589                                          0.807




                                                                                                                                     Promotion Depth
            0.2




            0.1




            0.0
                  0.00   0.25    0.50   0.75   1.00 0.00   0.25      0.50      0.75   1.00 0.00   0.25      0.50      0.75    1.00
                                                                  R-squared


Figure 9: Percentage of variance of prices, promotion frequency, and promotion depth explained
by market and chain factors




                                                                  62
                                                1.0

                                                0.9
         Variance explained (percentage)




                                                0.8

                                                0.7

                                                0.6

                                                0.5

                                                0.4

                                                0.3
                                                      0.2
                                                0.2
                                                            0.12
                                                                   0.08
                                                0.1                       0.06   0.05   0.04   0.03   0.03   0.02   0.02   0.02   0.02   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01
                                                0.0

                                                1.0

                                                0.9
         Cum. variance explained (percentage)




                                                                                                                                                                                   0.8    0.81
                                                                                                                                                                     0.78   0.79
                                                0.8                                                                                             0.75   0.76   0.77
                                                                                                                                  0.72   0.73
                                                                                                                           0.7
                                                                                                                    0.68
                                                0.7                                                          0.66
                                                                                                      0.64
                                                                                               0.61
                                                0.6                                     0.58
                                                                                 0.53
                                                                          0.48
                                                0.5
                                                                   0.42
                                                0.4
                                                            0.33
                                                0.3
                                                      0.2
                                                0.2

                                                0.1

                                                0.0
                                                      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17     18     19     20
                                                                                                        Principal Component


Figure 10: Percentage and cumulate percentage of price variance explained by principal compo-
nent




                                                                                                                  63
                           10                                          10




                            0                                           0




                          -10                                         -10




                          -20                                         -20



                                 -20      -10      0        10                -20      -10      0        10

                           10                                          10
Pricincipal component 2




                            0                                           0




                          -10                                         -10




                          -20                                         -20



                                 -20      -10      0        10                -20      -10      0        10

                           10                                          10




                            0                                           0




                          -10                                         -10




                          -20                                         -20



                                 -20      -10      0        10                -20      -10      0        10
                                                        Pricincipal component 1

                                Figure 11: Projected store-level price vectors colored by retail chain


                                                                 64
                           10                                       10




                            0                                        0




                          -10                                      -10




                          -20                                      -20



                                -20    -10       0       10               -20     -10      0     10

                           10                                       10
Pricincipal component 2




                            0                                        0




                          -10                                      -10




                          -20                                      -20



                                -20    -10       0       10               -20     -10      0     10

                           10                                       10




                            0                                        0




                          -10                                      -10




                          -20                                      -20



                                -20    -10       0       10               -20     -10      0     10
                                                     Pricincipal component 1

                                 Figure 12: Projected store-level price vectors colored by DMA


                                                              65
                                 DMA                                                               Chain



10                                                                10




 5                                                                 5




                                                                                                                                      Pepsi R
 0                                                                 0




-5                                                                -5
               -10          -5             0        5                            -10          -5               0        5

 30                                                                30


 20                                                                20


 10                                                                10




                                                                                                                                      Prilosec
     0                                                                 0


-10                                                               -10


-20                                                               -20



                     -20               0                20                             -20                 0                20
 20                                                                20




 10                                                                10
                                                                                                                                      Milk




     0                                                                 0




-10                                                               -10




         -20          -10          0           10            20            -20          -10            0           10            20


         Figure 13: Projected store-level price vectors colored by retail chain and DMA


                                                                  66
                                                           DMA                              Chain                              Chain/DMA
                                                  0.291                                             0.844                                  0.913
                                     300


                                     200




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                     100


                                      0

                                                  0.306                                           0.777                                  0.871
                                     300


                                     200




                                                                                                                                                          2
                                     100


                                       0

                                                  0.293                                          0.758                                   0.855
                                     300
      Count of principal component




                                     200




                                                                                                                                                          3
                                     100


                                       0

                                              0.278                                              0.718                                    0.83
                                     300


                                     200




                                                                                                                                                          4
                                     100


                                       0

                                              0.256                                           0.688                                     0.798
                                     300


                                     200
                                                                                                                                                          5



                                     100


                                       0

                                              0.264                                          0.666                                      0.787
                                     300


                                     200
                                                                                                                                                          6




                                     100


                                       0
                                           0.00     0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00 0.00   0.25    0.50    0.75   1.00 0.00   0.25     0.50      0.75    1.00
                                                                                        R-squared


Figure 14: Percentage of projected price variance (R2 ) explained by DMA, chain, and chain-DMA
fixed effects



                                                                                            67
            0.4                                                                         0.4
                                        0.41                                                                                 0.548

            0.3                                                                         0.3
Frequency




                                                                            Frequency
            0.2                                                                         0.2


            0.1                                                                         0.1


            0.0                                                                         0.0
                  0.0       0.2     0.4      0.6       0.8     1.0                            0.0    0.2     0.4       0.6     0.8      1.0
                         Promo percentage (all). % zero: 62.18                                 Promo percentage (top 1,000). % zero: 55.06

            0.4                                                                         0.4
                              0.2                                                                            0.279

            0.3                                                                         0.3
Frequency




                                                                            Frequency
            0.2                                                                         0.2


            0.1                                                                         0.1


            0.0                                                                         0.0
                  0.00        0.25       0.50        0.75       1.00                          0.00       0.25        0.50      0.75       1.00
                             Simulated (all). % zero: 28.27                                          Simulated (top 1,000). % zero: 22.45

            0.6                                                                         0.6
                                                       0.901                                                                         0.957


            0.4                                                                         0.4
Frequency




                                                                            Frequency




            0.2                                                                         0.2



            0.0                                                                         0.0
                  0.0       0.2     0.4     0.6      0.8        1.0                           0.0    0.2     0.4      0.6       0.8     1.0
                          Promo percentage, store-level (all)                                   Promo percentage, store-level (top 1,000)

            0.6                                                                         0.6
                                     0.333                                                                           0.416


            0.4                                                                         0.4
Frequency




                                                                            Frequency




            0.2                                                                         0.2



            0.0                                                                         0.0
                  0.00        0.25       0.50        0.75       1.00                          0.00       0.25      0.50       0.75           1.00
                                     Simulated (all)                                                       Simulated (top 1,000)


                                                                       1
                              Figure 15: Distribution of chain/DMA promotion percentages




                                                                       68
               0.6                                                                    0.6
                                              0                                                                    -0.002


               0.4                                                                    0.4
   Frequency




                                                                          Frequency
               0.2                                                                    0.2



               0.0                                                                    0.0
                     -1.0      -0.5       0.0         0.5      1.0                          -1.0      -0.5       0.0          0.5       1.0
                                   Intercept (market)                                                    Intercept (national)

               0.4                                                                    0.4
                                              1.005                                                                 1.017

               0.3                                                                    0.3
   Frequency




                                                                          Frequency
               0.2                                                                    0.2


               0.1                                                                    0.1


               0.0                                                                    0.0
                     0.0        0.5        1.0       1.5       2.0                          0.0         0.5       1.0        1.5        2.0
                               Inside percentage (market)                                             Inside percentage (national)

               0.4                                                                    0.4
                                              -0.001                                                                0

               0.3                                                                    0.3
   Frequency




                                                                          Frequency




               0.2                                                                    0.2


               0.1                                                                    0.1


               0.0                                                                    0.0
                     -1.0      -0.5       0.0       0.5        1.0                          -1.0      -0.5       0.0        0.5         1.0
                              Outside percentage (market)                                            Outside percentage (national)

               0.3                                                                    0.3
                                      0.082                                                                       0.363


               0.2                                                                    0.2
   Frequency




                                                                          Frequency




               0.1                                                                    0.1



               0.0                                                                    0.0
                     -1             0             1            2                            -1              0             1             2
                            Outside percentage only (market)                                       Outside percentage only (national)
                                                                     1


Figure 16: Regression results: Promotion incidence and inside and outside promotion percentages




                                                                     69
                                   ZIP3                               Chain                               ZIP3*Chain
                            0.465                                         0.699                                        0.881

            0.3




            0.2




                                                                                                                                       Price
            0.1
Frequency




            0.0

                                0.494                                     0.722                                         0.906

            0.3




                                                                                                                                       Base Price
            0.2




            0.1




            0.0
                  0.00   0.25      0.50   0.75   1.00 0.00   0.25      0.50     0.75   1.00 0.00   0.25      0.50      0.75     1.00
                                                                    R-squared


Figure 17: Percentage of variance of prices and base prices explained by market and chain factors




                                                                     70
            0.06                                  -1.93




            0.04
Frequency




                                                                                 Significant
                                                                                     No
                                                                                     Yes
            0.02




            0.00

                   -6   -5    -4      -3        -2         -1      0     1   2
                                     Own-price elasticity (OLS)
                                                  -1.97


            0.06
Frequency




            0.04                                                                 Significant
                                                                                     No
                                                                                     Yes


            0.02




            0.00

                   -6   -5    -4      -3        -2         -1      0     1   2
                                    Own-price elasticity (Bayes)


                             Figure 18: Own-price elasticity estimates




                                                     71
                                            -1.767                           0.06                        -1.924



            0.04                                                             0.04



                                                                 Frequency
Frequency




            0.02                                                             0.02




            0.00                                                             0.00
                   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2     -1     0   1   2                      -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0   1   2   Significant
                              No time fixed effects                                                ZIP+3/Quarter
                                                                                                                                   No
            0.06                        -1.93                                0.06                         -1.859                   Yes




            0.04                                                             0.04
Frequency




                                                                 Frequency




            0.02                                                             0.02




            0.00                                                             0.00
                   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2     -1     0   1   2                      -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0   1   2
                                  ZIP+3/Month                                                      ZIP+3/Week


                    Figure 19: Own-price elasticity estimates for different fixed effects definitions




                                                                             72
                                                0.153                                                       0.067


            0.09
                                                                                      0.10
Frequency




                                                                          Frequency
            0.06

                                                                                      0.05
            0.03



            0.00                                                                      0.00
                   -4           -2          0             2         4                        -2            0            2
                                                                                                                               Significant
                              Price elasticity (competitor 1)                                Price elasticity (competitor 2)
                                                                                                                                   No
                               0.178                                                                                               Yes
            0.15
Frequency




            0.10




            0.05




            0.00
                        0.0          0.5   1.0      1.5       2.0   2.5
                                 Promotion effect (own)


                                            Figure 20: Demand model parameter estimates




                                                                                      73
                                   ZIP3                                   Chain                               Chain/ZIP3
                          0.146                                 0.172                                             0.473
             0.3




             0.2




                                                                                                                                         OLS
             0.1
 Frequency




             0.0

                           0.207                                  0.235                                            0.523
             0.3




             0.2




                                                                                                                                         Bayes
             0.1




             0.0
                   0.00    0.25    0.50   0.75   1.00 0.00       0.25      0.50   0.75     1.00 0.00   0.25      0.50      0.75   1.00
                                                             R-squared, price elasticity

                                   ZIP3                                   Chain                               Chain/ZIP3
                          0.145                                    0.263                                            0.551

             0.3



             0.2




                                                                                                                                         OLS
             0.1
 Frequency




             0.0

                           0.193                                    0.305                                               0.564

             0.3
                                                                                                                                         Bayes




             0.2



             0.1



             0.0
                   0.00    0.25    0.50   0.75   1.00 0.00       0.25      0.50   0.75     1.00 0.00   0.25      0.50      0.75   1.00
                                                             R-squared, promotion effect


Figure 21: Percentage of variance of own-price elasticities and own-promotion effects explained
by market and chain factors


                                                                        74
                                    ZIP3                                     Chain                                    Chain/ZIP3
             0.25
                            0.207                                    0.235                                                  0.523

             0.20




                                                                                                                                                   Bayes (national prior)
             0.15


             0.10


             0.05
 Frequency




             0.00
             0.25
                            0.209                                                 0.51                                              0.705

             0.20




                                                                                                                                                   Bayes (chain-level prior)
             0.15


             0.10


             0.05


             0.00
                    0.00    0.25     0.50   0.75   1.00 0.00       0.25       0.50          0.75   1.00 0.00   0.25      0.50      0.75     1.00
                                                                R-squared, price elasticity

                                    ZIP3                                     Chain                                    Chain/ZIP3
                           0.193                                          0.305                                                 0.564
             0.3




                                                                                                                                                   Bayes (national prior)
             0.2




             0.1
 Frequency




             0.0

                           0.185                                                     0.56                                           0.735
             0.3
                                                                                                                                                   Bayes (chain-level prior)




             0.2




             0.1




             0.0
                   0.00    0.25     0.50    0.75   1.00 0.00       0.25       0.50          0.75   1.00 0.00   0.25      0.50      0.75     1.00
                                                               R-squared, promotion effect


Figure 22: Percentage of variance of own-price elasticities and own-promotion effects explained
by market and chain factors: Chain level vs. national priors


                                                                             75
                                                                    Price elasticities
                                       95% CI                                90% CI                               80% CI

                              0.075                                 0.124                                 0.212
                 0.4



                 0.3




                                                                                                                                         All Brands
                 0.2



                 0.1
     Frequency




                 0.0

                               0.116                                 0.177                                  0.284
                 0.4



                 0.3




                                                                                                                                         Top 250 Brands
                 0.2



                 0.1



                 0.0
                       0.00     0.25    0.50    0.75   1.00 0.00     0.25     0.50    0.75   1.00 0.00   0.25      0.50    0.75   1.00



                                                                   Promotion effects
                                       95% CI                                90% CI                               80% CI

                              0.084                                 0.143                                  0.25
                 0.3




                                                                                                                                         All Brands
                 0.2




                 0.1
     Frequency




                 0.0

                              0.093                                  0.156                                  0.263
                 0.3
                                                                                                                                         Top 250 Brands




                 0.2




                 0.1




                 0.0
                       0.00     0.25    0.50    0.75   1.00 0.00     0.25     0.50    0.75   1.00 0.00   0.25      0.50    0.75   1.00




Figure 23: Percentage of estimated price elasticities and promotion effects different from mar-
ket/retail chain level mean

                                                                             76
Appendix
A     Derivation of price variance decompositions
All decompositions are performed at the product level, hence we drop the subscript j. M is the
set of all markets, Sm is the set of all stores in market m  M, and S = mM Sm is the set
of all stores. For each store s we observe prices in periods t  Ts . Correspondingly, Sm is the
number of stores in market m, S = mM Sm is the number of all stores, and Ns is the number
of observations for stores s. Then the total number of observations is N = sS Ns , and the
number of observations in market m is Nm = sSm Ns .

Define the overall (national) average price, the average price in market m, and the average price
in stores s:
                                               1
                                       p
                                       ¯=                     pst ,
                                               N
                                                    sS tTs
                                           1
                                     p
                                     ¯m =                         pst ,
                                          Nm
                                                     sSm tTs
                                               1
                                      p
                                      ¯s =                pst .
                                               Ns
                                                    tTs

Similarly, define the average base price in market m and the average base price in store s :

                                     ¯     1
                                     bm =                         bst ,
                                          Nm
                                                     sSm tTs

                                      ¯    1
                                      bs =                bst .
                                           Ns
                                                    tTs

Our goal is to provide a decomposition for the overall variance of prices,


                                           1
                             var(pst ) =                                     ¯)2 .
                                                                      (pst - p
                                           N
                                               mM sSm tTs


A.1      Basic decomposition
Define
                                               1
                                var(¯
                                    pm ) =                          ¯)2 ,
                                                               pm - p
                                                           Nm (¯
                                               N
                                                    mM
                                            1
                                  ps |m) =
                              var(¯                                  ¯m )2 ,
                                                                ps - p
                                                            Ns (¯
                                           Nm
                                                     sSm
                                            1
                              var(pst |s) =                      ¯s )2 .
                                                          (pst - p
                                            Ns
                                                    tTs



                                                     77
var(pm ) is the variance of average market-level prices across markets, var(¯   ps |m) is the within-
market variance of average store-level prices, and var(pst |s) is the within-store variance of prices
over time. Note that var(pm ) and var(¯   ps |m) are calculated as weighted averages, using the
number of observations in each market and the number of observations for each store as weights.

We first decompose the overall variance of prices, var(pst ), into an across-market and a within-
market term:
                            1
              var(pst ) =                             ¯)2
                                               (pst - p
                            N
                                mM sSm tTs
                         1
                       =                       (pst - p         ¯)2
                                                           ¯m - p
                                                      ¯m + p
                         N
                                mM sSm tTs
                         1                                      1
                       =                              ¯m )2 +
                                               (pst - p                                      ¯)2
                                                                                        pm - p
                                                                                       (¯
                         N                                      N
                                mM sSm tTs                          mM sSm tTs
                                    1
                       = var(¯
                             pm ) +                                ¯m )2 .
                                                            (pst - p                                  (5)
                                    N
                                          mM sSm tTs

Note that the third line in this formula follows because

                            (pst - p    pm - p
                                   ¯m )(¯    ¯) =            pm - p
                                                            (¯    ¯)               (pst - p
                                                                                          ¯m ) = 0.
           mM sSm tTs                                 mM                sSm tTs

To further decompose the within-market term, note that

                                   ¯m )2 =
                            (pst - p                   (pst - p         ¯m )2
                                                                   ¯s - p
                                                              ¯s + p
                sSm tTs                      sSm tTs

                                        =                     ¯s )2 +
                                                       (pst - p                          ¯m )2
                                                                                    ps - p
                                                                                   (¯
                                             sSm tTs                    sSm tTs

                                        =          Ns var(pst |s) + Nm var(¯
                                                                           ps |m).                    (6)
                                             sSm

Here, to derive the second line we used

                            (pst - p    ps - p
                                   ¯s )(¯    ¯m ) =          ps - p
                                                            (¯    ¯m )         (pst - p
                                                                                      ¯s ) = 0.
                 sSm tTs                              sSm                tTs

Substituting equation (6) in (5), we obtain the desired decomposition of the overall price vari-
ance into the variance of average market-level prices, the weighted average of the within-market
variances of average store-level prices, and the weighted average of the within-store variances of




                                                      78
prices:

                                        1
              var(pst ) = var(¯
                              pm ) +                                 ¯m )2
                                                              (pst - p
                                        N
                                            mM sSm tTs
                                     1                                1
                        = var(¯
                              pm ) +                     ps |m) +
                                                  Nm var(¯                              Ns var(pst |s)
                                     N                                N
                                            mM                            mM sSm
                                     1                            1
                        = var(¯
                              pm ) +                     ps |m) +
                                                  Nm var(¯                      Ns var(pst |s).                    (7)
                                     N                            N
                                            mM                            sS


A.2       Decomposition into base price and promotion components
We start with an alternative decomposition of the within-market term (6):

                  ¯m )2 =
           (pst - p                                      ¯m )2
                                      (pst - bst + bst - p
sSm tTs                     sSm tTs

                       =              (pst - bst )2 +                    ¯m )2 + 2
                                                                  (bst - p                        (pst - bst )(bst - p
                                                                                                                     ¯m ).
                            sSm tTs                     sSm tTs                      sSm tTs
                                                                                                                   (8)

Note that

                           ¯m )2 =
                    (bst - p                   (bst - ¯
                                                      bm + ¯    ¯m )2
                                                           bm - p
          sSm tTs                    sSm tTs

                                =              (bst - ¯
                                                      bm )2 + Nm (¯    ¯m )2
                                                                  bm - p
                                     sSm tTs

                                =              (bst - ¯
                                                      bs + ¯
                                                           bs - ¯
                                                                bm )2 + Nm (¯    ¯m )2
                                                                            bm - p
                                     sSm tTs

                                =              (bst - ¯
                                                      bs )2 +             bs - ¯
                                                                      Ns (¯    bm )2 + Nm (¯    ¯m )2
                                                                                           bm - p
                                     sSm tTs                    sSm

                                =          Ns var(bst |s) + Nm var(¯
                                                                   bs |m) + Nm (¯    ¯m )2 .
                                                                                bm - p                             (9)
                                     sSm

Substituting equation (9) in (8) and rearranging terms, we obtain

                                      ¯m )2 = Nm var(¯
                               (pst - p              bs |m) +                Ns var(bst |s)
                     sSm tTs                                          sSm

                                             + Nm (¯    ¯m )2 +
                                                   bm - p                         (bst - pst )2
                                                                      sSm tTs

                                             -2               (bst - pst )(bst - p
                                                                                 ¯m ).                            (10)
                                                  sSm tTs




                                                         79
Define
                                           1                                             2
                    var(bst - pst |m) =                     (bst - pst ) - (¯
                                                                            bm - p
                                                                                 ¯m )
                                          Nm
                                               sSm tTs
                                          1
                                       =                   (bst - pst )2 - (¯    ¯m )2 .
                                                                            bm - p                     (11)
                                         Nm
                                               sSm tTs

Rearranging (11) and substituting in equation (10), we obtain

                                    ¯m )2 = Nm var(¯
                             (pst - p              bs |m) +             Ns var(bst |s)
                  sSm tTs                                         sSm

                                          + Nm var(bst - pst |m) + 2Nm (¯    ¯m )2
                                                                        bm - p
                                          -2              (bst - pst )(bst - p
                                                                             ¯m ).                     (12)
                                               sSm tTs

Define the within-market covariance between the promotional price discounts, bst - pst , and the
difference between the store-level base price and the average market price, bst - p
                                                                                  ¯:

                                   1
                       ¯m |m) =
 cov(bst - pst , bst - p                          (bst - pst ) - (¯
                                                                  bm - p
                                                                       ¯m )             ¯m ) - (¯
                                                                                 (bst - p       bm - p
                                                                                                     ¯m )
                                  Nm
                                       sSm tTs
                                 1
                              =                                     ¯m ) - (¯
                                                 (bst - pst )(bst - p            ¯m )2 .
                                                                            bm - p                     (13)
                                Nm
                                       sSm tTs

Rearranging and substituting (13) in equation (12), we then obtain

                            ¯m )2 = Nm var(¯
                     (pst - p              bs |m) +             Ns var(bst |s)
           sSm tTs                                        sSm

                                  + Nm var(bst - pst |m) + 2Nm (¯    ¯m )2
                                                                bm - p
                                                              ¯m |m) - 2Nm (¯
                                  - 2Nm cov(bst - pst , bst - p                  ¯m )2
                                                                            bm - p
                                   = Nm var(¯
                                            bs |m) +            Ns var(bst |s)
                                                          sSm

                                  + Nm var(bst - pst |m) - 2Nm cov(bst - pst , bst - p
                                                                                     ¯m |m).           (14)

Finally, we substitute (14) in (5) and note that cov(bst - pst , bst - p
                                                                       ¯m |m) = cov(bst - pst , bst |m)
to obtain the variance decomposition:

           var(pst ) = var(¯
                           pm )
                       1                        1
                     +          Nm var(¯
                                       bs |m) +             Ns var(bst |s)
                       N                        N
                             mM                        sS
                         1                                   1
                     +            Nm var(bst - pst |m) - 2              Nm cov(bst - pst , bst |m).    (15)
                         N                                   N
                             mM                                   mM




                                                     80
A.3      Example: Price promotions may decrease the overall price variance
Here we provide the derivation of the formula describing the price variance in the example in
Section 6.2. Define the promotion indicator Dst = I{pst < bst } (this corresponds to the promotion
definition in Section 5.2 with a threshold ¯ = 0).
    The mean price is given by:

                1                 1
      E[pst ] = E[pst |bst  ¯b] +    (1 -  )E[pst |Dst = 0, bst > ¯
                                                                  b] +  E[pst |Dst = 1, bst > ¯
                                                                                              b]
                2                 2
                1 ¯           1               
              =    b-      +     (1 -  ) ¯b+       + ¯b
                2       2     2               2
                   
              =¯b-     .
                    4
The across-store variance of base prices is given by the variance of a uniform distribution,

                                                      2
                                            var(¯
                                                bs ) = .
                                                      3
The derive the variance of the promotional price discounts we first calculate

                                         1
                       E (bst - pst )2 =  E (bst - pst )2 |Dst = 1, bst > ¯   b
                                         2
                                         1
                                       =  E (bst - ¯    b)2 |Dst = 1, bst > ¯
                                                                            b
                                         2
                                                  ¯
                                                  b+
                                         1                    1
                                       =             (x - ¯
                                                          b)2 dx
                                         2 ¯    b             
                                             2
                                       =       .
                                           6
Similarly, to derive the covariance between the promotional price discounts and the base price
we use the expression for E (bst - pst )2 above to obtain

                                          1
                E (bst - pst )(bst - ¯
                                     b) =  E (bst - pst )(bst - ¯
                                                                b)|Dst = 1, bst > ¯
                                                                                  b
                                          2
                                          1
                                        =  E (bst - ¯
                                                    b)2 |Dst = 1, bst > ¯
                                                                        b
                                          2
                                           2
                                        =     .
                                            6
Also, the squared difference between the mean base price and shelf price is:

                                                   2 2
                                          (¯ ¯)2 =
                                           b-p         .
                                                   16
Hence,

                             var(bst - pst ) = E (bst - pst )2 - (¯ ¯)2
                                                                  b-p
                                                2  2  2
                                           =     -      .
                                               6   16


                                                  81
Also,

                           cov(bst - pst , bst ) = cov(bst - pst , bst - ¯
                                                                         b)
                                                 = E (bst - pst )(bst - ¯b)
                                                    2
                                               =      .
                                                   6
Combining the three components we obtain the variance of prices,

                    var(pst ) = var(¯
                                    bs ) + var(bst - pst ) - 2cov(bst - pst , bst )
                                2  2  2  2     2
                             =   +   -     -2
                               3   6   16     6
                                  1     2
                             = 2   - -     .
                                  3 6  16




                                                   82
B       Bayesian hierarchical demand model
The approach to estimate a Bayesian hierarchical linear regression model that we use is standard
in the literature. See Rossi et al. (2005), Chapter 3.7, for a detailed exposition.
    We do not attempt to estimate the large number of 3-digit ZIP code/month fixed effects,
j (s, t). Instead, we first project all variables that enter the demand model onto the fixed effects
and then use the residuals from this projection to estimate the store-level demand parameters in
the model:

                     log(1 + qst ) = s +            ks log(pkst ) +         ks Dkst +   st ,
                                            kJs                       kJs
                                             2
                               st      N (0, s ).

st  is i.i.d. across stores and time. Note that we drop the brand index j and that we do
not distinguish between the original and the residualized data to simplify the notation. The
parameter vector s includes the store-specific intercept, s , the own and cross-price elasticities,
jks , and the promotion parameters, jks .
    The store-level demand parameters, s , are drawn from a common first-stage prior distribu-
tion:
                                        s  N (µ, V ).

These draws are independent, conditional on µ and V . We further specify the second-stage prior
distribution of V and µ:

                                           V  IW(, V ),
                                                 µ, V  A-1 ).
                                         µ|V  N (¯

                                                                 2 , are independent draws
IW denotes an inverse Wishart distribution. The error variances, s
from an inverse chi-squared distribution,
                                                          2
                                                         rs
                                                2
                                                s           .
                                                        2

Here,  denotes the degrees of freedom and rs  2 is a scale parameter.

   The MCMC algorithm to obtain the posterior distribution of the model parameters is per-
formed using Peter Rossi's bayesm package18 in R. We run the algorithm using the default settings
 18
      https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/bayesm/index.html




                                                       83
for the hyper-parameters in the bayesm package:

                                     v = 3 + n,
                                     V = In ,
                                     µ
                                     ¯ = 0,
                                     A = 0.01,
                                      = 3,
                                     2
                                    rs = var(log(1 + qst )).

Here, n is the dimension of the parameter vector s .
    We choose a chain length of 20,000 (after 2,000 initial burn-in draws) and keep every 10th
draw to calculate the posterior means and the 95 percent credible intervals of the parameters. A
visual inspection of the trace plots for a large number of randomly selected parameters (across
brands and stores) indicates convergence of the chain.




                                                84
C     Additional results
C.1    Price dispersion: Sensitivity analysis
We calculate two alternative dispersion statistics that are related to the standard deviation of
log-prices. First, the distribution of percentage price differences can be measured using the
standard deviation of prices normalized relative to the mean price (nationally or at the market
level), pjst /p
              ¯jmt , which is the approach used in Kaplan and Menzio (2015). Second, we can
report the square root of the variance of log-prices calculated using the following approach:

                                             1
                     var(log(pjst )|m) =                   (log(pjst ) - log(pjmt ))2 ,
                                            Njmt
                                                   sSjmt
                                             1
                        var(log(pjst )) =                Njmt var(log(pjst )|m).              (16)
                                            Njt
                                                  mM

Note that we do not use Bessel's correction in these two variance formulas. This approach is
equivalent to demeaning each log(pjst ) observation with respect to the average log price in market
m, and then calculating the variance over all observations. We include this approach because it
is more closely related to the variance decomposition in Section 6.
    Summary statistics for these two alternative approach are shown in Table 12, separately
for products defined as UPC's and brands. As expected the difference between the dispersion
statistics based on the standard deviation of log prices and the standard deviation of normalized
prices is negligible. On the other hand, the standard deviation calculated as the square root of
(16) is slightly larger at the DMA and 3-digit ZIP code level compared to the standard deviation
of the log of prices. Overall, our main conclusions are unchanged using these two alternative
dispersion statistics.




                                                    85
                    Table 12: Additional price and base price dispersion statistics

                                       Median   Mean                             Percentiles

                                                         0.01    0.05    0.1     0.25    0.75    0.9     0.95    0.99

Prices
Product definition: UPC

   Normalized price SD      National    0.157   0.160    0.014   0.058   0.088   0.122   0.197   0.233   0.267   0.327
                            DMA         0.107   0.112    0.006   0.031   0.049   0.076   0.142   0.181   0.205   0.258
                            ZIP+3       0.097   0.101    0.002   0.021   0.038   0.066   0.132   0.170   0.192   0.247

   Demeaned log-price SD    National    0.161   0.163    0.014   0.058   0.090   0.124   0.200   0.238   0.268   0.318
                            DMA         0.121   0.125    0.010   0.040   0.060   0.089   0.158   0.195   0.218   0.265
                            ZIP+3       0.113   0.116    0.002   0.026   0.048   0.080   0.151   0.187   0.209   0.257


Product definition: Brand

   Normalized price SD      National    0.174   0.187    0.073   0.097   0.115   0.140   0.217   0.263   0.330   0.450
                            DMA         0.135   0.145    0.045   0.066   0.082   0.104   0.173   0.216   0.251   0.388
                            ZIP+3       0.127   0.135    0.035   0.059   0.071   0.096   0.162   0.203   0.237   0.362

   Demeaned log-price SD    National    0.175   0.185    0.074   0.098   0.114   0.141   0.216   0.260   0.319   0.427
                            DMA         0.146   0.154    0.055   0.073   0.092   0.114   0.181   0.223   0.261   0.364
                            ZIP+3       0.139   0.145    0.044   0.067   0.081   0.107   0.172   0.209   0.244   0.332




                                                        86
                               Table 13: Details of price variance decompositions

                                        Median     Mean      %>0                                    Percentiles

                                                                          1%       5%      10%      25%      75%      90%      95%      99%


UPC's
Basic decomposition

Across-market                             0.269     0.327                0.009    0.068    0.100    0.164    0.444    0.662    0.774    0.980
Across-store                              0.251     0.270                0.000    0.028    0.076    0.158    0.373    0.486    0.557    0.670
Within-store                              0.396     0.403                0.000    0.033    0.075    0.214    0.578    0.719    0.802    0.977


Decomposition into base prices and promotions

Across-market                             0.269     0.327                0.009    0.068    0.100    0.164    0.444    0.662    0.774    0.980
Across-store mean base price variance     0.303     0.313                0.000    0.028    0.084    0.182    0.432    0.545    0.612    0.760
Within-store base price variance          0.096     0.123                0.000    0.008    0.022    0.051    0.160    0.244    0.323    0.622
Total contribution of promotions          0.188     0.237       0.964    -0.096   0.000    0.007    0.070    0.359    0.537    0.653    0.938

Promotional price discounts               0.329     0.360                0.000    0.005    0.029    0.143    0.546    0.735    0.828    0.975
EDLP vs. Hi-Lo adjustment                -0.084     -0.123      0.103    -0.772   -0.375   -0.286   -0.183   -0.017   0.000    0.004    0.040


Covariance between price discounts and store base price level

                                          0.042     0.062       0.920    -0.020   -0.002   0.000    0.009    0.091    0.143    0.188    0.386


Brands
Basic decomposition

Across-market                             0.242     0.297                0.066    0.107    0.133    0.175    0.372    0.564    0.674    0.794
Across-store                              0.420     0.423                0.052    0.157    0.201    0.291    0.555    0.652    0.710    0.793
Within-store                              0.251     0.280                0.020    0.043    0.062    0.139    0.394    0.528    0.616    0.776


Decomposition into base prices and promotions

Across-market                             0.242     0.297                0.066    0.107    0.133    0.175    0.372    0.564    0.674    0.794
Across-store mean base price variance     0.513     0.499                0.053    0.167    0.234    0.351    0.642    0.752    0.812    0.881
Within-store base price variance          0.094     0.134                0.008    0.023    0.033    0.053    0.159    0.272    0.328    0.755
Total contribution of promotions          0.059     0.070       0.692    -0.613   -0.255   -0.101   -0.012   0.174    0.312    0.411    0.635

Promotional price discounts               0.242     0.299                0.006    0.027    0.053    0.126    0.426    0.621    0.722    0.990
EDLP vs. Hi-Lo adjustment                -0.151     -0.229      0.028    -1.466   -0.785   -0.457   -0.260   -0.067   -0.021   -0.008   0.017


Covariance between price discounts and store base price level

                                          0.076     0.115       0.974    -0.008   0.004    0.010    0.033    0.130    0.229    0.393    0.733




                                                                    87
Table 14: Percentage of variance of prices, promotion frequency, and promotion depth explained
by market and chain factors

                   Median      Mean                            Percentiles

                                       0.01    0.05    0.1     0.25    0.75    0.9     0.95    0.99


 Price

 Market (ZIP+3)        0.465   0.490   0.198   0.241   0.266   0.341   0.620   0.757   0.820   0.932
 Chain                 0.699   0.652   0.001   0.299   0.410   0.573   0.774   0.826   0.855   0.917
 Market/chain          0.881   0.845   0.374   0.589   0.707   0.812   0.921   0.946   0.957   0.978


 Promotion frequency

 Market (ZIP+3)        0.361   0.389   0.125   0.182   0.211   0.270   0.477   0.611   0.708   0.879
 Chain                 0.632   0.587   0.000   0.019   0.177   0.444   0.747   0.822   0.856   0.910
 Market/chain          0.800   0.759   0.287   0.443   0.541   0.688   0.873   0.910   0.929   0.963


 Promotion depth

 Market (ZIP+3)        0.380   0.407   0.148   0.191   0.215   0.279   0.505   0.649   0.753   0.965
 Chain                 0.589   0.562   0.000   0.005   0.177   0.402   0.724   0.804   0.840   0.894
 Market/chain          0.807   0.772   0.305   0.483   0.589   0.711   0.875   0.913   0.930   0.980




                                                88
Table 15: Percentage of variance in estimated own-price elasticities and own-promotion effects
explained by market and chain factors

                      Median      Mean                            Percentiles

                                          0.01    0.05    0.1     0.25    0.75    0.9     0.95    0.99


 OLS estimates
   Own-price elasticity

   Market (ZIP+3)         0.146   0.163   0.047   0.072   0.082   0.108   0.197   0.263   0.311   0.476
   Chain                  0.172   0.195   0.016   0.042   0.068   0.110   0.250   0.353   0.412   0.601
   Market/chain           0.473   0.486   0.186   0.292   0.341   0.394   0.563   0.668   0.732   0.827


   Own-promotion effect

   Market (ZIP+3)         0.145   0.170   0.057   0.077   0.089   0.111   0.198   0.283   0.346   0.519
   Chain                  0.263   0.297   0.013   0.067   0.087   0.158   0.409   0.564   0.653   0.772
   Market/chain           0.551   0.558   0.209   0.338   0.381   0.455   0.659   0.749   0.807   0.876


 Bayesian hierarchical model estimates
   Own-price elasticity

   Market (ZIP+3)         0.207   0.224   0.082   0.106   0.124   0.158   0.269   0.340   0.400   0.563
   Chain                  0.235   0.252   0.039   0.072   0.099   0.161   0.334   0.421   0.479   0.563
   Market/chain           0.523   0.520   0.239   0.323   0.356   0.424   0.608   0.681   0.724   0.793


   Own-promotion effect

   Market (ZIP+3)         0.193   0.217   0.087   0.109   0.126   0.157   0.247   0.328   0.407   0.597
   Chain                  0.305   0.332   0.044   0.087   0.130   0.202   0.439   0.568   0.657   0.773
   Market/chain           0.564   0.567   0.250   0.347   0.392   0.471   0.667   0.744   0.801   0.867




                                                  89
            Figure 24: Predicted base prices, Tide liquid laundry detergent (70 oz)
                                                                                                                                                    qqq qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                                       qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq qqqq                                                                   qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                q                                                                      qq

        8                                                                   qqqqqqqqqqqqqqq                                                                                       qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq


                     q
                         qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
Price



        7      qqq qq                                                               q q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
        6          q                           q          q      q   q q                  q        q         q                q                     q qqq                                                                                            q



                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q


        5                            q



             2008                                                                   2009                                                                     2010                                                                  2011                                                                 2012
                                                                                                                                                            Date
                                                                                                                                          qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                                       qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq                                                          qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                           q                                                      qq
        8                                                                   qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq                                                                                   qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq


               qqqqqqq
                      qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
Price




        7      qqq qq                                                               q q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
        6          q                           q          q      q   q q                  q        q         q                q                     q qqq                                                                                            q



                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q


        5                            q



             2008                                                                   2009                                                                     2010                                                                  2011                                                                 2012
                                                                                                                                                            Date




                   Figure 25: Predicted base prices, Kellogg's Raisin Bran (20 oz)
                                                          qqqq       qqqq                                                                                                                                                                        qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q qqq qqq
                            q       q q                                                                                                                                                                q         qqq                                                                   qqq      qqqqq       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
        4                                              q
                                                                            qq qqqq q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                          qq q q                   qq       qqqqqqqq         qq       qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q q
Price




                         q                                                                    q        qq qqqqqq
               q
                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                    q       q q        q                 q
                   q             q                                                                                             q                                                                                                                         q
                                                              qq q                                                           q                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q             q                                 q            q                                       q
        3            qq
                       qq
                                                  q
                                                                qq
                                                                            q   q    q
                                                                                          q                           q                qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                   qq                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                   q q                 q           q                                               q                         q                             q        q
                                                      q                                   q                                                    q                                                 q                             q
                q                                                                     q                  q              q                                                                                          q                                                  q                                       q
                 q                        q                                                                                                                                             q                                              q             q                        q
                                                                        q       q                                                  q                    q                                        q                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                        q                                      q                                  q                                                         q                        q
                                          q                                                                                                                             q
                                     q                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                              q
                             q                qq                                                                  q                                                q        q
                                      q                                                                                            q                                q        q q             q       qq
                                                                                                   q             q                                                                       q                                                           q
                                              q
                                                   q                                                                                                                       q q                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q           qq
        2                       q                                                                 qq                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                               q



             2008                                                                   2009                                                                     2010                                                                  2011                                                                 2012
                                                                                                                                                            Date
                                                          qqqqqqqqqqqqqqq                                                                                                                                                                        qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqqqq
               qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq                                                                                                                                                              qqqqqqqqqqq                                                                     qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                              qqq
        4                                              q
                                                                            qqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                          qqqq   qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
Price




                         q                                                                    qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
               q
                                                                                                              q                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                               qqq q q                 q                 q
                   q             q                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                  q
                                                              qq q                                                           q                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q             q                                 q            q                                       q
        3            qq
                       qq
                                                  q
                                                                qq
                                                                            q   q    q
                                                                                          q                           q                qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                   qq                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                   q q                 q           q                                               q                         q                             q        q
                                                      q                                   q                                                    q                                                 q                             q
                q                                                                     q                  q              q                                                                                          q                                                  q                                       q
                 q                        q                                                                                                                                             q                                              q             q                        q
                                                                        q       q                                                  q                    q                                        q                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                        q                                      q                                  q                                                         q                        q
                                          q                                                                                                                             q
                                     q                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                              q
                             q                qq                                                                  q                                                q        q
                                      q                                                                                            q                                q        q q             q       qq
                                                                                                   q             q                                                                       q                                                           q
                                              q
                                                   q                                                                                                                       q q                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q           qq
        2                       q                                                                 qq                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                               q



             2008                                                                   2009                                                                     2010                                                                  2011                                                                 2012
                                                                                                                                                            Date




                                                                                                                                                    90
